In the beginning of God's preparing the heavens and the earth —
the earth hath existed waste and void, and darkness [is] on the face of the deep, and the Spirit of God fluttering on the face of the waters,
and God saith, 'Let light be;' and light is.
And God seeth the light that [it is] good, and God separateth between the light and the darkness,
and God calleth to the light 'Day,' and to the darkness He hath called 'Night;' and there is an evening, and there is a morning — day one.
And God saith, 'Let an expanse be in the midst of the waters, and let it be separating between waters and waters.'
And God maketh the expanse, and it separateth between the waters which [are] under the expanse, and the waters which [are] above the expanse: and it is so.
And God calleth to the expanse 'Heavens;' and there is an evening, and there is a morning — day second.
And God saith, 'Let the waters under the heavens be collected unto one place, and let the dry land be seen:' and it is so.
And God calleth to the dry land 'Earth,' and to the collection of the waters He hath called 'Seas;' and God seeth that [it is] good.
And God saith, 'Let the earth yield tender grass, herb sowing seed, fruit-tree (whose seed [is] in itself) making fruit after its kind, on the earth:' and it is so.
And the earth bringeth forth tender grass, herb sowing seed after its kind, and tree making fruit (whose seed [is] in itself) after its kind; and God seeth that [it is] good;
and there is an evening, and there is a morning — day third.
And God saith, 'Let luminaries be in the expanse of the heavens, to make a separation between the day and the night, then they have been for signs, and for seasons, and for days and years,
and they have been for luminaries in the expanse of the heavens to give light upon the earth:' and it is so.
And God maketh the two great luminaries, the great luminary for the rule of the day, and the small luminary — and the stars — for the rule of the night;
and God giveth them in the expanse of the heavens to give light upon the earth,
and to rule over day and over night, and to make a separation between the light and the darkness; and God seeth that [it is] good;
and there is an evening, and there is a morning — day fourth.
And God saith, 'Let the waters teem with the teeming living creature, and fowl let fly on the earth on the face of the expanse of the heavens.'
And God prepareth the great monsters, and every living creature that is creeping, which the waters have teemed with, after their kind, and every fowl with wing, after its kind, and God seeth that [it is] good.
And God blesseth them, saying, 'Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and the fowl let multiply in the earth:'
and there is an evening, and there is a morning — day fifth.
And God saith, 'Let the earth bring forth the living creature after its kind, cattle and creeping thing, and beast of the earth after its kind:' and it is so.
And God maketh the beast of the earth after its kind, and the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing of the ground after its kind, and God seeth that [it is] good.
And God saith, 'Let Us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness, and let them rule over fish of the sea, and over fowl of the heavens, and over cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that is creeping on the earth.'
And God prepareth the man in His image; in the image of God He prepared him, a male and a female He prepared them.
And God blesseth them, and God saith to them, 'Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the earth, and subdue it, and rule over fish of the sea, and over fowl of the heavens, and over every living thing that is creeping upon the earth.'
And God saith, 'Lo, I have given to you every herb sowing seed, which [is] upon the face of all the earth, and every tree in which [is] the fruit of a tree sowing seed, to you it is for food;
and to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the heavens, and to every creeping thing on the earth, in which [is] breath of life, every green herb [is] for food:' and it is so.
And God seeth all that He hath done, and lo, very good; and there is an evening, and there is a morning — day the sixth.
And the heavens and the earth are completed, and all their host;
and God completeth by the seventh day His work which He hath made, and ceaseth by the seventh day from all His work which He hath made.
And God blesseth the seventh day, and sanctifieth it, for in it He hath ceased from all His work which God had prepared for making.
These [are] births of the heavens and of the earth in their being prepared, in the day of Jehovah God's making earth and heavens;
and no shrub of the field is yet in the earth, and no herb of the field yet sprouteth, for Jehovah God hath not rained upon the earth, and a man there is not to serve the ground,
and a mist goeth up from the earth, and hath watered the whole face of the ground.
And Jehovah God formeth the man — dust from the ground, and breatheth into his nostrils breath of life, and the man becometh a living creature.
And Jehovah God planteth a garden in Eden, at the east, and He setteth there the man whom He hath formed;
and Jehovah God causeth to sprout from the ground every tree desirable for appearance, and good for food, and the tree of life in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.
And a river is going out from Eden to water the garden, and from thence it is parted, and hath become four chief [rivers];
the name of the one [is] Pison, it [is] that which is surrounding the whole land of the Havilah where the gold [is],
and the gold of that land [is] good, there [is] the bdolach and the shoham stone;
and the name of the second river [is] Gibon, it [is] that which is surrounding the whole land of Cush;
and the name of the third river [is] Hiddekel, it [is] that which is going east of Asshur; and the fourth river is Phrat.
And Jehovah God taketh the man, and causeth him to rest in the garden of Eden, to serve it, and to keep it.
And Jehovah God layeth a charge on the man, saying, 'Of every tree of the garden eating thou dost eat;
and of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou dost not eat of it, for in the day of thine eating of it — dying thou dost die.'
And Jehovah God saith, 'Not good for the man to be alone, I do make to him an helper — as his counterpart.'
And Jehovah God formeth from the ground every beast of the field, and every fowl of the heavens, and bringeth in unto the man, to see what he doth call it; and whatever the man calleth a living creature, that [is] its name.
And the man calleth names to all the cattle, and to fowl of the heavens, and to every beast of the field; and to man hath not been found an helper — as his counterpart.
And Jehovah God causeth a deep sleep to fall upon the man, and he sleepeth, and He taketh one of his ribs, and closeth up flesh in its stead.
And Jehovah God buildeth up the rib which He hath taken out of the man into a woman, and bringeth her in unto the man;
and the man saith, 'This [is] the [proper] step! bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh!' for this it is called Woman, for from a man hath this been taken;
therefore doth a man leave his father and his mother, and hath cleaved unto his wife, and they have become one flesh.
And they are both of them naked, the man and his wife, and they are not ashamed of themselves.
And the serpent hath been subtile above every beast of the field which Jehovah God hath made, and he saith unto the woman, 'Is it true that God hath said, Ye do not eat of every tree of the garden?'
And the woman saith unto the serpent, 'Of the fruit of the trees of the garden we do eat,
and of the fruit of the tree which [is] in the midst of the garden God hath said, Ye do not eat of it, nor touch it, lest ye die.'
And the serpent saith unto the woman, 'Dying, ye do not die,
for God doth know that in the day of your eating of it — your eyes have been opened, and ye have been as God, knowing good and evil.'
And the woman seeth that the tree [is] good for food, and that it [is] pleasant to the eyes, and the tree is desirable to make [one] wise, and she taketh of its fruit and eateth, and giveth also to her husband with her, and he doth eat;
and the eyes of them both are opened, and they know that they [are] naked, and they sew fig-leaves, and make to themselves girdles.
And they hear the sound of Jehovah God walking up and down in the garden at the breeze of the day, and the man and his wife hide themselves from the face of Jehovah God in the midst of the trees of the garden.
And Jehovah God calleth unto the man, and saith to him, 'Where [art] thou?'
and he saith, 'Thy sound I have heard in the garden, and I am afraid, for I am naked, and I hide myself.'
And He saith, 'Who hath declared to thee that thou [art] naked? of the tree of which I have commanded thee not to eat, hast thou eaten?'
and the man saith, 'The woman whom Thou didst place with me — she hath given to me of the tree — and I do eat.'
And Jehovah God saith to the woman, 'What [is] this thou hast done?' and the woman saith, 'The serpent hath caused me to forget — and I do eat.'
And Jehovah God saith unto the serpent, 'Because thou hast done this, cursed [art] thou above all the cattle, and above every beast of the field: on thy belly dost thou go, and dust thou dost eat, all days of thy life;
and enmity I put between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; he doth bruise thee — the head, and thou dost bruise him — the heel.'
Unto the woman He said, 'Multiplying I multiply thy sorrow and thy conception, in sorrow dost thou bear children, and toward thy husband [is] thy desire, and he doth rule over thee.'
And to the man He said, 'Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of thy wife, and dost eat of the tree concerning which I have charged thee, saying, Thou dost not eat of it, cursed [is] the ground on thine account; in sorrow thou dost eat of it all days of thy life,
and thorn and bramble it doth bring forth to thee, and thou hast eaten the herb of the field;
by the sweat of thy face thou dost eat bread till thy return unto the ground, for out of it hast thou been taken, for dust thou [art], and unto dust thou turnest back.'
And the man calleth his wife's name Eve: for she hath been mother of all living.
And Jehovah God doth make to the man and to his wife coats of skin, and doth clothe them.
And Jehovah God saith, 'Lo, the man was as one of Us, as to the knowledge of good and evil; and now, lest he send forth his hand, and have taken also of the tree of life, and eaten, and lived to the age,' —
Jehovah God sendeth him forth from the garden of Eden to serve the ground from which he hath been taken;
yea, he casteth out the man, and causeth to dwell at the east of the garden of Eden the cherubs and the flame of the sword which is turning itself round to guard the way of the tree of life.
And the man knew Eve his wife, and she conceiveth and beareth Cain, and saith, 'I have gotten a man by Jehovah;'
and she addeth to bear his brother, even Abel. And Abel is feeding a flock, and Cain hath been servant of the ground.
And it cometh to pass at the end of days that Cain bringeth from the fruit of the ground a present to Jehovah;
and Abel, he hath brought, he also, from the female firstlings of his flock, even from their fat ones; and Jehovah looketh unto Abel and unto his present,
and unto Cain and unto his present He hath not looked; and it is very displeasing to Cain, and his countenance is fallen.
And Jehovah saith unto Cain, 'Why hast thou displeasure? and why hath thy countenance fallen?
Is there not, if thou dost well, acceptance? and if thou dost not well, at the opening a sin-offering is crouching, and unto thee its desire, and thou rulest over it.'
And Cain saith unto Abel his brother, ['Let us go into the field;'] and it cometh to pass in their being in the field, that Cain riseth up against Abel his brother, and slayeth him.
And Jehovah saith unto Cain, 'Where [is] Abel thy brother?' and he saith, 'I have not known; my brother's keeper — I?'
And He saith, 'What hast thou done? the voice of thy brother's blood is crying unto Me from the ground;
and now, cursed [art] thou from the ground, which hath opened her mouth to receive the blood of thy brother from thy hand;
when thou tillest the ground, it doth not add to give its strength to thee — a wanderer, even a trembling one, thou art in the earth.'
And Cain saith unto Jehovah, 'Greater is my punishment than to be borne;
lo, Thou hast driven me to-day from off the face of the ground, and from Thy face I am hid; and I have been a wanderer, even a trembling one, in the earth, and it hath been — every one finding me doth slay me.'
And Jehovah saith to him, 'Therefore — of any slayer of Cain sevenfold it is required;' and Jehovah setteth to Cain a token that none finding him doth slay him.
And Cain goeth out from before Jehovah, and dwelleth in the land, moving about east of Eden;
and Cain knoweth his wife, and she conceiveth, and beareth Enoch; and he is building a city, and he calleth the name of the city, according to the name of his son — Enoch.
And born to Enoch is Irad; and Irad hath begotten Mehujael; and Mehujael hath begotten Methusael; and Methusael hath begotten Lamech.
And Lamech taketh to himself two wives, the name of the one Adah, and the name of the second Zillah.
And Adah beareth Jabal, he hath been father of those inhabiting tents and purchased possessions;
and the name of his brother [is] Jubal, he hath been father of every one handling harp and organ.
And Zillah she also bare Tubal-Cain, an instructor of every artificer in brass and iron; and a sister of Tubal-Cain [is] Naamah.
And Lamech saith to his wives: — 'Adah and Zillah, hear my voice; Wives of Lamech, give ear [to] my saying: For a man I have slain for my wound, Even a young man for my hurt;
For sevenfold is required for Cain, And for Lamech seventy and sevenfold.'
And Adam again knoweth his wife, and she beareth a son, and calleth his name Seth, 'for God hath appointed for me another seed instead of Abel:' for Cain had slain him.
And to Seth, to him also a son hath been born, and he calleth his name Enos; then a beginning was made of preaching in the name of Jehovah.
This [is] an account of the births of Adam: In the day of God's preparing man, in the likeness of God He hath made him;
a male and a female He hath prepared them, and He blesseth them, and calleth their name Man, in the day of their being prepared.
And Adam liveth an hundred and thirty years, and begetteth [a son] in his likeness, according to his image, and calleth his name Seth.
And the days of Adam after his begetting Seth are eight hundred years, and he begetteth sons and daughters.
And all the days of Adam which he lived are nine hundred and thirty years, and he dieth.
And Seth liveth an hundred and five years, and begetteth Enos.
And Seth liveth after his begetting Enos eight hundred and seven years, and begetteth sons and daughters.
And all the days of Seth are nine hundred and twelve years, and he dieth.
And Enos liveth ninety years, and begetteth Cainan.
And Enos liveth after his begetting Cainan eight hundred and fifteen years, and begetteth sons and daughters.
And all the days of Enos are nine hundred and five years, and he dieth.
And Cainan liveth seventy years, and begetteth Mahalaleel.
And Cainan liveth after his begetting Mahalaleel eight hundred and forty years, and begetteth sons and daughters.
And all the days of Cainan are nine hundred and ten years, and he dieth.
And Mahalaleel liveth five and sixty years, and begetteth Jared.
And Mahalaleel liveth after his begetting Jared eight hundred and thirty years, and begetteth sons and daughters.
And all the days of Mahalaleel are eight hundred and ninety and five years, and he dieth.
And Jared liveth an hundred and sixty and two years, and begetteth Enoch.
And Jared liveth after his begetting Enoch eight hundred years, and begetteth sons and daughters.
And all the days of Jared are nine hundred and sixty and two years, and he dieth.
And Enoch liveth five and sixty years, and begetteth Methuselah.
And Enoch walketh habitually with God after his begetting Methuselah three hundred years, and begetteth sons and daughters.
And all the days of Enoch are three hundred and sixty and five years.
And Enoch walketh habitually with God, and he is not, for God hath taken him.
And Methuselah liveth an hundred and eighty and seven years, and begetteth Lamech.
And Methuselah liveth after his begetting Lamech seven hundred and eighty and two years, and begetteth sons and daughters.
And all the days of Methuselah are nine hundred and sixty and nine years, and he dieth.
And Lamech liveth an hundred and eighty and two years, and begetteth a son,
and calleth his name Noah, saying, 'This [one] doth comfort us concerning our work, and concerning the labour of our hands, because of the ground which Jehovah hath cursed.'
And Lamech liveth after his begetting Noah five hundred and ninety and five years, and begetteth sons and daughters.
And all the days of Lamech are seven hundred and seventy and seven years, and he dieth.
And Noah is a son of five hundred years, and Noah begetteth Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
And it cometh to pass that mankind have begun to multiply on the face of the ground, and daughters have been born to them,
and sons of God see the daughters of men that they [are] fair, and they take to themselves women of all whom they have chosen.
And Jehovah saith, 'My Spirit doth not strive in man — to the age; in their erring they [are] flesh:' and his days have been an hundred and twenty years.
The fallen ones were in the earth in those days, and even afterwards when sons of God come in unto daughters of men, and they have borne to them — they [are] the heroes, who, from of old, [are] the men of name.
And Jehovah seeth that abundant [is] the wickedness of man in the earth, and every imagination of the thoughts of his heart only evil all the day;
and Jehovah repenteth that He hath made man in the earth, and He grieveth Himself — unto His heart.
And Jehovah saith, 'I wipe away man whom I have prepared from off the face of the ground, from man unto beast, unto creeping thing, and unto fowl of the heavens, for I have repented that I have made them.'
And Noah found grace in the eyes of Jehovah.
These [are] births of Noah: Noah [is] a righteous man; perfect he hath been among his generations; with God hath Noah walked habitually.
And Noah begetteth three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
And the earth is corrupt before God, and the earth is filled [with] violence.
And God seeth the earth, and lo, it hath been corrupted, for all flesh hath corrupted its way on the earth.
And God said to Noah, 'An end of all flesh hath come before Me, for the earth hath been full of violence from their presence; and lo, I am destroying them with the earth.
'Make for thyself an ark of gopher-wood; rooms dost thou make with the ark, and thou hast covered it within and without with cypress;
and this [is] that which thou dost with it: three hundred cubits [is] the length of the ark, fifty cubits its breadth, and thirty cubits its height;
a window dost thou make for the ark, and unto a cubit thou dost restrain it from above; and the opening of the ark thou dost put in its side, — lower, second, and third [stories] dost thou make it.
'And I, lo, I am bringing in the deluge of waters on the earth to destroy all flesh, in which [is] a living spirit, from under the heavens; all that [is] in the earth doth expire.
'And I have established My covenant with thee, and thou hast come in unto the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy son's wives with thee;
and of all that liveth, of all flesh, two of every [sort] thou dost bring in unto the ark, to keep alive with thee; male and female are they.
Of the fowl after its kind, and of the cattle after their kind, of every creeping thing of the ground after its kind, two of every [sort] they come in unto thee, to keep alive.
'And thou, take to thyself of all food that is eaten; and thou hast gathered unto thyself, and it hath been to thee and to them for food.'
And Noah doth according to all that God hath commanded him; so hath he done.
And Jehovah saith to Noah, 'Come in, thou and all thy house, unto the ark, for thee I have seen righteous before Me in this generation;
of all the clean beasts thou dost take to thee seven pairs, a male and its female; and of the beasts which are not clean two, a male and its female;
also, of fowl of the heavens seven pairs, a male and a female, to keep alive seed on the face of all the earth;
for after other seven days I am sending rain on the earth forty days and forty nights, and have wiped away all the substance that I have made from off the face of the ground.'
And Noah doth according to all that Jehovah hath commanded him:
and Noah [is] a son of six hundred years, and the deluge of waters hath been upon the earth.
And Noah goeth in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him, unto the ark, from the presence of the waters of the deluge;
of the clean beasts and of the beasts that [are] not clean, and of the fowl, and of every thing that is creeping upon the ground,
two by two they have come in unto Noah, unto the ark, a male and a female, as God hath commanded Noah.
And it cometh to pass, after the seventh of the days, that waters of the deluge have been on the earth.
In the six hundredth year of the life of Noah, in the second month, in the seventeenth day of the month, in this day have been broken up all fountains of the great deep, and the net-work of the heavens hath been opened,
and the shower is on the earth forty days and forty nights.
In this self-same day went in Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, sons of Noah, and Noah's wife and the three wives of his sons with them, unto the ark;
they, and every living creature after its kind, and every beast after its kind, and every creeping thing that is creeping on the earth after its kind, and every fowl after its kind, every bird — every wing.
And they come in unto Noah, unto the ark, two by two of all the flesh in which [is] a living spirit;
and they that are coming in, male and female of all flesh, have come in as God hath commanded him, and Jehovah doth close [it] for him.
And the deluge is forty days on the earth, and the waters multiply, and lift up the ark, and it is raised up from off the earth;
and the waters are mighty, and multiply exceedingly upon the earth; and the ark goeth on the face of the waters.
And the waters have been very very mighty on the earth, and covered are all the high mountains which [are] under the whole heavens;
fifteen cubits upwards have the waters become mighty, and the mountains are covered;
and expire doth all flesh that is moving on the earth, among fowl, and among cattle, and among beasts, and among all the teeming things which are teeming on the earth, and all mankind;
all in whose nostrils [is] breath of a living spirit — of all that [is] in the dry land — have died.
And wiped away is all the substance that is on the face of the ground, from man unto beast, unto creeping thing, and unto fowl of the heavens; yea, they are wiped away from the earth, and only Noah is left, and those who [are] with him in the ark;
and the waters are mighty on the earth a hundred and fifty days.
And God remembereth Noah, and every living thing, and all the cattle which [are] with him in the ark, and God causeth a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters subside,
and closed are the fountains of the deep and the net-work of the heavens, and restrained is the shower from the heavens.
And turn back do the waters from off the earth, going on and returning; and the waters are lacking at the end of a hundred and fifty days.
And the ark resteth, in the seventh month, in the seventeenth day of the month, on mountains of Ararat;
and the waters have been going and becoming lacking till the tenth month; in the tenth [month], on the first of the month, appeared the heads of the mountains.
And it cometh to pass, at the end of forty days, that Noah openeth the window of the ark which he made,
and he sendeth forth the raven, and it goeth out, going out and turning back till the drying of the waters from off the earth.
And he sendeth forth the dove from him to see whether the waters have been lightened from off the face of the ground,
and the dove hath not found rest for the sole of her foot, and she turneth back unto him, unto the ark, for waters [are] on the face of all the earth, and he putteth out his hand, and taketh her, and bringeth her in unto him, unto the ark.
And he stayeth yet other seven days, and addeth to send forth the dove from the ark;
and the dove cometh in unto him at even-time, and lo, an olive leaf torn off in her mouth; and Noah knoweth that the waters have been lightened from off the earth.
And he stayeth yet other seven days, and sendeth forth the dove, and it added not to turn back unto him any more.
And it cometh to pass in the six hundredth and first year, in the first [month], in the first of the month, the waters have been dried from off the earth; and Noah turneth aside the covering of the ark, and looketh, and lo, the face of the ground hath been dried.
And in the second month, in the seven and twentieth day of the month, the earth hath become dry.
And God speaketh unto Noah, saying, 'Go out from the ark, thou, and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons' wives with thee;
every living thing that [is] with thee, of all flesh, among fowl, and among cattle, and among every creeping thing which is creeping on the earth, bring out with thee;
and they have teemed in the earth, and been fruitful, and have multiplied on the earth.'
And Noah goeth out, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him;
every beast, every creeping thing, and every fowl; every creeping thing on the earth, after their families, have gone out from the ark.
And Noah buildeth an altar to Jehovah, and taketh of every clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and causeth burnt-offerings to ascend on the altar;
and Jehovah smelleth the sweet fragrance, and Jehovah saith unto His heart, 'I continue not to disesteem any more the ground because of man, though the imagination of the heart of man [is] evil from his youth; and I continue not to smite any more all living, as I have done;
during all days of the earth, seed-time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, do not cease.'
And God blesseth Noah, and his sons, and saith to them, 'Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the earth;
and your fear and your dread is on every beast of the earth, and on every fowl of the heavens, on all that creepeth on the ground, and on all fishes of the sea — into your hand they have been given.
Every creeping thing that is alive, to you it is for food; as the green herb I have given to you the whole;
only flesh in its life — its blood — ye do not eat.
'And only your blood for your lives do I require; from the hand of every living thing I require it, and from the hand of man, from the hand of every man's brother I require the life of man;
whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man is his blood shed: for in the image of God hath He made man.
And ye, be fruitful and multiply, teem in the earth, and multiply in it.'
And God speaketh unto Noah, and unto his sons with him, saying,
'And I, lo, I am establishing My covenant with you, and with your seed after you,
and with every living creature which [is] with you, among fowl, among cattle, and among every beast of the earth with you, from all who are going out of the ark — to every beast of the earth.
And I have established My covenant with you, and all flesh is not any more cut off by waters of a deluge, and there is not any more a deluge to destroy the earth.'
And God saith, 'This is a token of the covenant which I am giving between Me and you, and every living creature that [is] with you, to generations age-during;
My bow I have given in the cloud, and it hath been for a token of a covenant between Me and the earth;
and it hath come to pass (in My sending a cloud over the earth) that the bow hath been seen in the cloud,
and I have remembered My covenant which is between Me and you, and every living creature among all flesh, and the waters become no more a deluge to destroy all flesh;
and the bow hath been in the cloud, and I have seen it — to remember the covenant age-during between God and every living creature among all flesh which [is] on the earth.'
And God saith unto Noah, 'This [is] a token of the covenant which I have established between Me and all flesh that [is] upon the earth.'
And the sons of Noah who are going out of the ark are Shem, and Ham, and Japheth; and Ham is father of Canaan.
These three [are] sons of Noah, and from these hath all the earth been overspread.
And Noah remaineth a man of the ground, and planteth a vineyard,
and drinketh of the wine, and is drunken, and uncovereth himself in the midst of the tent.
And Ham, father of Canaan, seeth the nakedness of his father, and declareth to his two brethren without.
And Shem taketh — Japheth also — the garment, and they place on the shoulder of them both, and go backward, and cover the nakedness of their father; and their faces [are] backward, and their father's nakedness they have not seen.
And Noah awaketh from his wine, and knoweth that which his young son hath done to him,
and saith: 'Cursed [is] Canaan, Servant of servants he is to his brethren.'
And he saith: 'Blessed of Jehovah my God [is] Shem, And Canaan is servant to him.
God doth give beauty to Japheth, And he dwelleth in tents of Shem, And Canaan is servant to him.'
And Noah liveth after the deluge three hundred and fifty years;
and all the days of Noah are nine hundred and fifty years, and he dieth.
And these [are] births of the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth; and born to them are sons after the deluge.
'Sons of Japheth [are] Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.
And sons of Gomer [are] Ashkenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.
And sons of Javan [are] Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim.
By these have the isles of the nations been parted in their lands, each by his tongue, by their families, in their nations.
And sons of Ham [are] Cush, and Mitzraim, and Phut, and Canaan.
And sons of Cush [are] Seba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and Raamah, and Sabtechah; and sons of Raamah [are] Sheba and Dedan.
And Cush hath begotten Nimrod;
he hath begun to be a hero in the land; he hath been a hero in hunting before Jehovah; therefore it is said, 'As Nimrod the hero [in] hunting before Jehovah.'
And the first part of his kingdom is Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar;
from that land he hath gone out to Asshur, and buildeth Nineveh, even the broad places of the city, and Calah,
and Resen, between Nineveh and Calah; it [is] the great city.
And Mitzraim hath begotten the Ludim, and the Anamim, and the Lehabim, and the Naphtuhim,
and the Pathrusim, and the Casluhim, (whence have come out Philistim,) and the Caphtorim.
And Canaan hath begotten Sidon his first-born, and Heth,
and the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgashite,
and the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite,
and the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite; and afterwards have the families of the Canaanite been scattered.
And the border of the Canaanite is from Sidon, [in] thy coming towards Gerar, unto Gaza; [in] thy coming towards Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Admah, and Zeboim, unto Lasha.
These [are] sons of Ham, by their families, by their tongues, in their lands, in their nations.
As to Shem, father of all sons of Eber, brother of Japheth the elder, he hath also begotten:
Sons of Shem [are] Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram.
And sons of Aram [are] Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash.
And Arphaxad hath begotten Salah, and Salah hath begotten Eber.
And to Eber have two sons been born; the name of the one [is] Peleg (for in his days hath the earth been divided,) and his brother's name [is] Joktan.
And Joktan hath begotten Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah,
and Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah,
and Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba,
and Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab; all these [are] sons of Joktan;
and their dwelling is from Mesha, [in] thy coming towards Sephar, a mount of the east.
These [are] sons of Shem, by their families, by their tongues, in their lands, by their nations.
These [are] families of the sons of Noah, by their births, in their nations, and by these have the nations been parted in the earth after the deluge.
And the whole earth is of one pronunciation, and of the same words,
and it cometh to pass, in their journeying from the east, that they find a valley in the land of Shinar, and dwell there;
and they say each one to his neighbour, 'Give help, let us make bricks, and burn [them] thoroughly:' and the brick is to them for stone, and the bitumen hath been to them for mortar.
And they say, 'Give help, let us build for ourselves a city and tower, and its head in the heavens, and make for ourselves a name, lest we be scattered over the face of all the earth.'
And Jehovah cometh down to see the city and the tower which the sons of men have builded;
and Jehovah saith, 'Lo, the people [is] one, and one pronunciation [is] to them all, and this it hath dreamed of doing; and now, nothing is restrained from them of that which they have purposed to do.
Give help, let us go down, and mingle there their pronunciation, so that a man doth not understand the pronunciation of his companion.'
And Jehovah doth scatter them from thence over the face of all the earth, and they cease to build the city;
therefore hath [one] called its name Babel, for there hath Jehovah mingled the pronunciation of all the earth, and from thence hath Jehovah scattered them over the face of all the earth.
These [are] births of Shem: Shem [is] a son of an hundred years, and begetteth Arphaxad two years after the deluge.
And Shem liveth after his begetting Arphaxad five hundred years, and begetteth sons and daughters.
And Arphaxad hath lived five and thirty years, and begetteth Salah.
And Arphaxad liveth after his begetting Salah four hundred and three years, and begetteth sons and daughters.
And Salah hath lived thirty years, and begetteth Eber.
And Salah liveth after his begetting Eber four hundred and three years, and begetteth sons and daughters.
And Eber liveth four and thirty years, and begetteth Peleg.
And Eber liveth after his begetting Peleg four hundred and thirty years, and begetteth sons and daughters.
And Peleg liveth thirty years, and begetteth Reu.
And Peleg liveth after his begetting Reu two hundred and nine years, and begetteth sons and daughters.
And Reu liveth two and thirty years, and begetteth Serug.
And Reu liveth after his begetting Serug two hundred and seven years, and begetteth sons and daughters.
And Serug liveth thirty years, and begetteth Nahor.
And Serug liveth after his begetting Nahor two hundred years, and begetteth sons and daughters.
And Nahor liveth nine and twenty years, and begetteth Terah.
And Nahor liveth after his begetting Terah an hundred and nineteen years, and begetteth sons and daughters.
And Terah liveth seventy years, and begetteth Abram, Nahor, and Haran.
And these [are] births of Terah: Terah hath begotten Abram, Nahor, and Haran; and Haran hath begotten Lot;
and Haran dieth in the presence of Terah his father, in the land of his birth, in Ur of the Chaldees.
And Abram and Nahor take to themselves wives; the name of Abram's wife [is] Sarai, and the name of Nahor's wife [is] Milcah, daughter of Haran, father of Milcah, and father of Iscah.
And Sarai is barren — she hath no child.
And Terah taketh Abram his son, and Lot, son of Haran, his son's son, and Sarai his daughter-in-law, wife of Abram his son, and they go out with them from Ur of the Chaldees, to go towards the land of Canaan; and they come unto Charan, and dwell there.
And the days of Terah are two hundred and five years, and Terah dieth in Charan.
And Jehovah saith unto Abram, 'Go for thyself, from thy land, and from thy kindred, and from the house of thy father, unto the land which I shew thee.
And I make thee become a great nation, and bless thee, and make thy name great; and be thou a blessing.
And I bless those blessing thee, and him who is disesteeming thee I curse, and blessed in thee have been all families of the ground.'
And Abram goeth on, as Jehovah hath spoken unto him, and Lot goeth with him, and Abram [is] a son of five and seventy years in his going out from Charan.
And Abram taketh Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother's son, and all their substance that they have gained, and the persons that they have obtained in Charan; and they go out to go towards the land of Canaan; and they come in to the land of Canaan.
And Abram passeth over into the land, unto the place Shechem, unto the oak of Moreh; and the Canaanite [is] then in the land.
And Jehovah appeareth unto Abram, and saith, 'To thy seed I give this land;' and he buildeth there an altar to Jehovah, who hath appeared unto him.
And he removeth from thence towards a mountain at the east of Beth-El, and stretcheth out the tent (Beth-El at the west, and Hai at the east), and he buildeth there an altar to Jehovah, and preacheth in the name of Jehovah.
And Abram journeyeth, going on and journeying towards the south.
And there is a famine in the land, and Abram goeth down towards Egypt to sojourn there, for the famine [is] grievous in the land;
and it cometh to pass as he hath drawn near to enter Egypt, that he saith unto Sarai his wife, 'Lo, I pray thee, I have known that thou [art] a woman of beautiful appearance;
and it hath come to pass that the Egyptians see thee, and they have said, 'This [is] his wife,' and they have slain me, and thee they keep alive:
say, I pray thee, thou [art] my sister, so that it is well with me because of thee, and my soul hath lived for thy sake.'
And it cometh to pass, at the entering of Abram into Egypt, that the Egyptians see the woman that she [is] exceeding fair;
and princes of Pharaoh see her, and praise her unto Pharaoh, and the woman is taken [to] Pharaoh's house;
and to Abram he hath done good because of her, and he hath sheep and oxen, and he-asses, and men-servants, and handmaids, and she-asses, and camels.
And Jehovah plagueth Pharaoh and his house — great plagues — for the matter of Sarai, Abram's wife.
And Pharaoh calleth for Abram, and saith, 'What [is] this thou hast done to me? why hast thou not declared to me that she [is] thy wife?
Why hast thou said, She [is] my sister, and I take her to myself for a wife? and now, lo, thy wife, take and go.'
And Pharaoh chargeth men concerning him, and they send him away, and his wife, an all that he hath.
And Abram goeth up from Egypt (he and his wife, and all that he hath, and Lot with him) towards the south;
and Abram [is] exceedingly wealthy in cattle, in silver, and in gold.
And he goeth on his journeyings from the south, even unto Bethel, unto the place where his tent had been at the commencement, between Bethel and Hai —
unto the place of the altar which he made there at the first, and there doth Abram preach in the name of Jehovah.
And also to Lot, who is going with Abram, there hath been sheep and oxen and tents;
and the land hath not suffered them to dwell together, for their substance hath been much, and they have not been able to dwell together;
and there is a strife between those feeding Abram's cattle and those feeding Lot's cattle; and the Canaanite and the Perizzite [are] then dwelling in the land.
And Abram saith unto Lot, 'Let there not, I pray thee, be strife between me and thee, and between my shepherds and thy shepherds, for we [are] men — brethren.
Is not all the land before thee? be parted, I pray thee, from me; if to the left, then I to the right; and if to the right, then I to the left.'
And Lot lifteth up his eyes, and seeth the whole circuit of the Jordan that it [is] all a watered country (before Jehovah's destroying Sodom and Gomorrah, as Jehovah's garden, as the land of Egypt,) in thy coming toward Zoar,
and Lot chooseth for himself the whole circuit of the Jordan; and Lot journeyeth from the east, and they are parted — a man from his companion;
Abram hath dwelt in the land of Canaan, and Lot hath dwelt in the cities of the circuit, and tenteth unto Sodom;
and the men of Sodom [are] evil, and sinners before Jehovah exceedingly.
And Jehovah said unto Abram, after Lot's being parted from him, 'Lift up, I pray thee, thine eyes, and look from the place where thou [art], northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward;
for the whole of the land which thou are seeing, to thee I give it, and to thy seed — to the age.
And I have set thy seed as dust of the earth, so that, if one is able to number the dust of the earth, even thy seed is numbered;
rise, go up and down through the land, to its length, and to its breadth, for to thee I give it.'
And Abram tenteth, and cometh, and dwelleth among the oaks of Mamre, which [are] in Hebron, and buildeth there an altar to Jehovah.
And it cometh to pass in the days of Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of Goyim,
they have made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and Shemeber king of Zeboim, and the king of Bela, which [is] Zoar.
All these have been joined together unto the valley of Siddim, which [is] the Salt Sea;
twelve years they served Chedorlaomer, and the thirteenth year they rebelled.
And in the fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer, and the kings who [are] with him, and they smite the Rephaim in Ashteroth Karnaim, and the Zuzim in Ham, and the Emim in Shaveh Kiriathaim,
and the Horites in their mount Seir, unto El-Paran, which [is] by the wilderness;
and they turn back and come in unto En-Mishpat, which [is] Kadesh, and smite the whole field of the Amalekite, and also the Amorite who is dwelling in Hazezon-Tamar.
And the king of Sodom goeth out, and the king of Gomorrah, and the king of Admah, and the king of Zeboim, and the king of Bela, which [is] Zoar; and they set the battle in array with them in the valley of Siddim,
with Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of Goyim, and Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar; four kings with the five.
And the valley of Siddim [is] full of bitumen-pits; and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah flee, and fall there, and those left have fled to the mountain.
And they take the whole substance of Sodom and Gomorrah, and the whole of their food, and go away;
and they take Lot, Abram's brother's son (seeing he is dwelling in Sodom), and his substance, and go away.
And one who is escaping cometh and declareth to Abram the Hebrew, and he is dwelling among the oaks of Mamre the Amorite, brother of Eshcol, and brother of Aner, and they [are] Abram's allies.
And Abram heareth that his brother hath been taken captive, and he draweth out his trained domestics, three hundred and eighteen, and pursueth unto Dan.
And he divideth himself against them by night, he and his servants, and smiteth them, and pursueth them unto Hobah, which [is] at the left of Damascus;
and he bringeth back the whole of the substance, and also Lot his brother and his substance hath he brought back, and also the women and the people.
And the king of Sodom goeth out to meet him (after his turning back from the smiting of Chedorlaomer, and of the kings who [are] with him), unto the valley of Shaveh, which [is] the king's valley.
And Melchizedek king of Salem hath brought out bread and wine, and he [is] priest of God Most High;
and he blesseth him, and saith, 'Blessed [is] Abram to God Most High, possessing heaven and earth;
and blessed [is] God Most High, who hath delivered thine adversaries into thy hand;' and he giveth to him a tenth of all.
And the king of Sodom saith unto Abram, 'Give to me the persons, and the substance take to thyself,'
and Abram saith unto the king of Sodom, 'I have lifted up my hand unto Jehovah, God Most High, possessing heaven and earth —
from a thread even unto a shoe-latchet I take not of anything which thou hast, that thou say not, I — I have made Abram rich;
save only that which the young men have eaten, and the portion of the men who have gone with me — Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre — they take their portion.'
After these things hath the word of Jehovah been unto Abram in a vision, saying, 'Fear not, Abram, I [am] a shield to thee, thy reward [is] exceeding great.'
And Abram saith, 'Lord Jehovah, what dost Thou give to me, and I am going childless? and an acquired son in my house is Demmesek Eliezer.'
And Abram saith, 'Lo, to me Thou hast not given seed, and lo, a domestic doth heir me.'
And lo, the word of Jehovah [is] unto him, saying, 'This [one] doth not heir thee; but he who cometh out from thy bowels, he doth heir thee;'
and He bringeth him out without, and saith, 'Look attentively, I pray thee, towards the heavens, and count the stars, if thou art able to count them;' and He saith to him, 'Thus is thy seed.'
And he hath believed in Jehovah, and He reckoneth it to him — righteousness.
And He saith unto him, 'I [am] Jehovah who brought thee out from Ur of the Chaldees, to give to thee this land to possess it;'
and he saith, 'Lord Jehovah, whereby do I know that I possess it?'
And He saith unto him, 'Take for Me a heifer of three years, and a she-goat of three years, and a ram of three years, and a turtle-dove, and a young bird;'
and he taketh to him all these, and separateth them in the midst, and putteth each piece over against its fellow, but the bird he hath not divided;
and the ravenous birds come down upon the carcases, and Abram causeth them to turn back.
And the sun is about to go in, and deep sleep hath fallen upon Abram, and lo, a terror of great darkness is falling upon him;
and He saith to Abram, 'knowing — know that thy seed is a sojourner in a land not theirs, and they have served them, and they have afflicted them four hundred years,
and the nation also whom they serve I judge, and after this they go out with great substance;
and thou — thou comest in unto thy fathers in peace; thou art buried in a good old age;
and the fourth generation doth turn back hither, for the iniquity of the Amorite is not yet complete.'
And it cometh to pass — the sun hath gone in, and thick darkness hath been — and lo, a furnace of smoke, and a lamp of fire, which hath passed over between those pieces.
In that day hath Jehovah made with Abram a covenant, saying, 'To thy seed I have given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Phrat,
with the Kenite, and the Kenizzite, and the Kadmonite,
and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Rephaim,
and the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Girgashite, and the Jebusite.'
And Sarai, Abram's wife, hath not borne to him, and she hath an handmaid, an Egyptian, and her name [is] Hagar;
and Sarai saith unto Abram, 'Lo, I pray thee, Jehovah hath restrained me from bearing, go in, I pray thee, unto my handmaid; perhaps I am built up from her;' and Abram hearkeneth to the voice of Sarai.
And Sarai, Abram's wife, taketh Hagar the Egyptian, her handmaid, at the end of the tenth year of Abram's dwelling in the land of Canaan, and giveth her to Abram her husband, to him for a wife,
and he goeth in unto Hagar, and she conceiveth, and she seeth that she hath conceived, and her mistress is lightly esteemed in her eyes.
And Sarai saith unto Abram, 'My violence [is] for thee; I — I have given mine handmaid into thy bosom, and she seeth that she hath conceived, and I am lightly esteemed in her eyes; Jehovah doth judge between me and thee.'
And Abram saith unto Sarai, 'Lo, thine handmaid [is] in thine hand, do to her that which is good in thine eyes;' and Sarai afflicted her, and she fleeth from her presence.
And a messenger of Jehovah findeth her by the fountain of water in the wilderness, by the fountain in the way [to] Shur,
and he saith, 'Hagar, Sarai's handmaid, whence hast thou come, and whither dost thou go?' and she saith, 'From the presence of Sarai, my mistress, I am fleeing.'
And the messenger of Jehovah saith to her, 'Turn back unto thy mistress, and humble thyself under her hands;'
and the messenger of Jehovah saith to her, 'Multiplying I multiply thy seed, and it is not numbered from multitude;'
and the messenger of Jehovah saith to her, 'Behold thou [art] conceiving, and bearing a son, and hast called his name Ishmael, for Jehovah hath hearkened unto thine affliction;
and he is a wild-ass man, his hand against every one, and every one's hand against him — and before the face of all his brethren he dwelleth.'
And she calleth the name of Jehovah who is speaking unto her, 'Thou [art], O God, my beholder;' for she said, 'Even here have I looked behind my beholder?'
therefore hath one called the well, 'The well of the Living One, my beholder;' lo, between Kadesh and Bered.
And Hagar beareth to Abram a son; and Abram calleth the name of his son, whom Hagar hath borne, Ishmael;
and Abram [is] a son of eighty and six years in Hagar's bearing Ishmael to Abram.
And Abram is a son of ninety and nine years, and Jehovah appeareth unto Abram, and saith unto him, 'I [am] God Almighty, walk habitually before Me, and be thou perfect;
and I give My covenant between Me and thee, and multiply thee very exceedingly.'
And Abram falleth upon his face, and God speaketh with him, saying,
'I — lo, My covenant [is] with thee, and thou hast become father of a multitude of nations;
and thy name is no more called Abram, but thy name hath been Abraham, for father of a multitude of nations have I made thee;
and I have made thee exceeding fruitful, and made thee become nations, and kings go out from thee.
'And I have established My covenant between Me and thee, and thy seed after thee, to their generations, for a covenant age-during, to become God to thee, and to thy seed after thee;
and I have given to thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land of thy sojournings, the whole land of Canaan, for a possession age-during, and I have become their God.'
And God saith unto Abraham, 'And thou dost keep My covenant, thou and thy seed after thee, to their generations;
this [is] My covenant which ye keep between Me and you, and thy seed after thee: Every male of you [is] to be circumcised;
and ye have circumcised the flesh of your foreskin, and it hath become a token of a covenant between Me and you.
'And a son of eight days is circumcised by you; every male to your generations, born in the house, or bought with money from any son of a stranger, who is not of thy seed;
he is certainly circumcised who [is] born in thine house, or bought with thy money; and My covenant hath become in your flesh a covenant age-during;
and an uncircumcised one, a male, the flesh of whose foreskin is not circumcised, even that person hath been cut off from his people; My covenant he hath broken.'
And God saith unto Abraham, 'Sarai thy wife — thou dost not call her name Sarai, for Sarah [is] her name;
and I have blessed her, and have also given to thee a son from her; and I have blessed her, and she hath become nations — kings of peoples are from her.'
And Abraham falleth upon his face, and laugheth, and saith in his heart, 'To the son of an hundred years is one born? or doth Sarah — daughter of ninety years — bear?'
And Abraham saith unto God, 'O that Ishmael may live before Thee;'
and God saith, 'Sarah thy wife is certainly bearing a son to thee, and thou hast called his name Isaac, and I have established My covenant with him, for a covenant age-during, to his seed after him.
As to Ishmael, I have heard thee; lo, I have blessed him, and made him fruitful, and multiplied him, very exceedingly; twelve princes doth he beget, and I have made him become a great nation;
and My covenant I establish with Isaac, whom Sarah doth bear to thee at this appointed time in the next year;'
and He finisheth speaking with him, and God goeth up from Abraham.
And Abraham taketh Ishmael his son, and all those born in his house, and all those bought with his money — every male among the men of Abraham's house — and circumciseth the flesh of their foreskin, in this self-same day, as God hath spoken with him.
And Abraham [is] a son of ninety and nine years in the flesh of his foreskin being circumcised;
and Ishmael his son [is] a son of thirteen years in the flesh of his foreskin being circumcised;
in this self-same day hath Abraham been circumcised, and Ishmael his son;
and all the men of his house — born in the house, and bought with money from the son of a stranger — have been circumcised with him.
And Jehovah appeareth unto him among the oaks of Mamre, and he is sitting at the opening of the tent, about the heat of the day;
and he lifteth up his eyes and looketh, and lo, three men standing by him, and he seeth, and runneth to meet them from the opening of the tent, and boweth himself towards the earth,
And he saith, 'My Lord, if, I pray thee, I have found grace in thine eyes, do not, I pray thee, pass on from thy servant;
let, I pray thee, a little water be accepted, and wash your feet, and recline under the tree;
and I bring a piece of bread, and support ye your heart; afterwards pass on, for therefore have ye passed over unto your servant;' and they say, 'So mayest thou do as thou has spoken.'
And Abraham hasteth towards the tent, unto Sarah, and saith, 'Hasten three measures of flour-meal, knead, and make cakes;'
and Abraham ran unto the herd, and taketh a son of the herd, tender and good, and giveth unto the young man, and he hasteth to prepare it;
and he taketh butter and milk, and the son of the herd which he hath prepared, and setteth before them; and he is standing by them under the tree, and they do eat.
And they say unto him, 'Where [is] Sarah thy wife?' and he saith, 'Lo — in the tent;'
and he saith, 'returning I return unto thee, about the time of life, and lo, to Sarah thy wife a son.'
And Sarah is hearkening at the opening of the tent, which is behind him;
and Abraham and Sarah [are] aged, entering into days — the way of women hath ceased to be to Sarah;
and Sarah laugheth in her heart, saying, 'After I have waxed old I have had pleasure! — my lord also [is] old!'
And Jehovah saith unto Abraham, 'Why [is] this? Sarah hath laughed, saying, Is it true really — I bear — and I am aged? Is any thing too wonderful for Jehovah? at the appointed time I return unto thee, about the time of life, and Sarah hath a son.'
And Sarah denieth, saying, 'I did not laugh;' for she hath been afraid; and He saith, 'Nay, but thou didst laugh.'
And the men rise from thence, and look on the face of Sodom, and Abraham is going with them to send them away;
and Jehovah said, 'Am I concealing from Abraham that which I am doing,
and Abraham certainly becometh a nation great and mighty, and blessed in him have been all nations of the earth?
for I have known him, that he commandeth his children, and his house after him (and they have kept the way of Jehovah), to do righteousness and judgment, that Jehovah may bring on Abraham that which He hath spoken concerning him.'
And Jehovah saith, 'The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah — because great; and their sin — because exceeding grievous:
I go down now, and see whether according to its cry which is coming unto Me they have done completely — and if not — I know;'
and the men turn from thence, and go towards Sodom; and Abraham is yet standing before Jehovah.
And Abraham draweth nigh and saith, 'Dost Thou also consume righteous with wicked?
peradventure there are fifty righteous in the midst of the city; dost Thou also consume, and not bear with the place for the sake of the fifty — the righteous who [are] in its midst?
Far be it from Thee to do according to this thing, to put to death the righteous with the wicked; that it hath been — as the righteous so the wicked — far be it from Thee; doth the Judge of all the earth not do justice?'
And Jehovah saith, 'If I find in Sodom fifty righteous in the midst of the city, then have I borne with all the place for their sake.'
And Abraham answereth and saith, 'Lo, I pray thee, I have willed to speak unto the Lord, and I — dust and ashes;
peradventure there are lacking five of the fifty righteous — dost Thou destroy for five the whole of the city?' and He saith, 'I destroy [it] not, if I find there forty and five.'
And he addeth again to speak unto Him and saith, 'Peradventure there are found there forty?' and He saith, 'I do [it] not, because of the forty.'
And he saith, 'Let it not be, I Pray thee, displeasing to the Lord, and I speak: peradventure there are found there thirty?' and He saith, 'I do [it] not, if I find there thirty.'
And he saith, 'Lo, I pray thee, I have willed to speak unto the Lord: peradventure there are found there twenty?' and He saith, 'I do not destroy [it], because of the twenty.'
And he saith, 'Let it not be, I pray Thee, displeasing to the Lord, and I speak only this time: peradventure there are found there ten?' and He saith, 'I do not destroy [it], because of the ten.'
And Jehovah goeth on, when He hath finished speaking unto Abraham, and Abraham hath turned back to his place.
And two of the messengers come towards Sodom at even, and Lot is sitting at the gate of Sodom, and Lot seeth, and riseth to meet them, and boweth himself — face to the earth,
and he saith, 'Lo, I pray you, my lords, turn aside, I pray you, unto the house of your servant, and lodge, and wash your feet — then ye have risen early and gone on your way;' and they say, 'Nay, but in the broad place we do lodge.'
And he presseth on them greatly, and they turn aside unto him, and come in unto his house; and he maketh for them a banquet, and hath baked unleavened things; and they do eat.
Before they lie down, the men of the city — men of Sodom — have come round about against the house, from young even unto aged, all the people from the extremity;
and they call unto Lot and say to him, 'Where [are] the men who have come in unto thee to-night? bring them out unto us, and we know them.'
And Lot goeth out unto them, to the opening, and the door hath shut behind him,
and saith, 'Do not, I pray you, my brethren, do evil;
lo, I pray you, I have two daughters, who have not known any one; let me, I pray you, bring them out unto you, and do to them as [is] good in your eyes; only to these men do not anything, for therefore have they come in within the shadow of my roof.'
And they say, 'Come nigh hither;' they say also, 'This one hath come in to sojourn, and he certainly judgeth! now, we do evil to thee more than [to] them;' and they press against the man, against Lot greatly, and come nigh to break the door.
And the men put forth their hand, and bring in Lot unto them, into the house, and have shut the door;
and the men who [are] at the opening of the house they have smitten with blindness, from small even unto great, and they weary themselves to find the opening.
And the men say unto Lot, 'Whom hast thou here still? son-in-law, thy sons also, and thy daughters, and all whom thou hast in the city, bring out from this place;
for we are destroying this place, for their cry hath been great [before] the face of Jehovah, and Jehovah doth send us to destroy it.'
And Lot goeth out, and speaketh unto his sons-in-law, those taking his daughters, and saith, 'Rise, go out from this place, for Jehovah is destroying the city;' and he is as [one] mocking in the eyes of his sons-in-law.
And when the dawn hath ascended, then the messengers press upon Lot, saying, 'Rise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters who are found present, lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city.'
And he lingereth, and the men lay hold on his hand, and on the hand of his wife, and on the hand of his two daughters, through the mercy of Jehovah unto him, and they bring him out, and cause him to rest without the city.
And it cometh to pass when he hath brought them out without, that he saith, 'Escape for thy life; look not expectingly behind thee, nor stand thou in all the circuit; to the mountain escape, lest thou be consumed.'
And Lot saith unto them, 'Not [so], I pray thee, my lord;
lo, I pray thee, thy servant hath found grace in thine eyes, and thou dost make great thy kindness which thou hast done with me by saving my life, and I am unable to escape to the mountain, lest the evil cleave [to] me, and I have died;
lo, I pray thee, this city [is] near to flee thither, and it [is] little; let me escape, I pray thee, thither, (is it not little?) and my soul doth live.'
And he saith unto him, 'Lo, I have accepted thy face also for this thing, without overthrowing the city [for] which thou hast spoken;
haste, escape thither, for I am not able to do anything till thine entering thither;' therefore hath he calleth the name of the city Zoar.
The sun hath gone out on the earth, and Lot hath entered into Zoar,
and Jehovah hath rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from Jehovah, from the heavens;
and He overthroweth these cities, and all the circuit, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which is shooting up from the ground.
And his wife looketh expectingly from behind him, and she is — a pillar of salt!
And Abraham riseth early in the morning, unto the place where he hath stood [before] the face of Jehovah;
and he looketh on the face of Sodom and Gomorrah, and on all the face of the land of the circuit, and seeth, and lo, the smoke of the land went up as smoke of the furnace.
And it cometh to pass, in God's destroying the cities of the circuit, that God remembereth Abraham, and sendeth Lot out of the midst of the overthrow in the overthrowing of the cities in which Lot dwelt.
And Lot goeth up out of Zoar, and dwelleth in the mountain, and his two daughters with him, for he hath been afraid of dwelling in Zoar, and he dwelleth in a cave, he and his two daughters.
And the first-born saith unto the younger, 'Our father [is] old, and a man there is not in the earth to come in unto us, as [is] the way of all the earth;
come, we cause our father to drink wine, and lie with him, and preserve from our father — a seed.'
And they cause their father to drink wine on that night; and the first-born goeth in, and lieth with her father, and he hath not known in her lying down, or in her rising up.
And it cometh to pass, on the morrow, that the first-born saith unto the younger, 'Lo, I have lain yesterday-night with my father: we cause him to drink wine also to-night, and go thou in, lie with him, and we preserve from our father — a seed.'
And they cause their father to drink wine on that night also, and the younger riseth and lieth with him, and he hath not known in her lying down, or in her rising up.
And the two daughters of Lot conceive from their father,
and the first-born beareth a son, and calleth his name Moab; he [is] father of Moab unto this day;
as to the younger, she also hath born a son, and calleth his name Ben-Ammi: he [is] father of the Beni-Ammon unto this day.
And Abraham journeyeth from thence toward the land of the south, and dwelleth between Kadesh and Shur, and sojourneth in Gerar;
and Abraham saith concerning Sarah his wife, 'She is my sister;' and Abimelech king of Gerar sendeth and taketh Sarah.
And God cometh in unto Abimelech in a dream of the night, and saith to him, 'Lo, thou [art] a dead man, because of the woman whom thou hast taken — and she married to a husband.'
And Abimelech hath not drawn near unto her, and he saith, 'Lord, also a righteous nation dost thou slay?
hath not he himself said to me, She [is] my sister! and she, even she herself, said, He [is] my brother; in the integrity of my heart, and in the innocency of my hands, I have done this.'
And God saith unto him in the dream, 'Yea, I — I have known that in the integrity of thy heart thou hast done this, and I withhold thee, even I, from sinning against Me, therefore I have not suffered thee to come against her;
and now send back the man's wife, for he [is] inspired, and he doth pray for thee, and live thou; and if thou do not send back, know that dying thou dost die, thou, and all that thou hast.'
And Abimelech riseth early in the morning, and calleth for all his servants, and speaketh all these words in their ears; and the men fear exceedingly;
and Abimelech calleth for Abraham, and saith to him, 'What hast thou done to us? and what have I sinned against thee, that thou hast brought upon me, and upon my kingdom, a great sin? works which are not done thou hast done with me.'
Abimelech also saith unto Abraham, 'What hast thou seen that thou hast done this thing?'
And Abraham saith, 'Because I said, 'Surely the fear of God is not in this place, and they have slain me for the sake of my wife;
and also, truly she is my sister, daughter of my father, only not daughter of my mother, and she becometh my wife;
and it cometh to pass, when God hath caused me to wander from my father's house, that I say to her, This [is] thy kindness which thou dost with me: at every place whither we come, say of me, He [is] my brother.'
And Abimelech taketh sheep and oxen, and servants and handmaids, and giveth to Abraham, and sendeth back to him Sarah his wife;
and Abimelech saith, 'Lo, my land [is] before thee, where it is good in thine eyes, dwell;'
and to Sarah he hath said, 'Lo, I have given a thousand silverlings to thy brother; lo, it is to thee a covering of eyes, to all who are with thee;' and by all this she is reasoned with.
And Abraham prayeth unto God, and God healeth Abimelech and his wife, and his handmaids, and they bear:
for Jehovah restraining had restrained every womb of the house of Abimelech, because of Sarah, Abraham's wife.
And Jehovah hath looked after Sarah as He hath said, and Jehovah doth to Sarah as He hath spoken;
and Sarah conceiveth, and beareth a son to Abraham, to his old age, at the appointed time that God hath spoken of with him;
and Abraham calleth the name of his son who is born to him, whom Sarah hath born to him — Isaac;
and Abraham circumciseth Isaac his son, [being] a son of eight days, as God hath commanded him.
And Abraham [is] a son of a hundred years in Isaac his son being born to him,
and Sarah saith, 'God hath made laughter for me; every one who is hearing laugheth for me.'
She saith also, 'Who hath said to Abraham, Sarah hath suckled sons, that I have born a son for his old age?'
And the lad groweth, and is weaned, and Abraham maketh a great banquet in the day of Isaac's being weaned;
and Sarah seeth the son of Hagar the Egyptian, whom she hath borne to Abraham, mocking,
and she saith to Abraham, 'Cast out this handmaid and her son; for the son of this handmaid hath no possession with my son — with Isaac.'
And the thing is very wrong in the eyes of Abraham, for his son's sake;
and God saith unto Abraham, 'Let it not be wrong in thine eyes because of the youth, and because of thy handmaid: all that Sarah saith unto thee — hearken to her voice, for in Isaac is a seed called to thee.
As to the son of the handmaid also, for a nation I set him, because he [is] thy seed.'
And Abraham riseth early in the morning, and taketh bread, and a bottle of water, and giveth unto Hagar (placing [it] on her shoulder), also the lad, and sendeth her out; and she goeth on, and goeth astray in the wilderness of Beer-Sheba;
and the water is consumed from the bottle, and she placeth the lad under one of the shrubs.
And she goeth and sitteth by herself over-against, afar off, about a bow-shot, for she said, 'Let me not look on the death of the lad;' and she sitteth over-against, and lifteth up her voice, and weepeth.
And God heareth the voice of the youth; and the messenger of God calleth unto Hagar from the heavens, and saith to her, 'What to thee, Hagar? fear not; for God hath hearkened unto the voice of the youth where he [is];
rise, lift up the youth, and lay hold on him with thy hand, for for a great nation I set him.'
And God openeth her eyes, and she seeth a well of water, and she goeth and filleth the bottle [with] water, and causeth the youth to drink;
and God is with the youth, and he groweth, and dwelleth in the wilderness, and is an archer;
and he dwelleth in the wilderness of Paran, and his mother taketh for him a wife from the land of Egypt.
And it cometh to pass at that time that Abimelech speaketh — Phichol also, head of his host — unto Abraham, saying, 'God [is] with thee in all that thou art doing;
and now, swear to me by God here: thou dost not lie to me, or to my continuator, or to my successor; according to the kindness which I have done with thee thou dost with me, and with the land in which thou hast sojourned.'
And Abraham saith, 'I — I do swear.'
And Abraham reasoned with Abimelech concerning the matter of a well of water which Abimelech's servants have taken violently away,
and Abimelech saith, 'I have not known who hath done this thing, and even thou didst not declare to me, and I also, I have not heard save to-day.'
And Abraham taketh sheep and oxen, and giveth to Abimelech, and they make, both of them, a covenant;
and Abraham setteth seven Lambs of the flock by themselves.
And Abimelech saith unto Abraham, 'What [are] they — these seven lambs which thou hast set by themselves?'
And he saith, 'For — the seven lambs thou dost accept from my hand, so that it becometh a witness for me that I have digged this well;'
therefore hath he called that place 'Beer-Sheba,' for there have both of them sworn.
And they make a covenant in Beer-Sheba, and Abimelech riseth — Phichol also, head of his host — and they turn back unto the land of the Philistines;
and [Abraham] planteth a tamarisk in Beer-Sheba, and preacheth there in the name of Jehovah, God age-during;
and Abraham sojourneth in the land of the Philistines many days.
And it cometh to pass after these things that God hath tried Abraham, and saith unto him, 'Abraham;' and he saith, 'Here [am] I.'
And He saith, 'Take, I pray thee, thy son, thine only one, whom thou hast loved, even Isaac, and go for thyself unto the land of Moriah, and cause him to ascend there for a burnt-offering on one of the mountains of which I speak unto thee.'
And Abraham riseth early in the morning, and saddleth his ass, and taketh two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son, and he cleaveth the wood of the burnt-offering, and riseth and goeth unto the place of which God hath spoken to him.
On the third day — Abraham lifteth up his eyes, and seeth the place from afar;
and Abraham saith unto his young men, 'Remain by yourselves here with the ass, and I and the youth go yonder and worship, and turn back unto you.'
And Abraham taketh the wood of the burnt-offering, and placeth on Isaac his son, and he taketh in his hand the fire, and the knife; and they go on both of them together.
And Isaac speaketh unto Abraham his father, and saith, 'My father,' and he saith, 'Here [am] I, my son.' And he saith, 'Lo, the fire and the wood, and where the lamb for a burnt-offering?'
and Abraham saith, 'God doth provide for Himself the lamb for a burnt-offering, my son;' and they go on both of them together.
And they come in unto the place of which God hath spoken to him, and there Abraham buildeth the altar, and arrangeth the wood, and bindeth Isaac his son, and placeth him upon the altar above the wood;
and Abraham putteth forth his hand, and taketh the knife — to slaughter his son.
And the messenger of Jehovah calleth unto him from the heavens, and saith, 'Abraham, Abraham;' and he saith, 'Here [am] I;'
and He saith, 'Put not forth thine hand unto the youth, nor do anything to him, for now I have known that thou art fearing God, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only one, from Me.'
And Abraham lifteth up his eyes, and looketh, and lo, a ram behind, seized in a thicket by its horns; and Abraham goeth, and taketh the ram, and causeth it to ascend for a burnt-offering instead of his son;
and Abraham calleth the name of that place 'Jehovah-Jireh,' because it is said this day in the mount, 'Jehovah doth provide.'
And the messenger of Jehovah calleth unto Abraham a second time from the heavens,
and saith, 'By Myself I have sworn — the affirmation of Jehovah — that because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only one —
that blessing I bless thee, and multiplying I multiply thy seed as stars of the heavens, and as sand which [is] on the sea-shore; and thy seed doth possess the gate of his enemies;
and blessed themselves in thy seed have all nations of the earth, because that thou hast hearkened to My voice.'
And Abraham turneth back unto his young men, and they rise and go together unto Beer-Sheba; and Abraham dwelleth in Beer-Sheba.
And it cometh to pass after these things that it is declared to Abraham, saying, 'Lo, Milcah hath borne, even she, sons to Nahor thy brother:
Huz his first-born, and Buz his brother; and Kemuel father of Aram,
and Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel;
and Bethuel hath begotten Rebekah;' these eight hath Milcah borne to Nahor, Abraham's brother;
and his concubine, whose name [is] Reumah, she also hath borne Tebah, and Gaham, and Tahash, and Maachah.
And the life of Sarah is a hundred and twenty and seven years — years of the life of Sarah;
and Sarah dieth in Kirjath-Arba, which [is] Hebron, in the land of Caanan, and Abraham goeth in to mourn for Sarah, and to bewail her.
And Abraham riseth up from the presence of his dead, and speaketh unto the sons of Heth, saying,
'A sojourner and a settler I [am] with you; give to me a possession of a burying-place with you, and I bury my dead from before me.'
And the sons of Heth answer Abraham, saying to him,
'Hear us, my lord; a prince of God [art] thou in our midst; in the choice of our burying-places bury thy dead: none of us his burying-place doth withhold from thee, from burying thy dead.'
And Abraham riseth and boweth himself to the people of the land, to the sons of Heth,
and he speaketh with them, saying, 'If it is your desire to bury my dead from before me, hear me, and meet for me with Ephron, son of Zoar;
and he giveth to me the cave of Machpelah, which he hath, which [is] in the extremity of his field; for full money doth he give it to me, in your midst, for a possession of a burying-place.'
And Ephron is sitting in the midst of the sons of Heth, and Ephron the Hittite answereth Abraham in the ears of the sons of Heth, of all those entering the gate of his city, saying,
'Nay, my lord, hear me: the field I have given to thee, and the cave that [is] in it, to thee I have given it; before the eyes of the sons of my people I have given it to thee — bury thy dead.'
And Abraham boweth himself before the people of the land,
and speaketh unto Ephron in the ears of the people of the land, saying, 'Only — if thou wouldest hear me — I have given the money of the field — accept from me, and I bury my dead there.'
And Ephron answereth Abraham, saying to him,
'My lord, hear me: the land — four hundred shekels of silver; between me and thee, what [is] it? — thy dead bury.'
And Abraham hearkeneth unto Ephron, and Abraham weigheth to Ephron the silver which he hath spoken of in the ears of the sons of Heth, four hundred silver shekels, passing with the merchant.
And established are the field of Ephron, which [is] in Machpelah, which [is] before Mamre, the field and the cave which [is] in it, and all the trees which [are] in the field, which [are] in all its border round about,
to Abraham by purchase, before the eyes of the sons of Heth, among all entering the gate of his city.
And after this hath Abraham buried Sarah his wife at the cave of the field of Machpelah before Mamre (which [is] Hebron), in the land of Canaan;
and established are the field, and the cave which [is] in it, to Abraham for a possession of a burying-place, from the sons of Heth.
And Abraham [is] old, he hath entered into days, and Jehovah hath blessed Abraham in all [things];
and Abraham saith unto his servant, the eldest of his house, who is ruling over all that he hath, 'Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh,
and I cause thee to swear by Jehovah, God of the heavens, and God of the earth, that thou dost not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanite, in the midst of whom I am dwelling;
but unto my land and unto my kindred dost thou go, and hast taken a wife for my son, for Isaac.'
And the servant saith unto him, 'It may be the woman is not willing to come after me unto this land; do I at all cause thy son to turn back unto the land from whence thou camest out?'
And Abraham saith unto him, 'Take heed to thyself, lest thou cause my son to turn back thither;
Jehovah, God of the heavens, who hath taken me from the house of my father, and from the land of my birth, and who hath spoken to me, and who hath sworn to me, saying, To thy seed I give this land, He doth send His messenger before thee, and thou hast taken a wife for my son from thence;
and if the woman be not willing to come after thee, then thou hast been acquitted from this mine oath: only my son thou dost not cause to turn back thither.'
And the servant putteth his hand under the thigh of Abraham his lord, and sweareth to him concerning this matter.
And the servant taketh ten camels of the camels of his lord and goeth, also of all the goods of his lord in his hand, and he riseth, and goeth unto Aram-Naharaim, unto the city of Nahor;
and he causeth the camels to kneel at the outside of the city, at the well of water, at even-time, at the time of the coming out of the women who draw water.
And he saith, 'Jehovah, God of my lord Abraham, cause to meet, I pray Thee, before me this day — (and do kindness with my lord Abraham;
lo, I am standing by the fountain of water, and daughters of the men of the city are coming out to draw water;
and it hath been, the young person unto whom I say, Incline, I pray thee, thy pitcher, and I drink, and she hath said, Drink, and I water also thy camels) — her Thou hast decided for Thy servant, for Isaac; and by it I know that Thou hast done kindness with my lord.'
And it cometh to pass, before he hath finished speaking, that lo, Rebekah (who was born to Bethuel, son of Milcah, wife of Nahor, brother of Abraham) is coming out, and her pitcher on her shoulder,
and the young person [is] of very good appearance, a virgin, and a man hath not known her; and she goeth down to the fountain, and filleth her pitcher, and cometh up.
And the servant runneth to meet her, and saith, 'Let me swallow, I pray thee, a little water from thy pitcher;'
and she saith, 'Drink, my lord;' and she hasteth, and letteth down her pitcher upon her hand, and giveth him drink.
And she finisheth giving him drink, and saith, 'Also for thy camels I draw till they have finished drinking;'
and she hasteth, and emptieth her pitcher into the drinking-trough, and runneth again unto the well to draw, and draweth for all his camels.
And the man, wondering at her, remaineth silent, to know whether Jehovah hath made his way prosperous or not.
And it cometh to pass when the camels have finished drinking, that the man taketh a golden ring (whose weight [is] a bekah), and two bracelets for her hands (whose weight [is] ten [bekahs] of gold),
and saith, 'Whose daughter [art] thou? declare to me, I pray thee, is the house of thy father a place for us to lodge in?'
And she saith unto him, 'I [am] daughter of Bethuel, son of Milcah, whom she hath borne to Nahor.'
She saith also unto him, 'Both straw and provender [are] abundant with us, also a place to lodge in.'
And the man boweth, and doth obeisance to Jehovah,
and saith, 'Blessed [is] Jehovah, God of my lord Abraham, who hath not left off His kindness and His truth with my lord; — I [being] in the way, Jehovah hath led me to the house of my lord's brethren.'
And the young person runneth, and declareth to the house of her mother according to these words.
And Rebekah hath a brother, and his name [is] Laban, and Laban runneth unto the man who [is] without, unto the fountain;
yea, it cometh to pass, when he seeth the ring, and the bracelets on the hands of his sister, and when he heareth the words of Rebekah his sister, saying, 'Thus hath the man spoken unto me,' that he cometh in unto the man, and lo, he is standing by the camels by the fountain.
And he saith, 'Come in, O blessed one of Jehovah, why standest thou without, and I — I have prepared the house and place for the camels!'
And he bringeth in the man into the house, and looseth the camels, and giveth straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet, and the feet of the men who [are] with him:
and setteth before him to eat; but he saith, 'I do not eat till I have spoken my word;' and he saith, 'Speak.'
And he saith, 'I [am] Abraham's servant;
and Jehovah hath blessed my lord exceedingly, and he is great; and He giveth to him flock, and herd, and silver, and gold, and men-servants, and maid-servants, and camels, and asses;
and Sarah, my lord's wife, beareth a son to my lord, after she hath been aged, and he giveth to him all that he hath.
'And my lord causeth me to swear, saying, Thou dost not take a wife to my son from the daughters of the Canaanite, in whose land I am dwelling.
If not — unto the house of my father thou dost go, and unto my family, and thou hast taken a wife for my son.
'And I say unto my lord, It may be the woman doth not come after me;
and he saith unto me, Jehovah, before whom I have walked habitually, doth send His messenger with thee, and hath prospered thy way, and thou hast taken a wife for my son from my family, and from the house of my father;
then art thou acquitted from my oath, when thou comest unto my family, and if they give not [one] to thee; then thou hast been acquitted from my oath.
'And I come to-day unto the fountain, and I say, Jehovah, God of my lord Abraham, if Thou art, I pray Thee, making prosperous my way in which I am going —
(lo, I am standing by the fountain of water), then the virgin who is coming out to draw, and I have said unto her, Let me drink, I pray thee, a little water from thy pitcher,
and she hath said unto me, Both drink thou, and also for thy camels I draw — she is the woman whom Jehovah hath decided for my lord's son.
'Before I finish speaking unto my heart, then lo, Rebekah is coming out, and her pitcher on her shoulder, and she goeth down to the fountain, and draweth; and I say unto her, Let me drink, I pray thee,
and she hasteth and letteth down her pitcher from off her and saith, Drink, and thy camels also I water; and I drink, and the camels also she hath watered.
'And I ask her, and say, Whose daughter [art] thou? and she saith, Daughter of Bethuel, son of Nahor, whom Milcah hath borne to him, and I put the ring on her nose, and the bracelets on her hands,
and I bow, and do obeisance before Jehovah, and I bless Jehovah, God of my lord Abraham, who hath led me in the true way to receive the daughter of my lord's brother for his son.
'And now, if ye are dealing kindly and truly with my lord, declare to me; and if not, declare to me; and I turn unto the right or unto the left.'
And Laban answereth — Bethuel also — and they say, 'The thing hath gone out from Jehovah; we are not able to speak unto thee bad or good;
lo, Rebekah [is] before thee, take and go, and she is a wife to thy lord's son, as Jehovah hath spoken.'
And it cometh to pass, when the servant of Abraham hath heard their words, that he boweth himself towards the earth before Jehovah;
and the servant taketh out vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and garments, and giveth to Rebekah; precious things also he hath given to her brother and to her mother.
And they eat and drink, he and the men who [are] with him, and lodge all night; and they rise in the morning, and he saith, 'Send me to my lord;'
and her brother saith — her mother also — 'Let the young person abide with us a week or ten days, afterwards doth she go.'
And he saith unto them, 'Do not delay me, seeing Jehovah hath prospered my way; send me away, and I go to my lord;'
and they say, 'Let us call for the young person, and ask at her mouth;'
and they call for Rebekah, and say unto her, 'Dost thou go with this man?' and she saith, 'I go.'
And they send away Rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and Abraham's servant, and his men;
and they bless Rebekah, and say to her, 'Thou [art] our sister; become thou thousands of myriads, and thy seed doth possess the gate of those hating it.'
And Rebekah and her young women arise, and ride on the camels, and go after the man; and the servant taketh Rebekah and goeth.
And Isaac hath come in from the entrance of the Well of the Living One, my Beholder; and he is dwelling in the land of the south,
and Isaac goeth out to meditate in the field, at the turning of the evening, and he lifteth up his eyes, and looketh, and lo, camels are coming.
And Rebekah lifteth up her eyes, and seeth Isaac, and alighteth from off the camel;
and she saith unto the servant, 'Who [is] this man who is walking in the field to meet us?' and the servant saith, 'It [is] my lord;' and she taketh the veil, and covereth herself.
And the servant recounteth to Isaac all the things that he hath done,
and Isaac bringeth her in unto the tent of Sarah his mother, and he taketh Rebekah, and she becometh his wife, and he loveth her, and Isaac is comforted after [the death of] his mother.
And Abraham addeth and taketh a wife, and her name [is] Keturah;
and she beareth to him Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah.
And Jokshan hath begotten Sheba and Dedan; and the sons of Dedan were Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leummim;
and the sons of Midian [are] Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abidah, and Eldaah: all these [are] sons of Keturah.
And Abraham giveth all that he hath to Isaac;
and to the sons of the concubines whom Abraham hath, Abraham hath given gifts, and sendeth them away from Isaac his son (in his being yet alive) eastward, unto the east country.
And these [are] the days of the years of the life of Abraham, which he lived, a hundred and seventy and five years;
and Abraham expireth, and dieth in a good old age, aged and satisfied, and is gathered unto his people.
And Isaac and Ishmael his sons bury him at the cave of Machpelah, at the field of Ephron, son of Zoar the Hittite, which [is] before Mamre —
the field which Abraham bought from the sons of Heth — there hath Abraham been buried, and Sarah his wife.
And it cometh to pass after the death of Abraham, that God blesseth Isaac his son; and Isaac dwelleth by the Well of the Living One, my Beholder.
And these [are] births of Ishmael, Abraham's son, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's handmaid, hath borne to Abraham;
and these [are] the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names, according to their births: first-born of Ishmael, Nebajoth; and Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam,
and Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa,
Hadar, and Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah:
these are sons of Ishmael, and these their names, by their villages, and by their towers; twelve princes according to their peoples.
And these [are] the years of the life of Ishmael, a hundred and thirty and seven years; and he expireth, and dieth, and is gathered unto his people;
and they tabernacle from Havilah unto Shur, which [is] before Egypt, in [thy] going towards Asshur; in the presence of all his brethren hath he fallen.
And these [are] births of Isaac, Abraham's son: Abraham hath begotten Isaac;
and Isaac is a son of forty years in his taking Rebekah, daughter of Bethuel the Aramaean, from Padan-Aram, sister of Laban the Aramaean, to him for a wife.
And Isaac maketh entreaty to Jehovah before his wife, for she [is] barren: and Jehovah is entreated of him, and Rebekah his wife conceiveth,
and the children struggle together within her, and she saith, 'If [it is] right — why [am] I thus?' and she goeth to seek Jehovah.
And Jehovah saith to her, 'Two nations [are] in thy womb, and two peoples from thy bowels are parted; and the [one] people than the [other] people is stronger; and the elder doth serve the younger.'
And her days to bear are fulfilled, and lo, twins [are] in her womb;
and the first cometh out all red as a hairy robe, and they call his name Esau;
and afterwards hath his brother come out, and his hand is taking hold on Esau's heel, and one calleth his name Jacob; and Isaac [is] a son of sixty years in her bearing them.
And the youths grew, and Esau is a man acquainted [with] hunting, a man of the field; and Jacob [is] a plain man, inhabiting tents;
and Isaac loveth Esau, for [his] hunting [is] in his mouth; and Rebekah is loving Jacob.
And Jacob boileth pottage, and Esau cometh in from the field, and he [is] weary;
and Esau saith unto Jacob, 'Let me eat, I pray thee, some of this red red thing, for I [am] weary;' therefore hath [one] called his name Edom [Red];
and Jacob saith, 'Sell to-day thy birthright to me.'
And Esau saith, 'Lo, I am going to die, and what is this to me — birthright?'
and Jacob saith, 'Swear to me to-day:' and he sweareth to him, and selleth his birthright to Jacob;
and Jacob hath given to Esau bread and pottage of lentiles, and he eateth, and drinketh, and riseth, and goeth; and Esau despiseth the birthright.
And there is a famine in the land, besides the first famine which was in the days of Abraham, and Isaac goeth unto Abimelech king of the Philistines, to Gerar.
And Jehovah appeareth unto him, and saith, 'Go not down towards Egypt, tabernacle in the land concerning which I speak unto thee,
sojourn in this land, and I am with thee, and bless thee, for to thee and to thy seed I give all these lands, and I have established the oath which I have sworn to Abraham thy father;
and I have multiplied thy seed as stars of the heavens, and I have given to thy seed all these lands; and blessed themselves in thy seed have all nations of the earth;
because that Abraham hath hearkened to My voice, and keepeth My charge, My commands, My statutes, and My laws.'
And Isaac dwelleth in Gerar;
and men of the place ask him of his wife, and he saith, 'She [is] my sister:' for he hath been afraid to say, 'My wife — lest the men of the place kill me for Rebekah, for she [is] of good appearance.'
And it cometh to pass, when the days have been prolonged to him there, that Abimelech king of the Philistines looketh through the window, and seeth, and lo, Isaac is playing with Rebekah his wife.
And Abimelech calleth for Isaac, and saith, 'Lo, she [is] surely thy wife; and how hast thou said, She [is] my sister?' and Isaac saith unto him, 'Because I said, Lest I die for her.'
And Abimelech saith, 'What [is] this thou hast done to us? as a little thing one of the people had lain with thy wife, and thou hadst brought upon us guilt;'
and Abimelech commandeth all the people, saying, 'He who cometh against this man or against his wife, dying doth die.'
And Isaac soweth in that land, and findeth in that year a hundredfold, and Jehovah blesseth him;
and the man is great, and goeth on, going on and becoming great, till that he hath been very great,
and he hath possession of a flock, and possession of a herd, and an abundant service; and the Philistines envy him,
and all the wells which his father's servants digged in the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines have stopped them, and fill them with dust.
And Abimelech saith unto Isaac, 'Go from us; for thou hast become much mightier than we;'
and Isaac goeth from thence, and encampeth in the valley of Gerar, and dwelleth there;
and Isaac turneth back, and diggeth the wells of water which they digged in the days of Abraham his father, which the Philistines do stop after the death of Abraham, and he calleth to them names according to the names which his father called them.
And Isaac's servants dig in the valley, and find there a well of living water,
and shepherds of Gerar strive with shepherds of Isaac, saying, 'The water [is] ours;' and he calleth the name of the well 'Strife,' because they have striven habitually with him;
and they dig another well, and they strive also for it, and he calleth its name 'Hatred.'
And he removeth from thence, and diggeth another well, and they have not striven for it, and he calleth its name Enlargements, and saith, 'For — now hath Jehovah given enlargement to us, and we have been fruitful in the land.'
And he goeth up from thence [to] Beer-Sheba,
and Jehovah appeareth unto him during that night, and saith, 'I [am] the God of Abraham thy father, fear not, for I [am] with thee, and have blessed thee, and have multiplied thy seed, because of Abraham My servant;'
and he buildeth there an altar, and preacheth in the name of Jehovah, and stretcheth out there his tent, and there Isaac's servants dig a well.
And Abimelech hath gone unto him from Gerar, and Ahuzzath his friend, and Phichol head of his host;
and Isaac saith unto them, 'Wherefore have ye come unto me, and ye have hated me, and ye send me away from you?'
And they say, 'We have certainly seen that Jehovah hath been with thee, and we say, 'Let there be, we pray thee, an oath between us, between us and thee, and let us make a covenant with thee;
do not evil with us, as we have not touched thee, and as we have only done good with thee, and send thee away in peace; thou [art] now blessed of Jehovah.'
And he maketh for them a banquet, and they eat and drink,
and rise early in the morning, and swear one to another, and Isaac sendeth them away, and they go from him in peace.
And it cometh to pass during that day that Isaac's servants come and declare to him concerning the circumstances of the well which they have digged, and say to him, 'We have found water;'
and he calleth it Shebah, [oath,] therefore the name of the city [is] Beer-Sheba, [well of the oath,] unto this day.
And Esau is a son of forty years, and he taketh a wife, Judith, daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Bashemath, daughter of Elon the Hittite,
and they are a bitterness of spirit to Isaac and to Rebekah.
And it cometh to pass that Isaac [is] aged, and his eyes are too dim for seeing, and he calleth Esau his elder son, and saith unto him, 'My son;' and he saith unto him, 'Here [am] I.'
And he saith, 'Lo, I pray thee, I have become aged, I have not known the day of my death;
and now, take up, I pray thee, thy instruments, thy quiver, and thy bow, and go out to the field, and hunt for me provision,
and make for me tasteful things, [such] as I have loved, and bring in to me, and I do eat, so that my soul doth bless thee before I die.'
And Rebekah is hearkening while Isaac is speaking unto Esau his son; and Esau goeth to the field to hunt provision — to bring in;
and Rebekah hath spoken unto Jacob her son, saying, 'Lo, I have heard thy father speaking unto Esau thy brother, saying,
Bring for me provision, and make for me tasteful things, and I do eat, and bless thee before Jehovah before my death.
'And now, my son, hearken to my voice, to that which I am commanding thee:
Go, I pray thee, unto the flock, and take for me from thence two good kids of the goats, and I make them tasteful things for thy father, [such] as he hath loved;
and thou hast taken in to thy father, and he hath eaten, so that his soul doth bless thee before his death.
And Jacob saith unto Rebekah his mother, 'Lo, Esau my brother [is] a hairy man, and I a smooth man,
it may be my father doth feel me, and I have been in his eyes as a deceiver, and have brought upon me disesteem, and not a blessing;'
and his mother saith to him, 'On me thy disesteem, my son; only hearken to my voice, and go, take for me.'
And he goeth, and taketh, and bringeth to his mother, and his mother maketh tasteful things, [such] as his father hath loved;
and Rebekah taketh the desirable garments of Esau her elder son, which [are] with her in the house, and doth put on Jacob her younger son;
and the skins of the kids of the goats she hath put on his hands, and on the smooth of his neck,
and she giveth the tasteful things, and the bread which she hath made, into the hand of Jacob her son.
And he cometh in unto his father, and saith, 'My father;' and he saith, 'Here [am] I; who [art] thou, my son?'
And Jacob saith unto his father, 'I [am] Esau thy first-born; I have done as thou hast spoken unto me; rise, I pray thee, sit, and eat of my provision, so that thy soul doth bless me.'
And Isaac saith unto his son, 'What [is] this thou hast hasted to find, my son?' and he saith, 'That which Jehovah thy God hath caused to come before me.'
And Isaac saith unto Jacob, 'Come nigh, I pray thee, and I feel thee, my son, whether thou [art] he, my son Esau, or not.'
And Jacob cometh nigh unto Isaac his father, and he feeleth him, and saith, 'The voice [is] the voice of Jacob, and the hands hands of Esau.'
And he hath not discerned him, for his hands have been hairy, as the hands of Esau his brother, and he blesseth him,
and saith, 'Thou art he — my son Esau?' and he saith, 'I [am].'
And he saith, 'Bring nigh to me, and I do eat of my son's provision, so that my soul doth bless thee;' and he bringeth nigh to him, and he eateth; and he bringeth to him wine, and he drinketh.
And Isaac his father saith to him, 'Come nigh, I pray thee, and kiss me, my son;'
and he cometh nigh, and kisseth him, and he smelleth the fragrance of his garments, and blesseth him, and saith, 'See, the fragrance of my son [is] as the fragrance of a field which Jehovah hath blessed;
and God doth give to thee of the dew of heaven, and of the fatness of the earth, and abundance of corn and wine;
peoples serve thee, and nations bow themselves to thee, be thou mighty over thy brethren, and the sons of thy mother bow themselves to thee; those who curse thee [are] cursed, and those who bless thee [are] blessed.'
And it cometh to pass, as Isaac hath finished blessing Jacob, and Jacob is only just going out from the presence of Isaac his father, that Esau his brother hath come in from his hunting;
and he also maketh tasteful things, and bringeth to his father, and saith to his father, 'Let my father arise, and eat of his son's provision, so that thy soul doth bless me.'
And Isaac his father saith to him, 'Who [art] thou?' and he saith, 'I [am] thy son, thy first-born, Esau;'
and Isaac trembleth a very great trembling, and saith, 'Who, now, [is] he who hath provided provision, and bringeth in to me, and I eat of all before thou comest in, and I bless him? — yea, blessed is he.'
When Esau heareth the words of his father, then he crieth a very great and bitter cry, and saith to his father, 'Bless me, me also, O my father;'
and he saith, 'Thy brother hath come with subtilty, and taketh thy blessing.'
And he saith, 'Is it because [one] called his name Jacob that he doth take me by the heel these two times? my birthright he hath taken; and lo, now, he hath taken my blessing;' he saith also, 'Hast thou not kept back a blessing for me?'
And Isaac answereth and saith to Esau, 'Lo, a mighty one have I set him over thee, and all his brethren have I given to him for servants, and [with] corn and wine have I sustained him; and for thee now, what shall I do, my son?'
And Esau saith unto his father, 'One blessing hast thou my father? bless me, me also, O my father;' and Esau lifteth up his voice, and weepeth.
And Isaac his father answereth and saith unto him, 'Lo, of the fatness of the earth is thy dwelling, and of the dew of the heavens from above;
and by thy sword dost thou live, and thy brother dost thou serve; and it hath come to pass when thou rulest, that thou hast broken his yoke from off thy neck.'
And Esau hateth Jacob, because of the blessing with which his father blessed him, and Esau saith in his heart, 'The days of mourning [for] my father draw near, and I slay Jacob my brother.'
And the words of Esau her elder son are declared to Rebekah, and she sendeth and calleth for Jacob her younger son, and saith unto him, 'Lo, Esau thy brother is comforting himself in regard to thee — to slay thee;
and now, my son, hearken to my voice, and rise, flee for thyself unto Laban my brother, to Haran,
and thou hast dwelt with him some days, till thy brother's fury turn back,
till thy brother's anger turn back from thee, and he hath forgotten that which thou hast done to him, and I have sent and taken thee from thence; why am I bereaved even of you both the same day?'
And Rebekah saith unto Isaac, 'I have been disgusted with my life because of the presence of the daughters of Heth; if Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, like these — from the daughters of the land — why do I live?'
And Isaac calleth unto Jacob, and blesseth him, and commandeth him, and saith to him, 'Thou dost not take a wife of the daughters of Caanan;
rise, go to Padan-Aram, to the house of Bethuel, thy mother's father, and take for thyself from thence a wife, of the daughters of Laban, thy mother's brother;
and God Almighty doth bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and thou hast become an assembly of peoples;
and He doth give to thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee and to thy seed with thee, to cause thee to possess the land of thy sojournings, which God gave to Abraham.'
And Isaac sendeth away Jacob, and he goeth to Padan-Aram, unto Laban, son of Bethuel the Aramaean, brother of Rebekah, mother of Jacob and Esau.
And Esau seeth that Isaac hath blessed Jacob, and hath sent him to Padan-Aram to take to himself from thence a wife — in his blessing him that he layeth a charge upon him, saying, Thou dost not take a wife from the daughters of Canaan —
that Jacob hearkeneth unto his father and unto his mother, and goeth to Padan-Aram —
and Esau seeth that the daughters of Canaan are evil in the eyes of Isaac his father,
and Esau goeth unto Ishmael, and taketh Mahalath, daughter of Ishmael, Abraham's son, sister of Nebajoth, unto his wives, to himself, for a wife.
And Jacob goeth out from Beer-Sheba, and goeth toward Haran,
and he toucheth at a [certain] place, and lodgeth there, for the sun hath gone in, and he taketh of the stones of the place, and maketh [them] his pillows, and lieth down in that place.
And he dreameth, and lo, a ladder set up on the earth, and its head is touching the heavens; and lo, messengers of God are going up and coming down by it;
and lo, Jehovah is standing upon it, and He saith, 'I [am] Jehovah, God of Abraham thy father, and God of Isaac; the land on which thou art lying, to thee I give it, and to thy seed;
and thy seed hath been as the dust of the land, and thou hast broken forth westward, and eastward, and northward, and southward, and all families of the ground have been blessed in thee and in thy seed.
'And lo, I [am] with thee, and have kept thee whithersoever thou goest, and have caused thee to turn back unto this ground; for I leave thee not till that I have surely done that which I have spoken to thee.'
And Jacob awaketh out of his sleep, and saith, 'Surely Jehovah is in this place, and I knew not;'
and he feareth, and saith, 'How fearful [is] this place; this is nothing but a house of God, and this a gate of the heavens.'
And Jacob riseth early in the morning, and taketh the stone which he hath made his pillows, and maketh it a standing pillar, and poureth oil upon its top,
and he calleth the name of that place Bethel, [house of God,] and yet, Luz [is] the name of the city at the first.
And Jacob voweth a vow, saying, 'Seeing God is with me, and hath kept me in this way which I am going, and hath given to me bread to eat, and a garment to put on —
when I have turned back in peace unto the house of my father, and Jehovah hath become my God,
then this stone which I have made a standing pillar is a house of God, and all that Thou dost give to me — tithing I tithe to Thee.'
And Jacob lifteth up his feet, and goeth towards the land of the sons of the east;
and he looketh, and lo, a well in the field, and lo, there three droves of a flock crouching by it, for from that well they water the droves, and the great stone [is] on the mouth of the well.
(When thither have all the droves been gathered, and they have rolled the stone from off the mouth of the well, and have watered the flock, then they have turned back the stone on the mouth of the well to its place.)
And Jacob saith to them, 'My brethren, from whence [are] ye?' and they say, 'We [are] from Haran.'
And he saith to them, 'Have ye known Laban, son of Nahor?' and they say, 'We have known.'
And he saith to them, 'Hath he peace?' and they say, 'Peace; and lo, Rachel his daughter is coming with the flock.'
And he saith, 'Lo, the day [is] still great, [it is] not time for the cattle to be gathered; water ye the flock, and go, delight yourselves.'
And they say, 'We are not able, till that all the droves be gathered together, and they have rolled away the stone from the mouth of the well, and we have watered the flock.'
He is yet speaking with them, and Rachel hath come with the flock which her father hath, for she [is] shepherdess;
and it cometh to pass when Jacob hath seen Rachel, daughter of Laban his mother's brother, and the flock of Laban his mother's brother, that Jacob cometh nigh and rolleth the stone from off the mouth of the well, and watereth the flock of Laban his mother's brother.
And Jacob kisseth Rachel, and lifteth up his voice, and weepeth,
and Jacob declareth to Rachel that he [is] her father's brother, and that he [is] Rebekah's son, and she runneth and declareth to her father.
And it cometh to pass, when Laban heareth the report of Jacob his sister's son, that he runneth to meet him, and embraceth him, and kisseth him, and bringeth him in unto his house; and he recounteth to Laban all these things,
and Laban saith to him, 'Only my bone and my flesh [art] thou;' and he dwelleth with him a month of days.
And Laban saith to Jacob, 'Is it because thou [art] my brother that thou hast served me for nought? declare to me what [is] thy hire.'
And Laban hath two daughters, the name of the elder [is] Leah, and the name of the younger Rachel,
and the eyes of Leah [are] tender, and Rachel hath been fair of form and fair of appearance.
And Jacob loveth Rachel, and saith, 'I serve thee seven years for Rachel thy younger daughter:'
and Laban saith, 'It is better for me to give her to thee than to give her to another man; dwell with me;'
and Jacob serveth for Rachel seven years; and they are in his eyes as some days, because of his loving her.
And Jacob saith unto Laban, 'Give up my wife, for my days have been fulfilled, and I go in unto her;'
and Laban gathereth all the men of the place, and maketh a banquet.
And it cometh to pass in the evening, that he taketh Leah, his daughter, and bringeth her in unto him, and he goeth in unto her;
and Laban giveth to her Zilpah, his maid-servant, to Leah his daughter, a maid-servant.
And it cometh to pass in the morning, that lo, it [is] Leah; and he saith unto Laban, 'What [is] this thou hast done to me? for Rachel have I not served with thee? and why hast thou deceived me?'
And Laban saith, 'It is not done so in our place, to give the younger before the first-born;
fulfil the week of this one, and we give to thee also this one, for the service which thou dost serve with me yet seven other years.'
And Jacob doth so, and fulfilleth the week of this one, and he giveth to him Rachel his daughter, to him for a wife;
and Laban giveth to Rachel his daughter Bilhah his maid-servant, for a maid-servant to her.
And he goeth in also unto Rachel, and he also loveth Rachel more than Leah; and he serveth with him yet seven other years.
And Jehovah seeth that Leah [is] the hated one, and He openeth her womb, and Rachel [is] barren;
and Leah conceiveth, and beareth a son, and calleth his name Reuben, for she said, 'Because Jehovah hath looked on mine affliction; because now doth my husband love me.'
And she conceiveth again, and beareth a son, and saith, 'Because Jehovah hath heard that I [am] the hated one, He also giveth to me even this [one];' and she calleth his name Simeon.
And she conceiveth again, and beareth a son, and saith, 'Now [is] the time, my husband is joined unto me, because I have born to him three sons,' therefore hath [one] called his name Levi.
And she conceiveth again, and beareth a son, and saith this time, 'I praise Jehovah;' therefore hath she called his name Judah; and she ceaseth from bearing.
And Rachel seeth that she hath not borne to Jacob, and Rachel is envious of her sister, and saith unto Jacob, 'Give me sons, and if there is none — I die.'
And Jacob's anger burneth against Rachel, and he saith, 'Am I in stead of God who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?'
And she saith, 'Lo, my handmaid Bilhah, go in unto her, and she doth bear on my knees, and I am built up, even I, from her;'
and she giveth to him Bilhah her maid-servant for a wife, and Jacob goeth in unto her;
and Bilhah conceiveth, and beareth to Jacob a son,
and Rachel saith, 'God hath decided for me, and also hath hearkened to my voice, and giveth to me a son;' therefore hath she called his name Dan.
And Bilhah, Rachel's maid-servant, conceiveth again, and beareth a second son to Jacob,
and Rachel saith, 'With wrestlings of God I have wrestled with my sister, yea, I have prevailed;' and she calleth his name Napthali.
And Leah seeth that she hath ceased from bearing, and she taketh Zilpah her maid-servant, and giveth her to Jacob for a wife;
and Zilpah, Leah's maid-servant, beareth to Jacob a son,
and Leah saith, 'A troop is coming;' and she calleth his name Gad.
And Zilpah, Leah's maid-servant, beareth a second son to Jacob,
and Leah saith, 'Because of my happiness, for daughters have pronounced me happy;' and she calleth his name Asher.
And Reuben goeth in the days of wheat-harvest, and findeth love-apples in the field, and bringeth them in unto Leah, his mother, and Rachel saith unto Leah, 'Give to me, I pray thee, of the love-apples of thy son.'
And she saith to her, 'Is thy taking my husband a little thing, that thou hast taken also the love-apples of my son?' and Rachel saith, 'Therefore doth he lie with thee to-night, for thy son's love-apples.'
And Jacob cometh in from the field at evening; and Leah goeth to meet him, and saith, 'Unto me dost thou come in, for hiring I have hired thee with my son's love-apples;' and he lieth with her during that night.
And God hearkeneth unto Leah, and she conceiveth, and beareth to Jacob a son, a fifth,
and Leah saith, 'God hath given my hire, because I have given my maid-servant to my husband;' and she calleth his name Issachar.
And conceive again doth Leah, and she beareth a sixth son to Jacob,
and Leah saith, 'God hath endowed me — a good dowry; this time doth my husband dwell with me, for I have borne to him six sons;' and she calleth his name Zebulun;
and afterwards hath she born a daughter, and calleth her name Dinah.
And God remembereth Rachel, and God hearkeneth unto her, and openeth her womb,
and she conceiveth and beareth a son, and saith, 'God hath gathered up my reproach;'
and she calleth his name Joseph, saying, 'Jehovah is adding to me another son.'
And it cometh to pass, when Rachel hath borne Joseph, that Jacob saith unto Laban, 'Send me away, and I go unto my place, and to my land;
give up my wives and my children, for whom I have served thee, and I go; for thou — thou hast known my service which I have served thee.'
And Laban saith unto him, 'If, I pray thee, I have found grace in thine eyes — I have observed diligently that Jehovah doth bless me for thy sake.'
He saith also, 'Define thy hire to me, and I give.'
And he saith unto him, 'Thou — thou hast known that which I have served thee [in], and that which thy substance was with me;
for [it is] little which thou hast had at my appearance, and it breaketh forth into a multitude, and Jehovah blesseth thee at my coming; and now, when do I make, I also, for mine own house?'
And he saith, 'What do I give to thee?' And Jacob saith, 'Thou dost not give me anything; if thou do for me this thing, I turn back; I have delight; thy flock I watch;
I pass through all thy flock to-day to turn aside from thence every sheep speckled and spotted, and every brown sheep among the lambs, and speckled and spotted among the goats — and it hath been my hire;
and my righteousness hath answered for me in the day to come, when it cometh in for my hire before thy face; — every one which is not speckled and spotted among [my] goats, and brown among [my] lambs — it is stolen with me.'
And Laban saith, 'Lo, O that it were according to thy word;'
and he turneth aside during that day the ring-streaked and the spotted he-goats, and all the speckled and the spotted she-goats, every one that [hath] white in it, and every brown one among the lambs, and he giveth into the hand of his sons,
and setteth a journey of three days between himself and Jacob; and Jacob is feeding the rest of the flock of Laban.
And Jacob taketh to himself a rod of fresh poplar, and of the hazel and chesnut, and doth peel in them white peelings, making bare the white that [is] on the rods,
and setteth up the rods which he hath peeled in the gutters in the watering troughs (when the flock cometh in to drink), over-against the flock, that they may conceive in their coming in to drink;
and the flocks conceive at the rods, and the flock beareth ring-streaked, speckled, and spotted ones.
And the lambs hath Jacob parted, and he putteth the face of the flock towards the ring-streaked, also all the brown in the flock of Laban, and he setteth his own droves by themselves, and hath not set them near Laban's flock.
And it hath come to pass whenever the strong ones of the flock conceive, that Jacob set the rods before the eyes of the flock in the gutters, to cause them to conceive by the rods,
and when the flock is feeble, he doth not set [them]; and the feeble ones have been Laban's, and the strong ones Jacob's.
And the man increaseth very exceedingly, and hath many flocks, and maid-servants, and men-servants, and camels, and asses.
And he heareth the words of Laban's sons, saying, 'Jacob hath taken all that our father hath; yea, from that which our father hath, he hath made all this honour;'
and Jacob seeth the face of Laban, and lo, it is not with him as heretofore.
And Jehovah saith unto Jacob, 'Turn back unto the land of thy fathers, and to thy kindred, and I am with thee.'
And Jacob sendeth and calleth for Rachel and for Leah to the field unto his flock;
and saith to them, 'I am beholding your father's face — that it is not towards me as heretofore, and the God of my father hath been with me,
and ye — ye have known that with all my power I have served your father,
and your father hath played upon me, and hath changed my hire ten times; and God hath not suffered him to do evil with me.
'If he say thus: The speckled are thy hire, then bare all the flock speckled ones; and if he say thus: The ring-streaked are thy hire, then bare all the flock ring-streaked;
and God taketh away the substance of your father, and doth give to me.
'And it cometh to pass at the time of the flock conceiving, that I lift up mine eyes and see in a dream, and lo, the he-goats, which are going up on the flock, [are] ring-streaked, speckled, and grisled;
and the messenger of God saith unto me in the dream, Jacob, and I say, Here [am] I.
'And He saith, Lift up, I pray thee, thine eyes, and see — all the he-goats which are going up on the flock [are] ring-streaked, speckled, and grisled, for I have seen all that Laban is doing to thee;
I [am] the God of Bethel where thou hast anointed a standing pillar, where thou hast vowed a vow to me; now, arise, go out from this land, and turn back unto the land of thy birth.'
And Rachel answereth — Leah also — and saith to him, 'Have we yet a portion and inheritance in the house of our father?
have we not been reckoned strangers to him? for he hath sold us, and he also utterly consumeth our money;
for all the wealth which God hath taken away from our father, it [is] ours, and our children's; and now, all that God hath said unto thee — do.'
And Jacob riseth, and lifteth up his sons and his wives on the camels,
and leadeth all his cattle, and all his substance which he hath acquired, the cattle of his getting, which he hath acquired in Padan-Aram, to go unto Isaac his father, to the land of Canaan.
And Laban hath gone to shear his flock, and Rachel stealeth the teraphim which her father hath;
and Jacob deceiveth the heart of Laban the Aramaean, because he hath not declared to him that he is fleeing;
and he fleeth, he and all that he hath, and riseth, and passeth over the River, and setteth his face [toward] the mount of Gilead.
And it is told to Laban on the third day that Jacob hath fled,
and he taketh his brethren with him, and pursueth after him a journey of seven days, and overtaketh him in the mount of Gilead.
And God cometh in unto Laban the Aramaean in a dream of the night, and saith to him, 'Take heed to thyself lest thou speak with Jacob from good unto evil.'
And Laban overtaketh Jacob; and Jacob hath fixed his tent in the mount; and Laban with his brethren have fixed [theirs] in the mount of Gilead.
And Laban saith to Jacob, 'What hast thou done that thou dost deceive my heart, and lead away my daughters as captives of the sword?
Why hast thou hidden thyself to flee, and deceivest me, and hast not declared to me, and I send thee away with joy and with songs, with tabret and with harp,
and hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and my daughters? — now thou hast acted foolishly in doing [so];
my hand is to God to do evil with you, but the God of your father yesternight hath spoken unto me, saying, Take heed to thyself from speaking with Jacob from good unto evil.
'And now, thou hast certainly gone, because thou hast been very desirous for the house of thy father; why hast thou stolen my gods?'
And Jacob answereth and saith to Laban, 'Because I was afraid, for I said, Lest thou take violently away thy daughters from me;
with whomsoever thou findest thy gods — he doth not live; before our brethren discern for thyself what [is] with me, and take to thyself:' and Jacob hath not known that Rachel hath stolen them.
And Laban goeth into the tent of Jacob, and into the tent of Leah, and into the tent of the two handmaidens, and hath not found; and he goeth out from the tent of Leah, and goeth into the tent of Rachel.
And Rachel hath taken the teraphim, and putteth them in the furniture of the camel, and sitteth upon them; and Laban feeleth all the tent, and hath not found;
and she saith unto her father, 'Let it not be displeasing in the eyes of my lord that I am not able to rise at thy presence, for the way of women [is] on me;' and he searcheth, and hath not found the teraphim.
And it is displeasing to Jacob, and he striveth with Laban; and Jacob answereth and saith to Laban, 'What [is] my transgression? what my sin, that thou hast burned after me?
for thou hast felt all my vessels: what hast thou found of all the vessels of thy house? set here before my brethren, and thy brethren, and they decide between us both.
'These twenty years I [am] with thee: thy ewes and thy she-goats have not miscarried, and the rams of thy flock I have not eaten;
the torn I have not brought in unto thee — I, I repay it — from my hand thou dost seek it; I have been deceived by day, and I have been deceived by night;
I have been [thus]: in the day consumed me hath drought, and frost by night, and wander doth my sleep from mine eyes.
'This [is] to me twenty years in thy house: I have served thee fourteen years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy flock; and thou changest my hire ten times;
unless the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the Fear of Isaac, had been for me, surely now empty thou hadst sent me away; mine affliction and the labour of my hands hath God seen, and reproveth yesternight.'
And Laban answereth and saith unto Jacob, 'The daughters [are] my daughters, and the sons my sons, and the flock my flock, and all that thou art seeing [is] mine; and to my daughters — what do I to these to-day, or to their sons whom they have born?
and now, come, let us make a covenant, I and thou, and it hath been for a witness between me and thee.'
And Jacob taketh a stone, and lifteth it up [for] a standing pillar;
and Jacob saith to his brethren, 'Gather stones,' and they take stones, and make a heap; and they eat there on the heap;
and Laban calleth it Jegar-Sahadutha; and Jacob hath called it Galeed.
And Laban saith, 'This heap [is] witness between me and thee to-day;' therefore hath he called its name Galeed;
Mizpah also, for he said, 'Jehovah doth watch between me and thee, for we are hidden one from another;
if thou afflict my daughters, or take wives beside my daughters — there is no man with us — see, God [is] witness between me and thee.'
And Laban saith to Jacob, 'Lo, this heap, and lo, the standing pillar which I have cast between me and thee;
this heap [is] witness, and the standing pillar [is] witness, that I do not pass over this heap unto thee, and that thou dost not pass over this heap and this standing pillar unto me — for evil;
the God of Abraham and the God of Nahor, doth judge between us — the God of their father,' and Jacob sweareth by the Fear of his father Isaac.
And Jacob sacrificeth a sacrifice in the mount, and calleth to his brethren to eat bread, and they eat bread, and lodge in the mount;
and Laban riseth early in the morning, and kisseth his sons and his daughters, and blesseth them; and Laban goeth on, and turneth back to his place.
And Jacob hath gone on his way, and messengers of God come upon him;
and Jacob saith, when he hath seen them, 'This [is] the camp of God;' and he calleth the name of that place 'Two Camps.'
And Jacob sendeth messengers before him unto Esau his brother, towards the land of Seir, the field of Edom,
and commandeth them, saying, 'Thus do ye say to my lord, to Esau: Thus said thy servant Jacob, With Laban I have sojourned, and I tarry until now;
and I have ox, and ass, flock, and man-servant, and maid-servant, and I send to declare to my lord, to find grace in his eyes.'
And the messengers turn back unto Jacob, saying, 'We came in unto thy brother, unto Esau, and he also is coming to meet thee, and four hundred men with him;'
and Jacob feareth exceedingly, and is distressed, and he divideth the people who [are] with him, and the flock, and the herd, and the camels, into two camps,
and saith, 'If Esau come in unto the one camp, and have smitten it — then the camp which is left hath been for an escape.'
And Jacob saith, 'God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, Jehovah who saith unto me, Turn back to thy land, and to thy kindred, and I do good with thee:
I have been unworthy of all the kind acts, and of all the truth which Thou hast done with thy servant — for, with my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I have become two camps.
'Deliver me, I pray Thee, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau: for I am fearing him, less he come and have smitten me — mother beside sons;
and Thou — Thou hast said, I certainly do good with thee, and have set thy seed as the sand of the sea, which is not numbered because of the multitude.'
And he lodgeth there during that night, and taketh from that which is coming into his hand, a present for Esau his brother:
she-goats two hundred, and he-goats twenty, ewes two hundred, and rams twenty,
suckling camels and their young ones thirty, cows forty, and bullocks ten, she-asses twenty, and foals ten;
and he giveth into the hand of his servants, every drove by itself, and saith unto his servants, 'Pass over before me, and a space ye do put between drove and drove.'
And he commandeth the first, saying, 'When Esau my brother meeteth thee, and hath asked thee, saying, Whose [art] thou? and whither goest thou? and whose [are] these before thee?
then thou hast said, Thy servant Jacob's: it [is] a present sent to my lord, to Esau; and lo, he also [is] behind us.'
And he commandeth also the second, also the third, also all who are going after the droves, saying, 'According to this manner do ye speak unto Esau in your finding him,
and ye have said also, Lo, thy servant Jacob [is] behind us;' for he said, 'I pacify his face with the present which is going before me, and afterwards I see his face; it may be he lifteth up my face;'
and the present passeth over before his face, and he hath lodged during that night in the camp.
And he riseth in that night, and taketh his two wives, and his two maid-servants, and his eleven children, and passeth over the passage of Jabbok;
and he taketh them, and causeth them to pass over the brook, and he causeth that which he hath to pass over.
And Jacob is left alone, and one wrestleth with him till the ascending of the dawn;
and he seeth that he is not able for him, and he cometh against the hollow of his thigh, and the hollow of Jacob's thigh is disjointed in his wrestling with him;
and he saith, 'Send me away, for the dawn hath ascended:' and he saith, 'I send thee not away, except thou hast blessed me.'
And he saith unto him, 'What [is] thy name?' and he saith, 'Jacob.'
And he saith, 'Thy name is no more called Jacob, but Israel; for thou hast been a prince with God and with men, and dost prevail.'
And Jacob asketh, and saith, 'Declare, I pray thee, thy name;' and he saith, 'Why [is] this, thou askest for My name?' and He blesseth him there.
And Jacob calleth the name of the place Peniel: for 'I have seen God face unto face, and my life is delivered;'
and the sun riseth on him when he hath passed over Penuel, and he is halting on his thigh;
therefore the sons of Israel do not eat the sinew which shrank, which [is] on the hollow of the thigh, unto this day, because He came against the hollow of Jacob's thigh, against the sinew which shrank.
And Jacob lifteth up his eyes, and looketh, and lo, Esau is coming, and with him four hundred men; and he divideth the children unto Leah, and unto Rachel, and unto the two maid-servants;
and he setteth the maid-servants and their children first, and Leah and her children behind, and Rachel and Joseph last.
And he himself passed over before them, and boweth himself to the earth seven times, until his drawing nigh unto his brother,
and Esau runneth to meet him, and embraceth him, and falleth on his neck, and kisseth him, and they weep;
and he lifteth up his eyes, and seeth the women and the children, and saith, 'What [are] these to thee?' And he saith, 'The children with whom God hath favoured thy servant.'
And the maid-servants draw nigh, they and their children, and bow themselves;
and Leah also draweth nigh, and her children, and they bow themselves; and afterwards Joseph hath drawn nigh with Rachel, and they bow themselves.
And he saith, 'What to thee [is] all this camp which I have met?' and he saith, 'To find grace in the eyes of my lord.'
And Esau saith, 'I have abundance, my brother, let it be to thyself that which thou hast.'
And Jacob saith, 'Nay, I pray thee, if, I pray thee, I have found grace in thine eyes, then thou hast received my present from my hand, because that I have seen thy face, as the seeing of the face of God, and thou art pleased with me;
receive, I pray thee, my blessing, which is brought to thee, because God hath favoured me, and because I have all [things];' and he presseth on him, and he receiveth,
and saith, 'Let us journey and go on, and I go on before thee.'
And he saith unto him, 'My lord knoweth that the children [are] tender, and the suckling flock and the herd [are] with me; when they have beaten them one day, then hath all the flock died.
Let my lord, I pray thee, pass over before his servant, and I — I lead on gently, according to the foot of the work which [is] before me, and to the foot of the children, until that I come unto my lord, to Seir.'
And Esau saith, 'Let me, I pray thee, place with thee some of the people who [are] with me;' and he said, 'Why [is] this? I find grace in the eyes of my lord.'
And turn back on that day doth Esau on his way to Seir;
and Jacob hath journeyed to Succoth, and buildeth to himself a house, and for his cattle hath made booths, therefore hath he called the name of the place Succoth.
And Jacob cometh in to Shalem, a city of Shechem, which [is] in the land of Canaan, in his coming from Padan-Aram, and encampeth before the city,
and he buyeth the portion of the field where he hath stretched out his tent, from the hand of the sons of Hamor, father of Shechem, for a hundred kesitah;
and he setteth up there an altar, and proclaimeth at it God — the God of Israel.
And Dinah, daughter of Leah, whom she hath borne to Jacob, goeth out to look on the daughters of the land,
and Shechem, son of Hamor the Hivite, a prince of the land, seeth her, and taketh her, and lieth with her, and humbleth her;
and his soul cleaveth to Dinah, daughter of Jacob, and he loveth the young person, and speaketh unto the heart of the young person.
And Shechem speaketh unto Hamor his father, saying, 'Take for me this damsel for a wife.'
And Jacob hath heard that he hath defiled Dinah his daughter, and his sons were with his cattle in the field, and Jacob kept silent till their coming.
And Hamor, father of Shechem, goeth out unto Jacob to speak with him;
and the sons of Jacob came in from the field when they heard, and the men grieve themselves, and it [is] very displeasing to them, for folly he hath done against Israel, to lie with the daughter of Jacob — and so it is not done.
And Hamor speaketh with them, saying, 'Shechem, my son, his soul hath cleaved to your daughter; give her, I pray you, to him for a wife,
and join ye in marriage with us; your daughters ye give to us, and our daughters ye take to yourselves,
and with us ye dwell, and the land is before you; dwell ye and trade [in] it, and have possessions in it.'
And Shechem saith unto her father, and unto her brethren, 'Let me find grace in your eyes, and that which ye say unto me, I give;
multiply on me exceedingly dowry and gift, and I give as ye say unto me, and give to me the young person for a wife.'
And the sons of Jacob answer Shechem and Hamor his father deceitfully, and they speak (because he defiled Dinah their sister),
and say unto them, 'We are not able to do this thing, to give our sister to one who hath a foreskin: for it [is] a reproach to us.
'Only for this we consent to you; if ye be as we, to have every male of you circumcised,
then we have given our daughters to you, and your daughters we take to ourselves, and we have dwelt with you, and have become one people;
and if ye hearken not unto us to be circumcised, then we have taken our daughter, and have gone.'
And their words are good in the eyes of Hamor, and in the eyes of Shechem, Hamor's son;
and the young man delayed not to do the thing, for he had delight in Jacob's daughter, and he is honourable above all the house of his father.
And Hamor cometh — Shechem his son also — unto the gate of their city, and they speak unto the men of their city, saying,
'These men are peaceable with us; then let them dwell in the land, and trade [in] it; and the land, lo, [is] wide before them; their daughters let us take to ourselves for wives, and our daughters give to them.
'Only for this do the men consent to us, to dwell with us, to become one people, in every male of us being circumcised, as they are circumcised;
their cattle, and their substance, and all their beasts — are they not ours? only let us consent to them, and they dwell with us.'
And unto Hamor, and unto Shechem his son, hearken do all those going out of the gate of his city, and every male is circumcised, all those going out of the gate of his city.
And it cometh to pass, on the third day, in their being pained, that two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah's brethren, take each his sword, and come in against the city confidently, and slay every male;
and Hamor, and Shechem his son, they have slain by the mouth of the sword, and they take Dinah out of Shechem's house, and go out.
Jacob's sons have come in upon the wounded, and they spoil the city, because they had defiled their sister;
their flock and their herd, and their asses, and that which [is] in the city, and that which [is] in the field, have they taken;
and all their wealth, and all their infants, and their wives they have taken captive, and they spoil also all that [is] in the house.
And Jacob saith unto Simeon and unto Levi, 'Ye have troubled me, by causing me to stink among the inhabitants of the land, among the Canaanite, and among the Perizzite: and I [am] few in number, and they have been gathered against me, and have smitten me, and I have been destroyed, I and my house.'
And they say, 'As a harlot doth he make our sister?'
And God saith unto Jacob, 'Rise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there, and make there an altar to God, who appeared unto thee in thy fleeing from the face of Esau thy brother.'
And Jacob saith unto his household, and unto all who [are] with him, 'Turn aside the gods of the stranger which [are] in your midst, and cleanse yourselves, and change your garments;
and we rise, and go up to Bethel, and I make there an altar to God, who is answering me in the day of my distress, and is with me in the way that I have gone.'
And they give unto Jacob all the gods of the stranger that [are] in their hand, and the rings that [are] in their ears, and Jacob hideth them under the oak which [is] by Shechem;
and they journey, and the terror of God is on the cities which [are] round about them, and they have not pursued after the sons of Jacob.
And Jacob cometh in to Luz which [is] in the land of Canaan (it [is] Bethel), he and all the people who [are] with him,
and he buildeth there an altar, and proclaimeth at the place the God of Bethel: for there had God been revealed unto him, in his fleeing from the face of his brother.
And Deborah, Rebekah's nurse, dieth, and she is buried at the lower part of Bethel, under the oak, and he calleth its name 'Oak of weeping.'
And God appeareth unto Jacob again, in his coming from Padan-Aram, and blesseth him;
and God saith to him, 'Thy name [is] Jacob: thy name is no more called Jacob, but Israel is thy name;' and He calleth his name Israel.
And God saith to him, 'I [am] God Almighty; be fruitful and multiply, a nation and an assembly of nations is from thee, and kings from thy loins go out;
and the land which I have given to Abraham and to Isaac — to thee I give it, yea to thy seed after thee I give the land.'
And God goeth up from him, in the place where He hath spoken with him.
And Jacob setteth up a standing pillar in the place where He hath spoken with him, a standing pillar of stone, and he poureth on it an oblation, and he poureth on it oil;
and Jacob calleth the name of the place where God spake with him Bethel.
And they journey from Bethel, and there is yet a kibrath of land before entering Ephratha, and Rachel beareth, and is sharply pained in her bearing;
and it cometh to pass, in her being sharply pained in her bearing, that the midwife saith to her, 'Fear not, for this also [is] a son for thee.'
And it cometh to pass in the going out of her soul (for she died), that she calleth his name Ben-Oni; and his father called him Benjamin;
and Rachel dieth, and is buried in the way to Ephratha, which [is] Bethlehem,
and Jacob setteth up a standing pillar over her grave; which [is] the standing pillar of Rachel's grave unto this day.
And Israel journeyeth, and stretcheth out his tent beyond the tower of Edar;
and it cometh to pass in Israel's dwelling in that land, that Reuben goeth, and lieth with Bilhah his father's concubine; and Israel heareth.
And the sons of Jacob are twelve. Sons of Leah: Jacob's first-born Reuben, and Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Zebulun.
Sons of Rachel: Joseph and Benjamin.
And sons of Bilhah, Rachel's maid-servant: Dan and Naphtali.
And sons of Zilpah, Leah's maid-servant: Gad and Asher. These [are] sons of Jacob, who have been born to him in Padan-Aram.
And Jacob cometh unto Isaac his father, at Mamre, the city of Arba (which [is] Hebron), where Abraham and Isaac have sojourned.
And the days of Isaac are a hundred and eighty years,
and Isaac expireth, and dieth, and is gathered unto his people, aged and satisfied with days; and bury him do Esau and Jacob his sons.
And these [are] births of Esau, who [is] Edom.
Esau hath taken his wives from the daughters of Canaan: Adah daughter of Elon the Hittite, and Aholibamah daughter of Anah, daughter of Zibeon the Hivite,
and Bashemath daughter of Ishmael, sister of Nebajoth.
And Adah beareth to Esau, Eliphaz; and Bashemath hath born Reuel;
and Aholibamah hath born Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah. These [are] sons of Esau, who were born to him in the land of Canaan.
And Esau taketh his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and all the persons of his house, and his cattle, and all his beasts, and all his substance which he hath acquired in the land of Canaan, and goeth into the country from the face of Jacob his brother;
for their substance was more abundant than to dwell together, and the land of their sojournings was not able to bear them because of their cattle;
and Esau dwelleth in mount Seir: Esau is Edom.
And these [are] births of Esau, father of Edom, in mount Seir.
These [are] the names of the sons of Esau: Eliphaz son of Adah, wife of Esau; Reuel son of Bashemath, wife of Esau.
And the sons of Eliphaz are Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz;
and Timnath hath been concubine to Eliphaz son of Esau, and she beareth to Eliphaz, Amalek; these [are] sons of Adah wife of Esau.
And these [are] sons of Reuel: Nahath and Zerah, Shammah and Mizzah; these were sons of Bashemath wife of Esau.
And these have been the sons of Aholibamah daughter of Anah, daughter of Zibeon, wife of Esau; and she beareth to Esau, Jeush and Jaalam and Korah.
These [are] chiefs of the sons of Esau: sons of Eliphaz, first-born of Esau: chief Teman, chief Omar, chief Zepho, chief Kenaz,
chief Korah, chief Gatam, chief Amalek; these [are] chiefs of Eliphaz, in the land of Edom; these [are] sons of Adah.
And these [are] sons of Reuel son of Esau: chief Nahath, chief Zerah, chief Shammah, chief Mizzah; these [are] chiefs of Reuel, in the land of Edom; these [are] sons of Bashemath wife of Esau.
And these [are] sons of Aholibamah wife of Esau: chief Jeush, chief Jaalam, chief Korah; these [are] chiefs of Aholibamah daughter of Anah, wife of Esau.
These [are] sons of Esau (who [is] Edom), and these their chiefs.
These [are] sons of Seir the Horite, the inhabitants of the land: Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah,
and Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan; these [are] chiefs of the Horites, sons of Seir, in the land of Edom.
And the sons of Lotan are Hori and Heman; and a sister of Lotan [is] Timna.
And these [are] sons of Shobal: Alvan and Manahath, and Ebal, Shepho and Onam.
And these [are] sons of Zibeon, both Ajah and Anah: it [is] Anah that hath found the Imim in the wilderness, in his feeding the asses of Zibeon his father.
And these [are] sons of Anah: Dishon, and Aholibamah daughter of Anah.
And these [are] sons of Dishon: Hemdan, and Eshban, and Ithran, and Cheran.
These [are] sons of Ezer: Bilhan, and Zaavan, and Akan.
These [are] sons of Dishan: Uz and Aran.
These [are] chiefs of the Horite: chief Lotan, chief Shobal, chief Zibeon, chief Anah,
chief Dishon, chief Ezer, chief Dishan: these [are] chiefs of the Horite in reference to their chiefs in the land of Seir.
And these [are] the kings who have reigned in the land of Edom before the reigning of a king over the sons of Israel.
And Bela son of Beor reigneth in Edom, and the name of his city [is] Dinhabah;
and Bela dieth, and reign in his stead doth Jobab son of Zerah from Bozrah;
and Jobab dieth, and reign in his stead doth Husham from the land of the Temanite.
And Husham dieth, and reign in his stead doth Hadad son of Bedad (who smiteth Midian in the field of Moab), and the name of his city [is] Avith;
and Hadad dieth, and reign in his stead doth Samlah of Masrekah;
and Samlah dieth, and reign in his stead doth Saul from Rehoboth of the River;
and Saul dieth, and reign in his stead doth Baal-hanan son of Achbor;
and Baal-hanan son of Achbor dieth, and reign in his stead doth Hadar, and the name of his city [is] Pau; and his wife's name [is] Mehetabel daughter of Matred, daughter of Me-zahab.
And these [are] the names of the chiefs of Esau, according to their families, according to their places, by their names: chief Timnah, chief Alvah, chief Jetheth,
chief Aholibamah, chief Elah, chief Pinon,
chief Kenaz, chief Teman, chief Mibzar,
chief Magdiel, chief Iram: these [are] chiefs of Edom, in reference to their dwellings, in the land of their possession; he [is] Esau father of Edom.
And Jacob dwelleth in the land of his father's sojournings — in the land of Canaan.
These [are] births of Jacob: Joseph, a son of seventeen years, hath been enjoying himself with his brethren among the flock, (and he [is] a youth,) with the sons of Bilhah, and with the sons of Zilpah, his father's wives, and Joseph bringeth in an account of their evil unto their father.
And Israel hath loved Joseph more than any of his sons, for he [is] a son of his old age, and hath made for him a long coat;
and his brethren see that their father hath loved him more than any of his brethren, and they hate him, and have not been able to speak [to] him peaceably.
And Joseph dreameth a dream, and declareth to his brethren, and they add still more to hate him.
And he saith unto them, 'Hear ye, I pray you, this dream which I have dreamed:
that, lo, we are binding bundles in the midst of the field, and lo, my bundle hath arisen, and hath also stood up, and lo, your bundles are round about, and bow themselves to my bundle.'
And his brethren say to him, 'Dost thou certainly reign over us? dost thou certainly rule over us?' and they add still more to hate him, for his dreams, and for his words.
And he dreameth yet another dream, and recounteth it to his brethren, and saith, 'Lo, I have dreamed a dream again, and lo, the sun and the moon, and eleven stars, are bowing themselves to me.'
And he recounteth unto his father, and unto his brethren; and his father pusheth against him, and saith to him, 'What [is] this dream which thou hast dreamt? do we certainly come — I, and thy mother, and thy brethren — to bow ourselves to thee, to the earth?'
and his brethren are zealous against him, and his father hath watched the matter.
And his brethren go to feed the flock of their father in Shechem,
and Israel saith unto Joseph, 'Are not thy brethren feeding in Shechem? come, and I send thee unto them;' and he saith to him, 'Here [am] I;'
and he saith to him, 'Go, I pray thee, see the peace of thy brethren, and the peace of the flock, and bring me back word;' and he sendeth him from the valley of Hebron, and he cometh to Shechem.
And a man findeth him, and lo, he is wandering in the field, and the man asketh him, saying, 'What seekest thou?'
and he saith, 'My brethren I am seeking, declare to me, I pray thee, where they are feeding?'
And the man saith, 'They have journeyed from this, for I have heard some saying, Let us go to Dothan,' and Joseph goeth after his brethren, and findeth them in Dothan.
And they see him from afar, even before he draweth near unto them, and they conspire against him to put him to death.
And they say one unto another, 'Lo, this man of the dreams cometh;
and now, come, and we slay him, and cast him into one of the pits, and have said, An evil beast hath devoured him; and we see what his dreams are.'
And Reuben heareth, and delivereth him out of their hand, and saith, 'Let us not smite the life;'
and Reuben saith unto them, 'Shed no blood; cast him into this pit which [is] in the wilderness, and put not forth a hand upon him,' — in order to deliver him out of their hand, to bring him back unto his father.
And it cometh to pass, when Joseph hath come unto his brethren, that they strip Joseph of his coat, the long coat which [is] upon him,
and take him and cast him into the pit, and the pit [is] empty, there is no water in it.
And they sit down to eat bread, and they lift up their eyes, and look, and lo, a company of Ishmaelites coming from Gilead, and their camels bearing spices, and balm, and myrrh, going to take [them] down to Egypt.
And Judah saith unto his brethren, 'What gain when we slay our brother, and have concealed his blood?
Come, and we sell him to the Ishmaelites, and our hands are not on him, for he [is] our brother — our flesh;' and his brethren hearken.
And Midianite merchantmen pass by and they draw out and bring up Joseph out of the pit, and sell Joseph to the Ishmaelites for twenty silverlings, and they bring Joseph into Egypt.
And Reuben returneth unto the pit, and lo, Joseph is not in the pit, and he rendeth his garments,
and he returneth unto his brethren, and saith, 'The lad is not, and I — whither am I going?'
And they take the coat of Joseph, and slaughter a kid of the goats, and dip the coat in the blood,
and send the long coat, and they bring [it] in unto their father, and say, 'This have we found; discern, we pray thee, whether it [is] thy son's coat or not?'
And he discerneth it, and saith, 'My son's coat! an evil beast hath devoured him; torn — torn is Joseph!'
And Jacob rendeth his raiment, and putteth sackcloth on his loins, and becometh a mourner for his son many days,
and all his sons and all his daughters rise to comfort him, and he refuseth to comfort himself, and saith, 'For — I go down mourning unto my son, to Sheol,' and his father weepeth for him.
And the Medanites have sold him unto Egypt, to Potiphar, a eunuch of Pharaoh, head of the executioners.
And it cometh to pass, at that time, that Judah goeth down from his brethren, and turneth aside unto a man, an Adullamite, whose name [is] Hirah;
and Judah seeth there the daughter of a man, a Canaanite, whose name [is] Shuah, and taketh her, and goeth in unto her.
And she conceiveth, and beareth a son, and he calleth his name Er;
and she conceiveth again, and beareth a son, and calleth his name Onan;
and she addeth again, and beareth a son, and calleth his name Shelah; and he was in Chezib in her bearing him.
And Judah taketh a wife for Er, his first-born, and her name [is] Tamar;
and Er, Judah's first-born, is evil in the eyes of Jehovah, and Jehovah doth put him to death.
And Judah saith to Onan, 'Go in unto the wife of thy brother, and marry her, and raise up seed to thy brother;'
and Onan knoweth that the seed is not [reckoned] his; and it hath come to pass, if he hath gone in unto his brother's wife, that he hath destroyed [it] to the earth, so as not to give seed to his brother;
and that which he hath done is evil in the eyes of Jehovah, and He putteth him also to death.
And Judah saith to Tamar his daughter-in-law, 'Abide a widow at thy father's house, till Shelah my son groweth up;' for he said, 'Lest he die — even he — like his brethren;' and Tamar goeth and dwelleth at her father's house.
And the days are multiplied, and the daughter of Shuah, Judah's wife, dieth; and Judah is comforted, and goeth up unto his sheep-shearers, he and Hirah his friend the Adullamite, to Timnath.
And it is declared to Tamar, saying, 'Lo, thy husband's father is going up to Timnath to shear his flock;'
and she turneth aside the garments of her widowhood from off her, and covereth herself with a vail, and wrappeth herself up, and sitteth in the opening of Enayim, which [is] by the way to Timnath, for she hath seen that Shelah hath grown up, and she hath not been given to him for a wife.
And Judah seeth her, and reckoneth her for a harlot, for she hath covered her face,
and he turneth aside unto her by the way, and saith, 'Come, I pray thee, let me come in unto thee,' (for he hath not known that she [is] his daughter-in-law); and she saith, 'What dost thou give to me, that thou mayest come in unto me?'
and he saith, 'I — I send a kid of the goats from the flock.' And she saith, 'Dost thou give a pledge till thou send [it]?'
and he saith, 'What [is] the pledge that I give to thee?' and she saith, 'Thy seal, and thy ribbon, and thy staff which [is] in thy hand;' and he giveth to her, and goeth in unto her, and she conceiveth to him;
and she riseth, and goeth, and turneth aside her vail from off her, and putteth on the garments of her widowhood.
And Judah sendeth the kid of the goats by the hand of his friend the Adullamite, to receive the pledge from the hand of the woman, and he hath not found her.
And he asketh the men of her place, saying, 'Where [is] the separated one — she in Enayim, by the way?' and they say, 'There hath not been in this [place] a separated one.'
And he turneth back unto Judah, and saith, 'I have not found her; and the men of the place also have said, There hath not been in this [place] a separated one,'
and Judah saith, 'Let her take to herself, lest we become despised; lo, I sent this kid, and thou hast not found her.'
And it cometh to pass about three months [after], that it is declared to Judah, saying, 'Tamar thy daughter-in-law hath committed fornication; and also, lo, she hath conceived by fornication:' and Judah saith, 'Bring her out — and she is burnt.'
She is brought out, and she hath sent unto her husband's father, saying, 'To a man whose these [are], I [am] pregnant;' and she saith, 'Discern, I pray thee, whose [are] these — the seal, and the ribbons, and the staff.'
And Judah discerneth and saith, 'She hath been more righteous than I, because that I did not give her to Shelah my son;' and he hath not added to know her again.
And it cometh to pass in the time of her bearing, that lo, twins [are] in her womb;
and it cometh to pass in her bearing, that [one] giveth out a hand, and the midwife taketh and bindeth on his hand a scarlet thread, saying, 'This hath come out first.'
And it cometh to pass as he draweth back his hand, that lo, his brother hath come out, and she saith, 'What! thou hast broken forth — on thee [is] the breach;' and he calleth his name Pharez;
and afterwards hath his brother come out, on whose hand [is] the scarlet thread, and he calleth his name Zarah.
And Joseph hath been brought down to Egypt, and Potiphar, a eunuch of Pharaoh, head of the executioners, an Egyptian man, buyeth him out of the hands of the Ishmaelites who have brought him thither.
And Jehovah is with Joseph, and he is a prosperous man, and he is in the house of his lord the Egyptian,
and his lord seeth that Jehovah is with him, and all that he is doing Jehovah is causing to prosper in his hand,
and Joseph findeth grace in his eyes and serveth him, and he appointeth him over his house, and all that he hath he hath given into his hand.
And it cometh to pass from the time that he hath appointed him over his house, and over all that he hath, that Jehovah blesseth the house of the Egyptian for Joseph's sake, and the blessing of Jehovah is on all that he hath, in the house, and in the field;
and he leaveth all that he hath in the hand of Joseph, and he hath not known anything that he hath, except the bread which he is eating. And Joseph is of a fair form, and of a fair appearance.
And it cometh to pass after these things, that his lord's wife lifteth up her eyes unto Joseph, and saith, 'Lie with me;'
and he refuseth, and saith unto his lord's wife, 'Lo, my lord hath not known what [is] with me in the house, and all that he hath he hath given into my hand;
none is greater in this house than I, and he hath not withheld from me anything, except thee, because thou [art] his wife; and how shall I do this great evil? — then have I sinned against God.'
And it cometh to pass at her speaking unto Joseph day [by] day, that he hath not hearkened unto her, to lie near her, to be with her;
and it cometh to pass about this day, that he goeth into the house to do his work, and there is none of the men of the house there in the house,
and she catcheth him by his garment, saying, 'Lie with me;' and he leaveth his garment in her hand, and fleeth, and goeth without.
And it cometh to pass when she seeth that he hath left his garment in her hand, and fleeth without,
that she calleth for the men of her house, and speaketh to them, saying, 'See, he hath brought in to us a man, a Hebrew, to play with us; he hath come in unto me, to lie with me, and I call with a loud voice,
and it cometh to pass, when he heareth that I have lifted up my voice and call, that he leaveth his garment near me, and fleeth, and goeth without.'
And she placeth his garment near her, until the coming in of his lord unto his house.
And she speaketh unto him according to these words, saying, 'The Hebrew servant whom thou hast brought unto us, hath come in unto me to play with me;
and it cometh to pass, when I lift my voice and call, that he leaveth his garment near me, and fleeth without.'
And it cometh to pass when his lord heareth the words of his wife, which she hath spoken unto him, saying, 'According to these things hath thy servant done to me,' that his anger burneth;
and Joseph's lord taketh him, and putteth him unto the round-house, a place where the king's prisoners [are] bound; and he is there in the round-house.
And Jehovah is with Joseph, and stretcheth out kindness unto him, and putteth his grace in the eyes of the chief of the round-house;
and the chief of the round-house giveth into the hand of Joseph all the prisoners who [are] in the round-house, and of all that they are doing there, he hath been doer;
the chief of the round-house seeth not anything under his hand, because Jehovah [is] with him, and that which he is doing Jehovah is causing to prosper.
And it cometh to pass, after these things — the butler of the king of Egypt and the baker have sinned against their lord, against the king of Egypt;
and Pharaoh is wroth against his two eunuchs, against the chief of the butlers, and against the chief of the bakers,
and giveth them in charge in the house of the chief of the executioners, unto the round-house, the place where Joseph [is] a prisoner,
and the chief of the executioners chargeth Joseph with them, and he serveth them; and they are days in charge.
And they dream a dream both of them, each his dream in one night, each according to the interpretation of his dream, the butler and the baker whom the king of Egypt hath, who [are] prisoners in the round-house.
And Joseph cometh in unto them in the morning, and seeth them, and lo, they [are] morose;
and he asketh Pharaoh's eunuchs who [are] with him in charge in the house of his lord, saying, 'Wherefore [are] your faces sad to-day?'
And they say unto him, 'A dream we have dreamed, and there is no interpreter of it;' and Joseph saith unto them, 'Are not interpretations with God? recount, I pray you, to me.'
And the chief of the butlers recounteth his dream to Joseph, and saith to him, 'In my dream, then lo, a vine [is] before me!
and in the vine [are] three branches, and it [is] as it were flourishing; gone up hath its blossom, its clusters have ripened grapes;
and Pharaoh's cup [is] in my hand, and I take the grapes and press them into the cup of Pharaoh, and I give the cup into the hand of Pharaoh.'
And Joseph saith to him, 'This [is] its interpretation: the three branches are three days;
yet, within three days doth Pharaoh lift up thy head, and hath put thee back on thy station, and thou hast given the cup of Pharaoh into his hand, according to the former custom when thou wast his butler.
'Surely if thou hast remembered me with thee, when it is well with thee, and hast done (I pray thee) kindness with me, and hast made mention of me unto Pharaoh, then hast thou brought me out from this house,
for I was really stolen from the land of the Hebrews; and here also have I done nothing that they have put me in the pit.'
And the chief of the bakers seeth that he hath interpreted good, and he saith unto Joseph, 'I also [am] in a dream, and lo, three baskets of white bread [are] on my head,
and in the uppermost basket [are] of all [kinds] of Pharaoh's food, work of a baker; and the birds are eating them out of the basket, from off my head.'
And Joseph answereth and saith, 'This [is] its interpretation: the three baskets are three days;
yet, within three days doth Pharaoh lift up thy head from off thee, and hath hanged thee on a tree, and the birds have eaten thy flesh from off thee.'
And it cometh to pass, on the third day, Pharaoh's birthday, that he maketh a banquet to all his servants, and lifteth up the head of the chief of the butlers, and the head of the chief of the bakers among his servants,
and he putteth back the chief of the butlers to his butlership, and he giveth the cup into the hand of Pharaoh;
and the chief of the bakers he hath hanged, as Joseph hath interpreted to them;
and the chief of the butlers hath not remembered Joseph, but forgetteth him.
And it cometh to pass, at the end of two years of days that Pharaoh is dreaming, and lo, he is standing by the River,
and lo, from the River coming up are seven kine, of fair appearance, and fat [in] flesh, and they feed among the reeds;
and lo, seven other kine are coming up after them out of the River, of bad appearance, and lean [in] flesh, and they stand near the kine on the edge of the River,
and the kine of bad appearance and lean [in] flesh eat up the seven kine of fair appearance, and fat — and Pharaoh awaketh.
And he sleepeth, and dreameth a second time, and lo, seven ears are coming up on one stalk, fat and good,
and lo, seven ears, thin, and blasted with an east wind, are springing up after them;
and the thin ears swallow the seven fat and full ears — and Pharaoh awaketh, and lo, a dream.
And it cometh to pass in the morning, that his spirit is moved, and he sendeth and calleth all the scribes of Egypt, and all its wise men, and Pharaoh recounteth to them his dream, and there is no interpreter of them to Pharaoh.
And the chief of the butlers speaketh with Pharaoh, saying, 'My sin I mention this day:
Pharaoh hath been wroth against his servants, and giveth me into charge in the house of the chief of the executioners, me and the chief of the bakers;
and we dream a dream in one night, I and he, each according to the interpretation of his dream we have dreamed.
And there [is] with us a youth, a Hebrew, servant to the chief of the executioners, and we recount to him, and he interpreteth to us our dreams, [to] each according to his dream hath he interpreted,
and it cometh to pass, as he hath interpreted to us so it hath been, me he put back on my station, and him he hanged.'
And Pharaoh sendeth and calleth Joseph, and they cause him to run out of the pit, and he shaveth, and changeth his garments, and cometh in unto Pharaoh.
And Pharaoh saith unto Joseph, 'A dream I have dreamed, and there is no interpreter of it, and I — I have heard concerning thee, saying, Thou understandest a dream to interpret it,'
and Joseph answereth Pharaoh, saying, 'Without me — God doth answer Pharaoh with peace.'
And Pharaoh speaketh unto Joseph: 'In my dream, lo, I am standing by the edge of the River,
and lo, out of the River coming up are seven kine, fat [in] flesh, and of fair form, and they feed among the reeds;
and lo, seven other kine are coming up after them, thin, and of very bad form, and lean [in] flesh; I have not seen like these in all the land of Egypt for badness.
'And the lean and the bad kine eat up the first seven fat kine,
and they come in unto their midst, and it hath not been known that they have come in unto their midst, and their appearance [is] bad as at the commencement; and I awake.
'And I see in my dream, and lo, seven ears are coming up on one stalk, full and good;
and lo, seven ears, withered, thin, blasted with an east wind, are springing up after them;
and the thin ears swallow the seven good ears; and I tell unto the scribes, and there is none declaring to me.'
And Joseph saith unto Pharaoh, 'The dream of Pharaoh is one: that which God is doing he hath declared to Pharaoh;
the seven good kine are seven years, and the seven good ears are seven years, the dream is one;
and the seven thin and bad kine which are coming up after them are seven years, and the seven empty ears, blasted with an east wind, are seven years of famine;
this [is] the thing which I have spoken unto Pharaoh: That which God is doing, he hath shewn Pharaoh.
'Lo, seven years are coming of great abundance in all the land of Egypt,
and seven years of famine have arisen after them, and all the plenty is forgotten in the land of Egypt, and the famine hath finished the land,
and the plenty is not known in the land because of that famine afterwards, for it [is] very grievous.
'And because of the repeating of the dream unto Pharaoh twice, surely the thing is established by God, and God is hastening to do it.
'And now, let Pharaoh provide a man, intelligent and wise, and set him over the land of Egypt;
let Pharaoh make and appoint overseers over the land, and receive a fifth of the land of Egypt in the seven years of plenty,
and they gather all the food of these good years that are coming, and heap up corn under the hand of Pharaoh — food in the cities; and they have kept [it],
and the food hath been for a store for the land, for the seven years of famine which are in the land of Egypt; and the land is cut off by the famine.'
And the thing is good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of all his servants,
and Pharaoh saith unto his servants, 'Do we find like this, a man in whom the spirit of God [is]?'
and Pharaoh saith unto Joseph, 'After God's causing thee to know all this, there is none intelligent and wise as thou;
thou — thou art over my house, and at thy mouth do all my people kiss; only in the throne I am greater than thou.'
And Pharaoh saith unto Joseph, 'See, I have put thee over all the land of Egypt.'
And Pharaoh turneth aside his seal-ring from off his hand, and putteth it on the hand of Joseph, and clotheth him [with] garments of fine linen, and placeth a chain of gold on his neck,
and causeth him to ride in the second chariot which he hath, and they proclaim before him, 'Bow the knee!' and — to put him over all the land of Egypt.
And Pharaoh saith unto Joseph, 'I [am] Pharaoh, and without thee a man doth not lift up his hand and his foot in all the land of Egypt;'
and Pharaoh calleth Joseph's name Zaphnath-Paaneah, and he giveth to him Asenath daughter of Poti-Pherah, priest of On, for a wife, and Joseph goeth out over the land of Egypt.
And Joseph [is] a son of thirty years in his standing before Pharaoh king of Egypt, and Joseph goeth out from the presence of Pharaoh, and passeth over through all the land of Egypt;
and the land maketh in the seven years of plenty by handfuls.
And he gathereth all the food of the seven years which have been in the land of Egypt, and putteth food in the cities; the food of the field which [is] round about [each] city hath he put in its midst;
and Joseph gathereth corn as sand of the sea, multiplying exceedingly, until that he hath ceased to number, for there is no number.
And to Joseph were born two sons before the year of famine cometh, whom Asenath daughter of Poti-Pherah, priest of On, hath borne to him,
and Joseph calleth the name of the first-born Manasseh: 'for, God hath made me to forget all my labour, and all the house of my father;'
and the name of the second he hath called Ephraim: 'for, God hath caused me to be fruitful in the land of mine affliction.'
And the seven years of plenty are completed which have been in the land of Egypt,
and the seven years of famine begin to come, as Joseph said, and famine is in all the lands, but in all the land of Egypt hath been bread;
and all the land of Egypt is famished, and the people crieth unto Pharaoh for bread, and Pharaoh saith to all the Egyptians, 'Go unto Joseph; that which he saith to you — do.'
And the famine has been over all the face of the land, and Joseph openeth all [places] which have [corn] in them, and selleth to the Egyptians; and the famine is severe in the land of Egypt,
and all the earth hath come to Egypt, to buy, unto Joseph, for the famine was severe in all the earth.
And Jacob seeth that there is corn in Egypt, and Jacob saith to his sons, 'Why do you look at each other?'
he saith also, 'Lo, I have heard that there is corn in Egypt, go down thither, and buy for us from thence, and we live and do not die;'
and the ten brethren of Joseph go down to buy corn in Egypt,
and Benjamin, Joseph's brother, Jacob hath not sent with his brethren, for he said, 'Lest mischief meet him.'
And the sons of Israel come to buy in the midst of those coming, for the famine hath been in the land of Canaan,
and Joseph is the ruler over the land, he who is selling to all the people of the land, and Joseph's brethren come and bow themselves to him — face to the earth.
And Joseph seeth his brethren, and discerneth them, and maketh himself strange unto them, and speaketh with them sharp things, and saith unto them, 'From whence have ye come?' and they say, 'From the land of Canaan — to buy food.'
And Joseph discerneth his brethren, but they have not discerned him,
and Joseph remembereth the dreams which he dreamed of them, and saith unto them, 'Ye [are] spies; to see the nakedness of the land ye have come.'
And they say unto him, 'No, my lord, but thy servants have come to buy food;
we [are] all of us sons of one man, we [are] right men; thy servants have not been spies;'
and he saith unto them, 'No, but the nakedness of the land ye have come to see;'
and they say, 'Thy servants [are] twelve brethren; we [are] sons of one man in the land of Canaan, and lo, the young one [is] with our father to-day, and the one is not.'
And Joseph saith unto them, 'This [is] that which I have spoken unto you, saying, Ye [are] spies,
by this ye are proved: Pharaoh liveth! if ye go out from this — except by your young brother coming hither;
send one of you, and let him bring your brother, and ye, remain ye bound, and let your words be proved, whether truth be with you: and if not — Pharaoh liveth! surely ye [are] spies;'
and he removeth them unto charge three days.
And Joseph saith unto them on the third day, 'This do and live; God I fear!
if ye [are] right men, let one of your brethren be bound in the house of your ward, and ye, go, carry in corn [for] the famine of your houses,
and your young brother ye bring unto me, and your words are established, and ye die not;' and they do so.
And they say one unto another, 'Verily we [are] guilty concerning our brother, because we saw the distress of his soul, in his making supplication unto us, and we did not hearken: therefore hath this distress come upon us.'
And Reuben answereth them, saying, 'Spake I not unto you, saying, Sin not against the lad? and ye hearkened not; and his blood also, lo, it is required.'
And they have not known that Joseph understandeth, for the interpreter [is] between them;
and he turneth round from them, and weepeth, and turneth back unto them, and speaketh unto them, and taketh from them Simeon, and bindeth him before their eyes.
And Joseph commandeth, and they fill their vessels [with] corn, also to put back the money of each unto his sack, and to give to them provision for the way; and one doth to them so.
And they lift up their corn upon their asses, and go from thence,
and the one openeth his sack to give provender to his ass at a lodging-place, and he seeth his money, and lo, it [is] in the mouth of his bag,
and he saith unto his brethren, 'My money hath been put back, and also, lo, in my bag:' and their heart goeth out, and they tremble, one to another saying, 'What [is] this God hath done to us!'
And they come in unto Jacob their father, to the land of Canaan, and they declare to him all the things meeting them, saying,
'The man, the lord of the land, hath spoken with us sharp things, and maketh us as spies of the land;
and we say unto him, We [are] right men, we have not been spies,
we [are] twelve brethren, sons of our father, the one is not, and the young one [is] to-day with our father in the land of Canaan.
'And the man, the lord of the land, saith unto us, By this I know that ye [are] right men — one of your brethren leave with me, and [for] the famine of your houses take ye and go,
and bring your young brother unto me, and I know that ye [are] not spies, but ye [are] right men; your brother I give to you, and ye trade with the land.'
And it cometh to pass, they are emptying their sacks, and lo, the bundle of each man's silver [is] in his sack, and they see their bundles of silver, they and their father, and are afraid;
and Jacob their father saith unto them, 'Me ye have bereaved; Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and Benjamin ye take — against me have been all these.'
And Reuben speaketh unto his father, saying, 'My two sons thou dost put to death, if I bring him not in unto thee; give him into my hand, and I — I bring him back unto thee;'
and he saith, 'My son doth not go down with you, for his brother [is] dead, and he by himself is left; when mischief hath met him in the way in which ye go, then ye have brought down my grey hairs in sorrow to sheol.'
And the famine [is] severe in the land;
and it cometh to pass, when they have finished eating the corn which they brought from Egypt, that their father saith unto them, 'Turn back, buy for us a little food.'
And Judah speaketh unto him, saying, 'The man protesting protested to us, saying, Ye do not see my face without your brother [being] with you;
if thou art sending our brother with us, we go down, and buy for thee food,
and if thou art not sending — we do not go down, for the man said unto us, Ye do not see my face without your brother [being] with you.'
And Israel saith, 'Why did ye evil to me, by declaring to the man that ye had yet a brother?'
and they say, 'The man asked diligently concerning us, and concerning our kindred, saying, Is your father yet alive? have ye a brother? and we declare to him according to the tenor of these things; do we certainly know that he will say, Bring down your brother?'
And Judah saith unto Israel his father, 'Send the youth with me, and we arise, and go, and live, and do not die, both we, and thou, and our infants.
I — I am surety [for] him, from my hand thou dost require him; if I have not brought him in unto thee, and set him before thee — then I have sinned against thee all the days;
for if we had not lingered, surely now we had returned these two times.'
And Israel their father saith unto them, 'If so, now, this do: take of the praised thing of the land in your vessels, and take down to the man a present, a little balm, and a little honey, spices and myrrh, nuts and almonds;
and double money take in your hand, even the money which is brought back in the mouth of your bags, ye take back in your hand, it may be it [is] an oversight.
'And take your brother, and rise, turn back unto the man;
and God Almighty give to you mercies before the man, so that he hath sent to you your other brother and Benjamin; and I, when I am bereaved — I am bereaved.'
And the men take this present, double money also they have taken in their hand, and Benjamin; and they rise, and go down to Egypt, and stand before Joseph;
and Joseph seeth Benjamin with them, and saith to him who [is] over his house, 'Bring the men into the house, and slaughter an animal, and make ready, for with me do the men eat at noon.'
And the man doth as Joseph hath said, and the man bringeth in the men into the house of Joseph,
and the men are afraid because they have been brought into the house of Joseph, and they say, 'For the matter of the money which was put back in our bags at the commencement are we brought in — to roll himself upon us, and to throw himself on us, and to take us for servants — our asses also.'
And they come nigh unto the man who [is] over the house of Joseph, and speak unto him at the opening of the house,
and say, 'O, my lord, we really come down at the commencement to buy food;
and it cometh to pass, when we have come in unto the lodging-place, and open our bags, that lo, each one's money [is] in the mouth of his bag, our money in its weight, and we bring it back in our hand;
and other money have we brought down in our hand to buy food; we have not known who put our money in our bags.'
And he saith, 'Peace to you, fear not: your God and the God of your father hath given to you hidden treasure in your bags, your money came unto me;' and he bringeth out Simeon unto them.
And the man bringeth in the men into Joseph's house, and giveth water, and they wash their feet; and he giveth provender for their asses,
and they prepare the present until the coming of Joseph at noon, for they have heard that there they do eat bread.
And Joseph cometh into the house, and they bring to him the present which [is] in their hand, into the house, and bow themselves to him, to the earth;
and he asketh of them of peace, and saith, 'Is your father well? the aged man of whom ye have spoken, is he yet alive?'
and they say, 'Thy servant our father [is] well, he is yet alive;' and they bow, and do obeisance.
And he lifteth up his eyes, and seeth Benjamin his brother, his mother's son, and saith, 'Is this your young brother, of whom ye have spoken unto me?' and he saith, 'God favour thee, my son.'
And Joseph hasteth, for his bowels have been moved for his brother, and he seeketh to weep, and entereth the inner chamber, and weepeth there;
and he washeth his face, and goeth out, and refraineth himself, and saith, 'Place bread.'
And they place for him by himself, and for them by themselves, and for the Egyptians who are eating with him by themselves: for the Egyptians are unable to eat bread with the Hebrews, for it [is] an abomination to the Egyptians.
And they sit before him, the first-born according to his birthright, and the young one according to his youth, and the men wonder one at another;
and he lifteth up gifts from before him unto them, and the gift of Benjamin is five hands more than the gifts of all of them; and they drink, yea, they drink abundantly with him.
And he commandeth him who [is] over his house, saying, 'Fill the bags of the men [with] food, as they are able to bear, and put the money of each in the mouth of his bag;
and my cup, the silver cup, thou dost put in the mouth of the bag of the young one, and his corn-money;' and he doth according to the word of Joseph which he hath spoken.
The morning is bright, and the men have been sent away, they and their asses —
they have gone out of the city — they have not gone far off — and Joseph hath said to him who [is] over his house, 'Rise, pursue after the men; and thou hast overtaken them, and thou hast said unto them, Why have ye recompensed evil for good?
Is not this that with which my lord drinketh? and he observeth diligently with it; ye have done evil [in] that which ye have done.'
And he overtaketh them, and speaketh unto them these words,
and they say unto him, 'Why doth my lord speak according to these words? far be it from thy servants to do according to this word;
lo, the money which we found in the mouth of our bags we brought back unto thee from the land of Canaan, and how do we steal from the house of thy lord silver or gold?
with whomsoever of thy servants it is found, he hath died, and we also are to my lord for servants.'
And he saith, 'Now, also, according to your words, so it [is]; he with whom it is found becometh my servant, and ye are acquitted;'
and they hasten and take down each his bag to the earth, and each openeth his bag;
and he searcheth — at the eldest he hath begun, and at the youngest he hath completed — and the cup is found in the bag of Benjamin;
and they rend their garments, and each ladeth his ass, and they turn back to the city.
And Judah — his brethren also — cometh in unto the house of Joseph, and he is yet there, and they fall before him to the earth;
and Joseph saith to them, 'What [is] this deed that ye have done? have ye not known that a man like me doth diligently observe?'
And Judah saith, 'What do we say to my lord? what do we speak? and what — do we justify ourselves? God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants; lo, we [are] servants to my lord, both we, and he in whose hand the cup hath been found;'
and he saith, 'Far be it from me to do this; the man in whose hand the cup hath been found, he becometh my servant; and ye, go ye up in peace unto your father.'
And Judah cometh nigh unto him, and saith, 'O, my lord, let thy servant speak, I pray thee, a word in the ears of my lord, and let not thine anger burn against thy servant — for thou art as Pharaoh.
My lord hath asked his servants, saying, Have ye a father or brother?
and we say unto my lord, We have a father, an aged one, and a child of old age, a little one; and his brother died, and he is left alone of his mother, and his father hath loved him.
'And thou sayest unto thy servants, Bring him down unto me, and I set mine eye upon him;
and we say unto my lord, The youth is not able to leave his father, when he hath left his father, then he hath died;
and thou sayest unto thy servants, If your young brother come not down with you, ye add not to see my face.
'And it cometh to pass, that we have come up unto thy servant my father, that we declare to him the words of my lord;
and our father saith, Turn back, buy for us a little food,
and we say, We are not able to go down; if our young brother is with us, then we have gone down; for we are not able to see the man's face, and our young brother not with us.
'And thy servant my father saith unto us, Ye — ye have known that two did my wife bare to me,
and the one goeth out from me, and I say, Surely he is torn — torn! and I have not seen him since;
when ye have taken also this from my presence, and mischief hath met him, then ye have brought down my grey hairs with evil to sheol.
'And now, at my coming in unto thy servant my father, and the youth not with us (and his soul is bound up in his soul),
then it hath come to pass when he seeth that the youth is not, that he hath died, and thy servants have brought down the grey hairs of thy servant our father with sorrow to sheol;
for thy servant obtained the youth by surety from my father, saying, If I bring him not in unto thee — then I have sinned against my father all the days.
'And now, let thy servant, I pray thee, abide instead of the youth a servant to my lord, and the youth goeth up with his brethren,
for how do I go up unto my father, and the youth not with me? lest I look on the evil which doth find my father.'
And Joseph hath not been able to refrain himself before all those standing by him, and he calleth, 'Put out every man from me;' and no man hath stood with him when Joseph maketh himself known unto his brethren,
and he giveth forth his voice in weeping, and the Egyptians hear, and the house of Pharaoh heareth.
And Joseph saith unto his brethren, 'I [am] Joseph, is my father yet alive?' and his brethren have not been able to answer him, for they have been troubled at his presence.
And Joseph saith unto his brethren, 'Come nigh unto me, I pray you,' and they come nigh; and he saith, 'I [am] Joseph, your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt;
and now, be not grieved, nor let it be displeasing in your eyes that ye sold me hither, for to preserve life hath God sent me before you.
'Because these two years the famine [is] in the heart of the land, and yet [are] five years, [in] which there is neither ploughing nor harvest;
and God sendeth me before you, to place of you a remnant in the land, and to give life to you by a great escape;
and now, ye — ye have not sent me hither, but God, and He doth set me for a father to Pharaoh, and for lord to all his house, and ruler over all the land of Egypt.
'Haste, and go up unto my father, then ye have said to him, Thus said Joseph thy son, God hath set me for lord to all Egypt; come down unto me, stay not,
and thou hast dwelt in the land of Goshen, and been near unto me, thou and thy sons, and thy son's sons, and thy flock, and thy herd, and all that thou hast,
and I have nourished thee there — for yet [are] five years of famine — lest thou become poor, thou and thy household, and all that thou hast.
'And lo, your eyes are seeing, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that [it is] my mouth which is speaking unto you;
and ye have declared to my father all my honour in Egypt, and all that ye have seen, and ye have hasted, and have brought down my father hither.'
And he falleth on the neck of Benjamin his brother, and weepeth, and Benjamin hath wept on his neck;
and he kisseth all his brethren, and weepeth over them; and afterwards have his brethren spoken with him.
And the sound hath been heard in the house of Pharaoh, saying, 'Come have the brethren of Joseph;' and it is good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants,
and Pharaoh saith unto Joseph, 'Say unto thy brethren, This do ye: lade your beasts, and go, enter ye the land of Canaan,
and take your father, and your households, and come unto me, and I give to you the good of the land of Egypt, and eat ye the fat of the land.
'Yea, thou — thou hast been commanded: this do ye, take for yourselves out of the land of Egypt, waggons for your infants, and for your wives, and ye have brought your father, and come;
and your eye hath no pity on your vessels, for the good of all the land of Egypt [is] yours.'
And the sons of Israel do so, and Joseph giveth waggons to them by the command of Pharaoh, and he giveth to them provision for the way;
to all of them hath he given — to each changes of garments, and to Benjamin he hath given three hundred silverlings, and five changes of garments;
and to his father he hath sent thus: ten asses bearing of the good things of Egypt, and ten she-asses bearing corn and bread, even food for his father for the way.
And he sendeth his brethren away, and they go; and he saith unto them, 'Be not angry in the way.'
And they go up out of Egypt, and come in to the land of Canaan, unto Jacob their father,
and they declare to him, saying, 'Joseph [is] yet alive,' and that he [is] ruler over all the land of Egypt; and his heart ceaseth, for he hath not given credence to them.
And they speak unto him all the words of Joseph, which he hath spoken unto them, and he seeth the waggons which Joseph hath sent to bear him away, and live doth the spirit of Jacob their father;
and Israel saith, 'Enough! Joseph my son [is] yet alive; I go and see him before I die.'
And Israel journeyeth, and all that he hath, and cometh in to Beer-Sheba, and sacrificeth sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac;
and God speaketh to Israel in visions of the night, and saith, 'Jacob, Jacob;' and he saith, 'Here [am] I.'
And He saith, 'I [am] God, God of thy father, be not afraid of going down to Egypt, for for a great nation I set thee there;
I — I go down with thee to Egypt, and I — I also certainly bring thee up, and Joseph doth put his hand on thine eyes.'
And Jacob riseth from Beer-Sheba, and the sons of Israel bear away Jacob their father, And their infants, and their wives, in the waggons which Pharaoh hath sent to bear him,
and they take their cattle, and their goods which they have acquired in the land of Canaan, and come into Egypt — Jacob, and all his seed with him,
his sons, and his sons' sons with him, his daughters, and his sons' daughters, yea, all his seed he brought with him into Egypt.
And these [are] the names of the sons of Israel who are coming into Egypt: Jacob and his sons, Jacob's first-born, Reuben.
And sons of Reuben: Hanoch, and Phallu, and Hezron, and Carmi.
And sons of Simeon: Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul son of the Canaanitess.
And sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
And sons of Judah: Er, and Onan, and Shelah, and Pharez, and Zarah, (and Er and Onan die in the land of Canaan.) And sons of Pharez are Hezron and Hamul.
And sons of Issachar: Tola, and Phuvah, and Job, and Shimron.
And sons of Zebulun: Sered, and Elon, and Jahleel.
These [are] sons of Leah whom she bare to Jacob in Padan-Aram, and Dinah his daughter; all the persons of his sons and his daughters [are] thirty and three.
And sons of Gad: Ziphion, and Haggi, Shuni, and Ezbon, Eri, and Arodi, and Areli.
And sons of Asher: Jimnah, and Ishuah, and Isui, and Beriah, and Serah their sister. And sons of Beriah: Heber and Malchiel.
These [are] sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to Leah his daughter, and she beareth these to Jacob — sixteen persons.
Sons of Rachel, Jacob's wife: Joseph and Benjamin.
And born to Joseph in the land of Egypt (whom Asenath daughter of Poti-Pherah, priest of On, hath borne to him) [are] Manasseh and Ephraim.
And sons of Benjamin: Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, Ehi, and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard.
These [are] sons of Rachel, who were born to Jacob; all the persons [are] fourteen.
And sons of Dan: Hushim.
And sons of Naphtali: Jahzeel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shillem.
These [are] sons of Bilhah, whom Laban gave to Rachel his daughter; and she beareth these to Jacob — all the persons [are] seven.
All the persons who are coming to Jacob to Egypt, coming out of his thigh, apart from the wives of Jacob's sons, all the persons [are] sixty and six.
And the sons of Joseph who have been born to him in Egypt [are] two persons. All the persons of the house of Jacob who are coming into Egypt [are] seventy.
And Judah he hath sent before him unto Joseph, to direct before him to Goshen, and they come into the land of Goshen;
and Joseph harnesseth his chariot, and goeth up to meet Israel his father, to Goshen, and appeareth unto him, and falleth on his neck, and weepeth on his neck again;
and Israel saith unto Joseph, 'Let me die this time, after my seeing thy face, for thou [art] yet alive.'
And Joseph saith unto his brethren, and unto the house of his father, 'I go up, and declare to Pharaoh, and say unto him, My brethren, and the house of my father who [are] in the land of Canaan have come in unto me;
and the men [are] feeders of a flock, for they have been men of cattle; and their flock, and their herd, and all that they have, they have brought.'
'And it hath come to pass when Pharaoh calleth for you, and hath said, What [are] your works?
that ye have said, Thy servants have been men of cattle from our youth, even until now, both we and our fathers, — in order that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen, for the abomination of the Egyptians is every one feeding a flock.'
And Joseph cometh, and declareth to Pharaoh, and saith, 'My father, and my brethren, and their flock, and their herd, and all they have, have come from the land of Canaan, and lo, they [are] in the land of Goshen.'
And out of his brethren he hath taken five men, and setteth them before Pharaoh;
and Pharaoh saith unto his brethren, 'What [are] your works?' and they say unto Pharaoh, 'Thy servants [are] feeders of a flock, both we and our fathers;'
and they say unto Pharaoh, 'To sojourn in the land we have come, for there is no pasture for the flock which thy servants have, for grievous [is] the famine in the land of Canaan; and now, let thy servants, we pray thee, dwell in the land of Goshen.'
And Pharaoh speaketh unto Joseph, saying, 'Thy father and thy brethren have come unto thee:
the land of Egypt is before thee; in the best of the land cause thy father and thy brethren to dwell — they dwell in the land of Goshen, and if thou hast known, and there are among them men of ability, then thou hast set them heads over the cattle I have.'
And Joseph bringeth in Jacob his father, and causeth him to stand before Pharaoh; and Jacob blesseth Pharaoh.
And Pharaoh saith unto Jacob, 'How many [are] the days of the years of thy life?'
And Jacob saith unto Pharaoh, 'The days of the years of my sojournings [are] an hundred and thirty years; few and evil have been the days of the years of my life, and they have not reached the days of the years of the life of my fathers, in the days of their sojournings.'
And Jacob blesseth Pharaoh, and goeth out from before Pharaoh.
And Joseph settleth his father and his brethren, and giveth to them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh commanded;
and Joseph nourisheth his father, and his brethren, and all the house of his father [with] bread, according to the mouth of the infants.
And there is no bread in all the land, for the famine [is] very grievous, and the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan are feeble because of the famine;
and Joseph gathereth all the silver that is found in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, for the corn that they are buying, and Joseph bringeth the silver into the house of Pharaoh.
And the silver is consumed out of the land of Egypt, and out of the land of Canaan, and all the Egyptians come in unto Joseph, saying, 'Give to us bread — why do we die before thee, though the money hath ceased?'
and Joseph saith, 'Give your cattle; and I give to you for your cattle, if the money hath ceased.'
And they bring in their cattle unto Joseph, and Joseph giveth to them bread, for the horses, and for the cattle of the flock, and for the cattle of the herd, and for the asses; and he tendeth them with bread, for all their cattle, during that year.
And that year is finished, and they come in unto him on the second year, and say to him, 'We do not hide from my lord, that since the money hath been finished, and possession of the cattle [is] unto my lord, there hath not been left before my lord save our bodies, and our ground;
why do we die before thine eyes, both we and our ground? buy us and our ground for bread, and we and our ground are servants to Pharaoh; and give seed, and we live, and die not, and the ground is not desolate.'
And Joseph buyeth all the ground of Egypt for Pharaoh, for the Egyptians have sold each his field, for the famine hath been severe upon them, and the land becometh Pharaoh's;
as to the people he hath removed them to cities from the [one] end of the border of Egypt even unto its [other] end.
Only the ground of the priests he hath not bought, for the priests have a portion from Pharaoh, and they have eaten their portion which Pharaoh hath given to them, therefore they have not sold their ground.
And Joseph saith unto the people, 'Lo, I have bought you to-day and your ground for Pharaoh; lo, seed for you, and ye have sown the ground,
and it hath come to pass in the increases, that ye have given a fifth to Pharaoh, and four of the parts are for yourselves, for seed of the field, and for your food, and for those who [are] in your houses, and for food for your infants.'
And they say, 'Thou hast revived us; we find grace in the eyes of my lord, and have been servants to Pharaoh;'
and Joseph setteth it for a statute unto this day, concerning the ground of Egypt, [that] Pharaoh hath a fifth; only the ground of the priests alone hath not become Pharaoh's.
And Israel dwelleth in the land of Egypt, in the land of Goshen, and they have possession in it, and are fruitful, and multiply exceedingly;
and Jacob liveth in the land of Egypt seventeen years, and the days of Jacob, the years of his life, are an hundred and forty and seven years.
And the days of Israel are near to die, and he calleth for his son, for Joseph, and saith to him, 'If, I pray thee, I have found grace in thine eyes, put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and thou hast done with me kindness and truth; bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt,
and I have lain with my fathers, and thou hast borne me out of Egypt, and buried me in their burying-place.' And he saith, 'I — I do according to thy word;'
and he saith, 'Swear to me;' and he sweareth to him, and Israel boweth himself on the head of the bed.
And it cometh to pass, after these things, that [one] saith to Joseph, 'Lo, thy father is sick;' and he taketh his two sons with him, Manasseh and Ephraim.
And [one] declareth to Jacob, and saith, 'Lo, thy son Joseph is coming unto thee;' and Israel doth strengthen himself, and sit upon the bed.
And Jacob saith unto Joseph, 'God Almighty hath appeared unto me, in Luz, in the land of Canaan, and blesseth me,
and saith unto me, Lo, I am making thee fruitful, and have multiplied thee, and given thee for an assembly of peoples, and given this land to thy seed after thee, a possession age-during.
'And now, thy two sons, who are born to thee in the land of Egypt, before my coming unto thee to Egypt, mine they [are]; Ephraim and Manasseh, as Reuben and Simeon they are mine;
and thy family which thou hast begotten after them are thine; by the name of their brethren they are called in their inheritance.
'And I — in my coming in from Padan-Aram Rachel hath died by me in the land of Canaan, in the way, while yet a kibrath of land to enter Ephrata, and I bury her there in the way of Ephrata, which [is] Bethlehem.'
And Israel seeth the sons of Joseph, and saith, 'Who [are] these?'
and Joseph saith unto his father, 'They [are] my sons, whom God hath given to me in this [place];' and he saith, 'Bring them, I pray thee, unto me, and I bless them.'
And the eyes of Israel have been heavy from age, he is unable to see; and he bringeth them nigh unto him, and he kisseth them, and cleaveth to them;
and Israel saith unto Joseph, 'To see thy face I had not thought, and lo, God hath shewed me also thy seed.'
And Joseph bringeth them out from between his knees, and boweth himself on his face to the earth;
and Joseph taketh them both, Ephraim in his right hand towards Israel's left, and Manasseh in his left towards Israel's right, and bringeth [them] nigh to him.
And Israel putteth out his right hand, and placeth [it] upon the head of Ephraim, who [is] the younger, and his left hand upon the head of Manasseh; he hath guided his hands wisely, for Manasseh [is] the first-born.
And he blesseth Joseph, and saith, 'God, before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked habitually: God who is feeding me from my being unto this day:
the Messenger who is redeeming me from all evil doth bless the youths, and my name is called upon them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac; and they increase into a multitude in the midst of the land.'
And Joseph seeth that his father setteth his right hand on the head of Ephraim, and it is wrong in his eyes, and he supporteth the hand of his father to turn it aside from off the head of Ephraim to the head of Manasseh;
and Joseph saith unto his father, 'Not so, my father, for this [is] the first-born; set thy right hand on his head.'
And his father refuseth, and saith, 'I have known, my son, I have known; he also becometh a people, and he also is great, and yet, his young brother is greater than he, and his seed is the fulness of the nations;'
and he blesseth them in that day, saying, 'By thee doth Israel bless, saying, God set thee as Ephraim and as Manasseh;' and he setteth Ephraim before Manasseh.
And Israel saith unto Joseph, 'Lo, I am dying, and God hath been with you, and hath brought you back unto the land of your fathers;
and I — I have given to thee one portion above thy brethren, which I have taken out of the hand of the Amorite by my sword and by my bow.'
And Jacob calleth unto his sons and saith, 'Be gathered together, and I declare to you that which doth happen with you in the latter end of the days.
'Be assembled, and hear, sons of Jacob, And hearken unto Israel your father.
Reuben! my first-born thou, My power, and beginning of my strength, The abundance of exaltation, And the abundance of strength;
Unstable as water, thou art not abundant; For thou hast gone up thy father's bed; Then thou hast polluted: My couch he went up!
Simeon and Levi [are] brethren! Instruments of violence — their espousals!
Into their secret, come not, O my soul! Unto their assembly be not united, O mine honour; For in their anger they slew a man, And in their self-will eradicated a prince.
Cursed [is] their anger, for [it is] fierce, And their wrath, for [it is] sharp; I divide them in Jacob, And I scatter them in Israel.
Judah! thou — thy brethren praise thee! Thy hand [is] on the neck of thine enemies, Sons of thy father bow themselves to thee.
A lion's whelp [is] Judah, For prey, my son, thou hast gone up; He hath bent, he hath crouched as a lion, And as a lioness; who causeth him to arise?
The sceptre turneth not aside from Judah, And a lawgiver from between his feet, Till his Seed come; And his [is] the obedience of peoples.
Binding to the vine his ass, And to the choice vine the colt of his ass, He hath washed in wine his clothing, And in the blood of grapes his covering;
Red [are] eyes with wine, And white [are] teeth with milk!
Zebulun at a haven of the seas doth dwell, And he [is] for a haven of ships; And his side [is] unto Zidon.
Issacher [is] a strong ass, Crouching between the two folds;
And he seeth rest that [it is] good, And the land that [it is] pleasant, And he inclineth his shoulder to bear, And is to tribute a servant.
Dan doth judge his people, As one of the tribes of Israel;
Dan is a serpent by the way, An adder by the path, Which is biting the horse's heels, And its rider falleth backward.
For Thy salvation I have waited, Jehovah!
Gad! a troop assaulteth him, But he assaulteth last.
Out of Asher his bread [is] fat; And he giveth dainties of a king.
Naphtali [is] a hind sent away, Who is giving beauteous young ones.
Joseph [is] a fruitful son; A fruitful son by a fountain, Daughters step over the wall;
And embitter him — yea, they have striven, Yea, hate him do archers;
And his bow abideth in strength, And strengthened are the arms of his hands By the hands of the Mighty One of Jacob, Whence is a shepherd, a son of Israel.
By the God of thy father who helpeth thee, And the Mighty One who blesseth thee, Blessings of the heavens from above, Blessings of the deep lying under, Blessings of breasts and womb; —
Thy father's blessings have been mighty Above the blessings of my progenitors, Unto the limit of the heights age-during They are for the head of Joseph, And for the crown of the one Separate [from] his brethren.
Benjamin! a wolf teareth; In the morning he eateth prey, And at evening he apportioneth spoil.'
All these [are] the twelve tribes of Israel, and this [is] that which their father hath spoken unto them, and he blesseth them; each according to his blessing he hath blessed them.
And he commandeth them, and saith unto them, 'I am being gathered unto my people; bury me by my fathers, at the cave which [is] in the field of Ephron the Hittite;
in the cave which [is] in the field of Machpelah, which [is] on the front of Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the field from Ephron the Hittite for a possession of a burying-place;
(there they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife; there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife; and there I buried Leah);
the purchase of the field and of the cave which [is] in it, [is] from Sons of Heth.'
And Jacob finisheth commanding his sons, and gathereth up his feet unto the bed, and expireth, and is gathered unto his people.
And Joseph falleth on his father's face, and weepeth over him, and kisseth him;
and Joseph commandeth his servants, the physicians, to embalm his father, and the physicians embalm Israel;
and they fulfil for him forty days, for so they fulfil the days of the embalmed, and the Egyptians weep for him seventy days.
And the days of his weeping pass away, and Joseph speaketh unto the house of Pharaoh, saying, 'If, I pray you, I have found grace in your eyes, speak, I pray you, in the ears of Pharaoh, saying,
My father caused me to swear, saying, Lo, I am dying; in my burying-place which I have prepared for myself in the land of Canaan, there dost thou bury me; and now, let me go up, I pray thee, and bury my father, and return;'
and Pharaoh saith, 'Go up and bury thy father, as he caused thee to swear.'
And Joseph goeth up to bury his father, and go up with him do all the servants of Pharaoh, elders of his house, and all the elders of the land of Egypt,
and all the house of Joseph, and his brethren, and the house of his father; only their infants, and their flock, and their herd, have they left in the land of Goshen;
and there go up with him both chariot and horsemen, and the camp is very great.
And they come unto the threshing-floor of Atad, which [is] beyond the Jordan, and they lament there, a lamentation great and very grievous; and he maketh for his father a mourning seven days,
and the inhabitant of the land, the Canaanite, see the mourning in the threshing-floor of Atad, and say, 'A grievous mourning [is] this to the Egyptians;' therefore hath [one] called its name 'The mourning of the Egyptians,' which [is] beyond the Jordan.
And his sons do to him so as he commanded them,
and his sons bear him away to the land of Canaan, and bury him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, which Abraham bought with the field for a possession of a burying-place, from Ephron the Hittite, on the front of Mamre.
And Joseph turneth back to Egypt, he and his brethren, and all who are going up with him to bury his father, after his burying his father.
And the brethren of Joseph see that their father is dead, and say, 'Peradventure Joseph doth hate us, and doth certainly return to us all the evil which we did with him.'
And they give a charge for Joseph, saying, 'Thy father commanded before his death, saying,
Thus ye do say to Joseph, I pray thee, bear, I pray thee, with the transgression of thy brethren, and their sin, for they have done thee evil; and now, bear, we pray thee, with the transgression of the servants of the God of thy father;' and Joseph weepeth in their speaking unto him.
And his brethren also go and fall before him, and say, 'Lo, we [are] to thee for servants.'
And Joseph saith unto them, 'Fear not, for [am] I in the place of God?
As for you, ye devised against me evil — God devised it for good, in order to do as [at] this day, to keep alive a numerous people;
and now, fear not: I do nourish you and your infants;' and he comforteth them, and speaketh unto their heart.
And Joseph dwelleth in Egypt, he and the house of his father, and Joseph liveth a hundred and ten years,
and Joseph looketh on Ephraim's sons of the third [generation]; sons also of Machir, son of Manasseh, have been born on the knees of Joseph.
And Joseph saith unto his brethren, 'I am dying, and God doth certainly inspect you, and hath caused you to go up from this land, unto the land which He hath sworn to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.'
And Joseph causeth the sons of Israel to swear, saying, 'God doth certainly inspect you, and ye have brought up my bones from this [place].'
And Joseph dieth, a son of an hundred and ten years, and they embalm him, and he is put into a coffin in Egypt.
And these [are] the names of the sons of Israel who are coming into Egypt with Jacob; a man and his household have they come;
Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah,
Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin,
Dan, and Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.
And all the persons coming out of the thigh of Jacob are seventy persons; as to Joseph, he was in Egypt.
And Joseph dieth, and all his brethren, and all that generation;
and the sons of Israel have been fruitful, and they teem, and multiply, and are very very mighty, and the land is filled with them.
And there riseth a new king over Egypt, who hath not known Joseph,
and he saith unto his people, 'Lo, the people of the sons of Israel [is] more numerous and mighty than we;
give help! let us act wisely concerning it, lest it multiply, and it hath come to pass, when war happeneth, that it hath been joined, even it, unto those hating us, and hath fought against us, and hath gone out up of the land.'
And they set over it princes of tribute, so as to afflict it with their burdens, and it buildeth store-cities for Pharaoh, Pithom and Raamses;
and as they afflict it, so it multiplieth, and so it breaketh forth, and they are vexed because of the sons of Israel;
and the Egyptians cause the sons of Israel to serve with rigour,
and make their lives bitter in hard service, in clay, and in brick, and in every [kind] of service in the field; all their service in which they have served [is] with rigour.
And the king of Egypt speaketh to the midwives, the Hebrewesses, (of whom the name of the one [is] Shiphrah, and the name of the second Puah),
and saith, 'When ye cause the Hebrew women to bear, and have looked on the children; if it [is] a son — then ye have put him to death; and if it [is] a daughter — then she hath lived.'
And the midwives fear God, and have not done as the king of Egypt hath spoken unto them, and keep the lads alive;
and the king of Egypt calleth for the midwives, and saith to them, 'Wherefore have ye done this thing, and keep the lads alive?'
And the midwives say unto Pharaoh, 'Because the Hebrew women [are] not as the Egyptian women, for they [are] lively; before the midwife cometh in unto them — they have borne!'
And God doth good to the midwives, and the people multiply, and are very mighty;
and it cometh to pass, because the midwives have feared God, that He maketh for them households;
and Pharaoh layeth a charge on all his people, saying, 'Every son who is born — into the River ye do cast him, and every daughter ye do keep alive.'
And there goeth a man of the house of Levi, and he taketh the daughter of Levi,
and the woman conceiveth, and beareth a son, and she seeth him that he [is] fair, and she hideth him three months,
and she hath not been able any more to hide him, and she taketh for him an ark of rushes, and daubeth it with bitumen and with pitch, and putteth the lad in it, and putteth [it] in the weeds by the edge of the River;
and his sister stationeth herself afar off, to know what is done to him.
And a daughter of Pharaoh cometh down to bathe at the River, and her damsels are walking by the side of the River, and she seeth the ark in the midst of the weeds, and sendeth her handmaid, and she taketh it,
and openeth, and seeth him — the lad, and lo, a child weeping! and she hath pity on him, and saith, 'This is [one] of the Hebrews' children.'
And his sister saith unto the daughter of Pharaoh, 'Do I go? when I have called for thee a suckling woman of the Hebrews, then she doth suckle the lad for thee;'
and the daughter of Pharaoh saith to her, 'Go;' and the virgin goeth, and calleth the mother of the lad,
and the daughter of Pharaoh saith to her, 'Take this lad away, and suckle him for me, and I — I give thy hire;' and the woman taketh the lad, and suckleth him.
And the lad groweth, and she bringeth him in to the daughter of Pharaoh, and he is to her for a son, and she calleth his name Moses, and saith, 'Because — from the water I have drawn him.'
And it cometh to pass, in those days, that Moses is grown, and he goeth out unto his brethren, and looketh on their burdens, and seeth a man, an Egyptian, smiting a man, a Hebrew, [one] of his brethren,
and he turneth hither and thither, and seeth that there is no man, and smiteth the Egyptian, and hideth him in the sand.
And he goeth out on the second day, and lo, two men, Hebrews, striving! and he saith to the wrong-doer, 'Why dost thou smite thy neighbour?'
and he saith, 'Who set thee for a head and a judge over us? to slay me art thou saying [it], as thou hast slain the Egyptian?' and Moses feareth, and saith, 'Surely the thing hath been known.'
And Pharaoh heareth of this thing, and seeketh to slay Moses, and Moses fleeth from the face of Pharaoh, and dwelleth in the land of Midian, and dwelleth by the well.
And to a priest of Midian [are] seven daughters, and they come and draw, and fill the troughs, to water the flock of their father,
and the shepherds come and drive them away, and Moses ariseth, and saveth them, and watereth their flock.
And they come in to Reuel their father, and he saith, 'Wherefore have ye hastened to come in to-day?'
and they say, 'A man, an Egyptian, hath delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds, and also hath diligently drawn for us, and watereth the flock;'
and he saith unto his daughters, 'And where [is] he? why [is] this? — ye left the man! call for him, and he doth eat bread.'
And Moses is willing to dwell with the man, and he giveth Zipporah his daughter to Moses,
and she beareth a son, and he calleth his name Gershom, for he said, 'A sojourner I have been in a strange land.'
And it cometh to pass during these many days, that the king of Egypt dieth, and the sons of Israel sigh because of the service, and cry, and their cry goeth up unto God, because of the service;
and God heareth their groaning, and God remembereth His covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob;
and God seeth the sons of Israel, and God knoweth.
And Moses hath been feeding the flock of Jethro his father-in-law, priest of Midian, and he leadeth the flock behind the wilderness, and cometh in unto the mount of God, to Horeb;
and there appeareth unto him a messenger of Jehovah in a flame of fire, out of the midst of the bush, and he seeth, and lo, the bush is burning with fire, and the bush is not consumed.
And Moses saith, 'Let me turn aside, I pray thee, and I see this great appearance; wherefore is the bush not burned?'
and Jehovah seeth that he hath turned aside to see, and God calleth unto him out of the midst of the bush, and saith, 'Moses, Moses;' and he saith, 'Here [am] I.'
And He saith, 'Come not near hither: cast thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place on which thou art standing is holy ground.'
He saith also, 'I [am] the God of thy father, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob;' and Moses hideth his face, for he is afraid to look towards God.
And Jehovah saith, 'I have certainly seen the affliction of My people who [are] in Egypt, and their cry I have heard, because of its exactors, for I have known its pains;
and I go down to deliver it out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to cause it to go up out of the land, unto a land good and broad, unto a land flowing with milk and honey — unto the place of the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite.
'And now, lo, the cry of the sons of Israel hath come in unto Me, and I have also seen the oppression with which the Egyptians are oppressing them,
and now, come, and I send thee unto Pharaoh, and bring thou out My people, the sons of Israel, out of Egypt.'
And Moses saith unto God, 'Who [am] I, that I go unto Pharaoh, and that I bring out the sons of Israel from Egypt?'
and He saith, 'Because I am with thee, and this [is] to thee the sign that I have sent thee: in thy bringing out the people from Egypt — ye do serve God on this mount.'
And Moses saith unto God, 'Lo, I am coming unto the sons of Israel, and have said to them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you, and they have said to me, What [is] His name? what do I say unto them?'
And God saith unto Moses, 'I AM THAT WHICH I AM;' He saith also, 'Thus dost thou say to the sons of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you.'
And God saith again unto Moses, 'Thus dost thou say unto the sons of Israel, Jehovah, God of your fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you; this [is] My name — to the age, and this My memorial, to generation — generation.
'Go, and thou hast gathered the elders of Israel, and hast said unto them: Jehovah, God of your fathers, hath appeareth unto me, God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, saying, I have certainly inspected you, and that which is done to you in Egypt;
and I say, I bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt, unto the land of the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite, unto a land flowing [with] milk and honey.
'And they have hearkened to thy voice, and thou hast entered, thou and the elders of Israel, unto the king of Egypt, and ye have said unto him, Jehovah, God of the Hebrews, hath met with us; and now, let us go, we pray thee, a journey of three days into the wilderness, and we sacrifice to Jehovah our God.
'And I — I have known that the king of Egypt doth not permit you to go, unless by a strong hand,
and I have put forth My hand, and have smitten Egypt with all My wonders, which I do in its midst — and afterwards he doth send you away.
'And I have given the grace of this people in the eyes of the Egyptians, and it hath come to pass, when ye go, ye go not empty;
and [every] woman hath asked from her neighbour, and from her who is sojourning in her house, vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and garments, and ye have put [them] on your sons and on your daughters, and have spoiled the Egyptians.'
And Moses answereth and saith, 'And, if they do not give credence to me, nor hearken to my voice, and say, Jehovah hath not appeared unto thee?'
And Jehovah saith unto him, 'What [is] this in thy hand?' and he saith, 'A rod;'
and He saith, 'Cast it to the earth;' and he casteth it to the earth, and it becometh a serpent — and Moses fleeth from its presence.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Put forth thy hand, and lay hold on the tail of it;' and he putteth forth his hand, and layeth hold on it, and it becometh a rod in his hand —
' — so that they believe that Jehovah, God of their fathers, hath appeared unto thee, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob.'
And Jehovah saith to him again, 'Put in, I pray thee, thy hand into thy bosom;' and he putteth in his hand into his bosom, and he bringeth it out, and lo, his hand [is] leprous as snow;
and He saith, 'Put back thy hand unto thy bosom;' and he putteth back his hand unto his bosom, and he bringeth it out from his bosom, and lo, it hath turned back as his flesh —
' — and it hath come to pass, if they do not give credence to thee, and hearken not to the voice of the first sign, that they have given credence to the voice of the latter sign.
'And it hath come to pass, if they do not give credence even to these two signs, nor hearken to thy voice, that thou hast taken of the waters of the River, and hast poured on the dry land, and the waters which thou takest from the River have been, yea, they have become — blood on the dry land.'
And Moses saith unto Jehovah, 'O, my Lord, I [am] not a man of words, either yesterday, or before, or since Thy speaking unto Thy servant, for I [am] slow of mouth, and slow of tongue.'
And Jehovah saith unto him, 'Who appointed a mouth for man? or who appointeth the dumb, or deaf, or open, or blind? is it not I, Jehovah?
and now, go, and I — I am with thy mouth, and have directed thee that which thou speakest;'
and he saith, 'O, my Lord, send, I pray thee, by the hand Thou dost send.'
And the anger of Jehovah burneth against Moses, and He saith, 'Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I have known that he speaketh well, and also, lo, he is coming out to meet thee; when he hath seen thee, then he hath rejoiced in his heart,
and thou hast spoken unto him, and hast set the words in his mouth, and I — I am with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and have directed you that which ye do;
and he, he hath spoken for thee unto the people, and it hath come to pass, he — he is to thee for a mouth, and thou — thou art to him for God;
and this rod thou dost take in thy hand, with which thou doest the signs.'
And Moses goeth and turneth back unto Jethro his father-in-law, and saith to him, 'Let me go, I pray thee, and I turn back unto my brethren who [are] in Egypt, and I see whether they are yet alive.' And Jethro saith to Moses, 'Go in peace.'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses in Midian, 'Go, turn back to Egypt, for all the men have died who seek thy life;'
and Moses taketh his wife, and his sons, and causeth them to ride on the ass, and turneth back to the land of Egypt, and Moses taketh the rod of God in his hand.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'In thy going to turn back to Egypt, see — all the wonders which I have put in thy hand — that thou hast done them before Pharaoh, and I — I strengthen his heart, and he doth not send the people away;
and thou hast said unto Pharaoh, Thus said Jehovah, My son, My first-born [is] Israel,
and I say unto thee, Send away My son, and he doth serve Me; and — thou dost refuse to send him away — lo, I am slaying thy son, thy first-born.'
And it cometh to pass in the way, in a lodging place, that Jehovah meeteth him, and seeketh to put him to death;
and Zipporah taketh a flint, and cutteth off the foreskin of her son, and causeth [it] to touch his feet, and saith, 'Surely a bridegroom of blood [art] thou to me;'
and He desisteth from him: then she said, 'A bridegroom of blood,' in reference to the circumcision.
And Jehovah saith unto Aaron, 'Go to meet Moses into the wilderness;' and he goeth, and meeteth him in the mount of God, and kisseth him,
and Moses declareth to Aaron all the words of Jehovah with which He hath sent him, and all the signs with which He hath charged him.
And Moses goeth — Aaron also — and they gather all the elders of the sons of Israel,
and Aaron speaketh all the words which Jehovah hath spoken unto Moses, and doth the signs before the eyes of the people;
and the people believe when they hear that Jehovah hath looked after the sons of Israel, and that He hath seen their affliction; and they bow and do obeisance.
And afterwards have Moses and Aaron entered, and they say unto Pharaoh, 'Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, Send My people away, and they keep a feast to Me in the wilderness;'
and Pharaoh saith, 'Who [is] Jehovah, that I hearken to His voice, to send Israel away? I have not known Jehovah, and Israel also I do not send away.'
And they say, 'The God of the Hebrews hath met with us, let us go, we pray thee, a journey of three days into the wilderness, and we sacrifice to Jehovah our God, lest He meet us with pestilence or with sword.'
And the king of Egypt saith unto them, 'Why, Moses and Aaron, do ye free the people from its works? go to your burdens.'
Pharaoh also saith, 'Lo, numerous now [is] the people of the land, and ye have caused them to cease from their burdens!'
And Pharaoh commandeth, on that day, the exactors among the people and its authorities, saying,
'Ye do not add to give straw to the people for the making of the bricks, as heretofore — they go and have gathered straw for themselves;
and the proper quantity of the bricks which they are making heretofore ye do put on them, ye do not diminish from it, for they are remiss, therefore they are crying, saying, Let us go, let us sacrifice to our God;
let the service be heavy on the men, and let them work at it, and not be dazzled by lying words.'
And the exactors of the people, and its authorities, go out, and speak unto the people, saying, 'Thus said Pharaoh, I do not give you straw,
ye — go ye, take for yourselves straw where ye find [it], for there is nothing of your service diminished.'
And the people is scattered over all the land of Egypt, to gather stubble for straw,
and the exactors are making haste, saying, 'Complete your works, the matter of a day in its day, as when there is straw.'
And the authorities of the sons of Israel, whom the exactors of Pharaoh have placed over them, are beaten, saying, 'Wherefore have ye not completed your portion in making brick as heretofore, both yesterday and to-day?'
And the authorities of the sons of Israel come in and cry unto Pharaoh, saying, 'Why dost thou thus to thy servants?
Straw is not given to thy servants, and they are saying to us, Make bricks, and lo, thy servants are smitten — and thy people hath sinned.'
And he saith, 'Remiss — ye are remiss, therefore ye are saying, Let us go, let us sacrifice to Jehovah;
and now, go, serve; and straw is not given to you, and the measure of bricks ye do give.'
And the authorities of the sons of Israel see them in affliction, saying, 'Ye do not diminish from your bricks; the matter of a day in its day.'
And they meet Moses and Aaron standing to meet them, in their coming out from Pharaoh,
and say unto them, 'Jehovah look upon you, and judge, because ye have caused our fragrance to stink in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants — to give a sword into their hand to slay us.'
And Moses turneth back unto Jehovah, and saith, 'Lord, why hast Thou done evil to this people? why [is] this? — Thou hast sent me!
and since I have come unto Pharaoh, to speak in Thy name, he hath done evil to this people, and Thou hast not at all delivered Thy people.'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Now dost thou see that which I do to Pharaoh, for with a strong hand he doth send them away, yea, with a strong hand he doth cast them out of his land.'
And God speaketh unto Moses, and saith unto him, 'I [am] Jehovah,
and I appear unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, as God Almighty; as to My name Jehovah, I have not been known to them;
and also I have established My covenant with them, to give to them the land of Canaan, the land of their sojournings, wherein they have sojourned;
and also I have heard the groaning of the sons of Israel, whom the Egyptians are causing to serve, and I remember My covenant.
'Therefore say to the sons of Israel, I [am] Jehovah, and I have brought you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and have delivered you from their service, and have redeemed you by a stretched-out arm, and by great judgments,
and have taken you to Me for a people, and I have been to you for God, and ye have known that I [am] Jehovah your God, who is bringing you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians;
and I have brought you in unto the land which I have lifted up My hand to give it to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, and have given it to you — a possession; I [am] Jehovah.'
And Moses speaketh so unto the sons of Israel, and they hearkened not unto Moses, for anguish of spirit, and for harsh service.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Go in, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he doth send the sons of Israel out of his land;
and Moses speaketh before Jehovah, saying, 'Lo, the sons of Israel have not hearkened unto me, and how doth Pharaoh hear me, and I of uncircumcised lips?'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, and unto Aaron, and chargeth them for the sons of Israel, and for Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring out the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt.
These [are] heads of the house of their fathers: Sons of Reuben first-born of Israel [are] Hanoch, and Phallu, Hezron, and Carmi: these [are] families of Reuben.
And sons of Simeon [are] Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul, son of the Canaanitess: these [are] families of Simeon.
And these [are] the names of the sons of Levi, as to their births: Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari: and the years of the life of Levi [are] a hundred and thirty and seven years.
The sons of Gershon [are] Libni, and Shimi, as to their families.
And the sons of Kohath [are] Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel: and the years of the life of Kohath [are] a hundred and thirty and three years.
And the sons of Merari [are] Mahli and Mushi: these [are] families of Levi, as to their births.
And Amram taketh Jochebed his aunt to himself for a wife, and she beareth to him Aaron and Moses: and the years of the life of Amram [are] a hundred and thirty and seven years.
And sons of Izhar [are] Korah, and Nepheg, and Zichri.
And sons of Uzziel [are] Mishael, and Elzaphan, and Sithri.
And Aaron taketh Elisheba daughter of Amminadab, sister of Naashon, to himself for a wife, and she beareth to him Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
And sons of Korah [are] Assir, and Elkanah, and Abiasaph: these [are] families of the Korhite.
And Eleazar, Aaron's son, hath taken to him [one] of the daughters of Putiel for a wife to himself, and she beareth to him Phinehas: these [are] heads of the fathers of the Levites, as to their families.
This [is] Aaron — and Moses — to whom Jehovah said, 'Bring ye out the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt, by their hosts;'
these are they who are speaking unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring out the sons of Israel from Egypt, this [is] Moses — and Aaron.
And it cometh to pass in the day of Jehovah's speaking unto Moses in the land of Egypt,
that Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying, 'I [am] Jehovah, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I am speaking unto thee.'
And Moses saith before Jehovah, 'Lo, I [am] of uncircumcised lips, and how doth Pharaoh hearken unto me?'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'See, I have given thee a god to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy brother is thy prophet;
thou — thou dost speak all that I command thee, and Aaron thy brother doth speak unto Pharaoh, and he hath sent the sons of Israel out of his land.
'And I harden the heart of Pharaoh, and have multiplied My signs and My wonders in the land of Egypt,
and Pharaoh doth not hearken, and I have put My hand on Egypt, and have brought out My hosts, My people, the sons of Israel, from the land of Egypt by great judgments;
and the Egyptians have known that I [am] Jehovah, in My stretching out My hand against Egypt; and I have brought out the sons of Israel from their midst.'
And Moses doth — Aaron also — as Jehovah commanded them; so have they done;
and Moses [is] a son of eighty years, and Aaron [is] a son of eighty and three years, in their speaking unto Pharaoh.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
'When Pharaoh speaketh unto you, saying, Give for yourselves a wonder; then thou hast said unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and cast before Pharaoh — it becometh a monster.'
And Moses goeth in — Aaron also — unto Pharaoh, and they do so as Jehovah hath commanded; and Aaron casteth his rod before Pharaoh, and before his servants, and it becometh a monster.
And Pharaoh also calleth for wise men, and for sorcerers; and the scribes of Egypt, they also, with their flashings, do so,
and they cast down each his rod, and they become monsters, and the rod of Aaron swalloweth their rods;
and the heart of Pharaoh is strong, and he hath not hearkened unto them, as Jehovah hath spoken.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'The heart of Pharaoh hath been hard, he hath refused to send the people away;
go unto Pharaoh in the morning, lo, he is going out to the water, and thou hast stood to meet him by the edge of the River, and the rod which was turned to a serpent thou dost take in thy hand,
and thou hast said unto him: Jehovah, God of the Hebrews, hath sent me unto thee, saying, Send My people away, and they serve Me in the wilderness; and lo, thou hast not hearkened hitherto.
'Thus said Jehovah: By this thou knowest that I [am] Jehovah; lo, I am smiting with the rod which [is] in my hand, on the waters which [are] in the River, and they have been turned to blood,
and the fish that [are] in the River die, and the River hath stank, and the Egyptians have been wearied of drinking waters from the River.'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and stretch out thy hand against the waters of Egypt, against their streams, against their rivers, and against their ponds, and against all their collections of waters; and they are blood — and there hath been blood in all the land of Egypt, both in [vessels of] wood, and in [those of] stone.'
And Moses and Aaron do so, as Jehovah hath commanded, and he lifteth up [his hand] with the rod, and smiteth the waters which [are] in the River, before the eyes of Pharaoh, and before the eyes of his servants, and all the waters which [are] in the River are turned to blood,
and the fish which [is] in the River hath died, and the River stinketh, and the Egyptians have not been able to drink water from the River; and the blood is in all the land of Egypt.
And the scribes of Egypt do so with their flashings, and the heart of Pharaoh is strong, and he hath not hearkened unto them, as Jehovah hath spoken,
and Pharaoh turneth and goeth in unto his house, and hath not set his heart even to this;
and all the Egyptians seek water round about the river to drink, for they have not been able to drink of the waters of the River.
And seven days are completed after Jehovah's smiting the River,
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Go in unto Pharaoh: and thou hast said unto him, Thus said Jehovah, Send My people away, and they serve Me;
and if thou art refusing to send away, lo, I am smiting all thy border with frogs;
and the River hath teemed [with] frogs, and they have gone up and gone into thy house, and into the inner-chamber of thy bed, and on thy couch, and into the house of thy servants, and among thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy kneading-troughs;
yea, on thee, and on thy people, and on all thy servants do the frogs go up.'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy hand, with thy rod, against the streams, against the rivers, and against the ponds, and cause the frogs to come up against the land of Egypt.'
And Aaron stretcheth out his hand against the waters of Egypt, and the frog cometh up, and covereth the land of Egypt;
and the scribes do so with their flashings, and cause the frogs to come up against the land of Egypt.
And Pharaoh calleth for Moses and for Aaron, and saith, 'Make supplication unto Jehovah, that he turn aside the frogs from me, and from my people, and I send the people away, and they sacrifice to Jehovah.'
And Moses saith to Pharaoh, 'Beautify thyself over me; when do I make supplication for thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, to cut off the frogs from thee and from thy houses — only in the River they do remain?'
and he saith, 'To-morrow.' And he saith, According to thy word [it is], so that thou knowest that there is none like Jehovah our God,
and the frogs have turned aside from thee, and from thy houses, and from thy servants, and from thy people; only in the River they do remain.'
And Moses — Aaron also — goeth out from Pharaoh, and Moses crieth unto Jehovah, concerning the matter of the frogs which He hath set on Pharaoh;
and Jehovah doth according to the word of Moses, and the frogs die out of the houses, out of the courts, and out of the fields,
and they heap them up together, and the land stinketh.
And Pharaoh seeth that there hath been a respite, and he hath hardened his heart, and hath not hearkened unto them, as Jehovah hath spoken.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy rod, and smite the dust of the land, and it hath become gnats in all the land of Egypt.'
And they do so, and Aaron stretcheth out his hand with his rod, and smiteth the dust of the land, and the gnats are on man and on beast; all the dust of the land hath been gnats in all the land of Egypt.
And the scribes do so with their flashings, to bring out the gnats, and they have not been able, and the gnats are on man and on beast;
and the scribes say unto Pharaoh, 'It [is] the finger of God;' and the heart of Pharaoh is strong, and he hath not hearkened unto them, as Jehovah hath spoken.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Rise early in the morning, and station thyself before Pharaoh, lo, he is going out to the waters, and thou hast said unto him, Thus said Jehovah, Send My people away, and they serve Me;
for, if thou art not sending My people away, lo, I am sending against thee, and against thy servants, and against thy people, and against thy houses, the beetle, and the houses of the Egyptians have been full of the beetle, and also the ground on which they are.
'And I have separated in that day the land of Goshen, in which My people are staying, that the beetle is not there, so that thou knowest that I [am] Jehovah in the midst of the land,
and I have put a division between My people and thy people: to-morrow is this sign.'
And Jehovah doth so, and the grievous beetle entereth the house of Pharaoh, and the house of his servants, and in all the land of Egypt the land is corrupted from the presence of the beetle.
And Pharaoh calleth unto Moses and to Aaron, and saith, 'Go, sacrifice to your God in the land;'
and Moses saith, 'Not right to do so, for the abomination of the Egyptians we do sacrifice to Jehovah our God; lo, we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes — and they do not stone us!
A journey of three days we go into the wilderness, and have sacrificed to Jehovah our God, as He saith unto us.'
And Pharaoh saith, 'I send you away, and ye have sacrificed to Jehovah your God in the wilderness, only go not very far off; make ye supplication for me;'
and Moses saith, 'Lo, I am going out from thee, and have made supplication unto Jehovah, and the beetle hath turned aside from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people — to-morrow, only let not Pharaoh add to deceive — in not sending the people away to sacrifice to Jehovah.'
And Moses goeth out from Pharaoh, and maketh supplication unto Jehovah,
and Jehovah doth according to the word of Moses, and turneth aside the beetle from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people — there hath not been left one;
and Pharaoh hardeneth his heart also at this time, and hath not sent the people away.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Go in unto Pharaoh, and thou hast spoken unto him, Thus said Jehovah, God of the Hebrews, Send My people away, and they serve me,
for, if thou art refusing to send away, and art still keeping hold upon them,
lo, the hand of Jehovah is on thy cattle which [are] in the field, on horses, on asses, on camels, on herd, and on flock — a pestilence very grievous.
'And Jehovah hath separated between the cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt, and there doth not die a thing of all the sons of Israel's;
and Jehovah setteth an appointed time, saying, To-morrow doth Jehovah do this thing in the land.'
And Jehovah doth this thing on the morrow, and all the cattle of Egypt die, and of the cattle of the sons of Israel not one hath died;
and Pharaoh sendeth, and lo, not even one of the cattle of Israel hath died, and the heart of Pharaoh is hard, and he hath not sent the people away.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses and unto Aaron, 'Take to you the fulness of your hands [of] soot of a furnace, and Moses hath sprinkled it towards the heavens, before the eyes of Pharaoh,
and it hath become small dust over all the land of Egypt, and it hath become on man and on cattle a boil breaking forth [with] blains, in all the land of Egypt.'
And they take the soot of the furnace, and stand before Pharaoh, and Moses sprinkleth it towards the heavens, and it is a boil [with] blains, breaking forth, on man and on beast;
and the scribes have not been able to stand before Moses, because of the boil, for the boil hath been on the scribes, and on all the Egyptians.
And Jehovah strengtheneth the heart of Pharaoh, and he hath not hearkened unto them, as Jehovah hath spoken unto Moses.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Rise early in the morning, and station thyself before Pharaoh, and thou hast said unto him, Thus said Jehovah, God of the Hebrews, Send My people away, and they serve Me,
for, at this time I am sending all My plagues unto thy heart, and on thy servants, and on thy people, so that thou knowest that there is none like Me in all the earth,
for now I have put forth My hand, and I smite thee, and thy people, with pestilence, and thou art hidden from the earth.
'And yet for this I have caused thee to stand, so as to show thee My power, and for the sake of declaring My Name in all the earth;
still thou art exalting thyself against My people — so as not to send them away;
lo, I am raining about [this] time to-morrow hail very grievous, such as hath not been in Egypt, even from the day of its being founded, even until now.
'And, now, send, strengthen thy cattle and all that thou hast in the field; every man and beast which is found in the field, and is not gathered into the house — come down on them hath the hail, and they have died.'
He who is fearing the word of Jehovah among the servants of Pharaoh hath caused his servants and his cattle to flee unto the houses;
and he who hath not set his heart unto the word of Jehovah leaveth his servants and his cattle in the field.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Stretch forth thy hand towards the heavens, and there is hail in all the land of Egypt, on man, and on beast, and on every herb of the field in the land of Egypt.'
And Moses stretcheth out his rod towards the heavens, and Jehovah hath given voices and hail, and fire goeth towards the earth, and Jehovah raineth hail on the land of Egypt,
and there is hail, and fire catching itself in the midst of the hail, very grievous, such as hath not been in all the land of Egypt since it hath become a nation.
And the hail smiteth in all the land of Egypt all that [is] in the field, from man even unto beast, and every herb of the field hath the hail smitten, and every tree of the field it hath broken;
only in the land of Goshen, where the sons of Israel [are], there hath been no hail.
And Pharaoh sendeth, and calleth for Moses and for Aaron, and saith unto them, 'I have sinned this time, Jehovah [is] the Righteous, and I and my people [are] the Wicked,
make ye supplication unto Jehovah, and plead that there be no voices of God and hail, and I send you away, and ye add not to remain.'
And Moses saith unto him, 'At my going out of the city, I spread my palms unto Jehovah — the voices cease, and the hail is not any more, so that thou knowest that the earth [is] Jehovah's;
but thou and thy servants — I have known that ye are not yet afraid of the face of Jehovah God.'
And the flax and the barley have been smitten, for the barley [is] budding, and the flax forming flowers,
and the wheat and the rye have not been smitten, for they are late.
And Moses goeth out from Pharaoh, [from] the city, and spreadeth his hands unto Jehovah, and the voices and the hail cease, and rain hath not been poured out to the earth;
and Pharaoh seeth that the rain hath ceased, and the hail and the voices, and he continueth to sin, and hardeneth his heart, he and his servants;
and the heart of Pharaoh is strong, and he hath not sent the sons of Israel away, as Jehovah hath spoken by the hand of Moses.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Go in unto Pharaoh, for I have declared hard his heart, and the heart of his servants, so that I set these My signs in their midst,
and so that thou recountest in the ears of thy son, and of thy son's son, that which I have done in Egypt, and My signs which I have set among them, and ye have known that I [am] Jehovah.'
And Moses cometh in — Aaron also — unto Pharaoh, and they say unto him, 'Thus said Jehovah, God of the Hebrews, Until when hast thou refused to be humbled at My presence? send My people away, and they serve Me,
for if thou art refusing to send My people away, lo, I am bringing in to-morrow the locust into thy border,
and it hath covered the eye of the land, and none is able to see the land, and it hath eaten the remnant of that which is escaped, which is left to you from the hail, and it hath eaten every tree which is springing for you out of the field;
and they have filled thy houses, and the houses of all thy servants, and the houses of all the Egyptians, which neither thy fathers nor thy father's fathers have seen, since the day of their being on the ground unto this day,' — and he turneth and goeth out from Pharaoh.
And the servants of Pharaoh say unto him, 'Until when doth this [one] become a snare to us? send the men away, and they serve Jehovah their God; knowest thou not yet that Egypt hath perished?'
And Moses is brought back — Aaron also — unto Pharaoh, and he saith unto them, 'Go, serve Jehovah your God; — who and who [are] those going?'
And Moses saith, 'With our young ones, and with our aged ones, we go, with our sons, and with our daughters, with our flock, and our herd, we go, for we have a festival to Jehovah.'
And he saith unto them, 'Be it so, Jehovah [be] with you when I send you and your infants away; see — for evil [is] before your faces;
not so! go now, ye who [are] men, and serve Jehovah, for that ye are seeking;' and [one] casteth them out from the presence of Pharaoh.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Stretch out thy hand against the land of Egypt for the locust, and it goeth up against the land of Egypt, and doth eat every herb of the land — all that the hail hath left.'
And Moses stretcheth out his rod against the land of Egypt, and Jehovah hath led an east wind over the land all that day, and all the night; the morning hath been, and the east wind hath lifted up the locust.
And the locust goeth up against all the land of Egypt, and resteth in all the border of Egypt — very grievous: before it there hath not been such a locust as it, and after it there is none such;
and it covereth the eye of all the land, and the land is darkened; and it eateth every herb of the land, and all the fruit of the trees which the hail hath left, and there hath not been left any green thing in the trees, or in the herb of the field, in all the land of Egypt.'
And Pharaoh hasteth to call for Moses and for Aaron, and saith, 'I have sinned against Jehovah your God, and against you,
and now, bear with, I pray you, my sin, only this time, and make ye supplication to Jehovah your God, that He turn aside from off me only this death.'
And he goeth out from Pharaoh, and maketh supplication unto Jehovah,
and Jehovah turneth a very strong sea wind, and it lifteth up the locust, and bloweth it into the Red Sea — there hath not been left one locust in all the border of Egypt;
and Jehovah strengtheneth the heart of Pharaoh, and he hath not sent the sons of Israel away.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Stretch out thy hand towards the heavens, and there is darkness over the land of Egypt, and the darkness is felt.'
And Moses stretcheth out his hand towards the heavens, and there is darkness — thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days;
they have not seen one another, and none hath risen from his place three days; and to all the sons of Israel there hath been light in their dwellings.'
And Pharaoh calleth unto Moses and saith, 'Go ye, serve Jehovah, only your flock and your herd are stayed, your infants also go with you;'
and Moses saith, 'Thou also dost give in our hand sacrifices and burnt-offerings, and we have prepared for Jehovah our God;
and also our cattle doth go with us, there is not left a hoof, for from it we do take to serve Jehovah our God; and we — we know not how we do serve Jehovah till our going thither.'
And Jehovah strengtheneth the heart of Pharaoh, and he hath not been willing to send them away;
and Pharaoh saith to him, 'Go from me, take heed to thyself, add not to see my face, for in the day thou seest my face thou diest;'
and Moses saith, 'Rightly hast thou spoken, I add not any more to see thy face.'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'One plague more I do bring in on Pharaoh, and on Egypt, afterwards he doth send you away from this; when he is sending you away, he surely casteth you out altogether from this [place];
speak, I pray thee, in the ears of the people, and they ask — each man from his neighbour, and each woman from her neighbour, vessels of silver, and vessels of gold.'
And Jehovah giveth the grace of the people in the eyes of the Egyptians; also the man Moses [is] very great in the land of Egypt, in the eyes of the servants of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of the people.
And Moses saith, 'Thus said Jehovah, About midnight I am going out into the midst of Egypt,
and every first-born in the land of Egypt hath died, from the first-born of Pharaoh who is sitting on his throne, unto the first-born of the maid-servant who [is] behind the millstones, and all the first-born of beasts;
and there hath been a great cry in all the land of Egypt, such as there hath not been, and such as there is not again.
'And against all the sons of Israel a dog sharpeneth not its tongue, from man even unto beast, so that ye know that Jehovah doth make a separation between the Egyptians and Israel;
and all these thy servants have come down unto me, and bowed themselves to me, saying, Go out, thou and all the people who [are] at thy feet; and afterwards I do go out;' — and he goeth out from Pharaoh in the heat of anger.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Pharaoh doth not hearken unto you, so as to multiply My wonders in the land of Egypt;'
and Moses and Aaron have done all these wonders before Pharaoh, and Jehovah strengtheneth Pharaoh's heart, and he hath not sent the sons of Israel out of his land.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses and unto Aaron, in the land of Egypt, saying,
'This month [is] to you the chief of months — it [is] the first to you of the months of the year;
speak ye unto all the company of Israel, saying, In the tenth of this month — they take to them each man a lamb for the house of the fathers, a lamb for a house.
'(And if the household be too few for a lamb, then hath he taken, he and his neighbour who is near unto his house, for the number of persons, each according to his eating ye do count for the lamb,)
a lamb, a perfect one, a male, a son of a year, let be to you; from the sheep or from the goats ye do take [it].
'And it hath become a charge to you, until the fourteenth day of this month, and the whole assembly of the company of Israel have slaughtered it between the evenings;
and they have taken of the blood, and have put on the two side-posts, and on the lintel over the houses in which they eat it.
'And they have eaten the flesh in this night, roast with fire; with unleavened things and bitters they do eat it;
ye do not eat of it raw, or boiled at all in water, but roast with fire, its head with its legs, and with its inwards;
and ye do not leave of it till morning, and that which is remaining of it till morning with fire ye do burn.
'And thus ye do eat it: your loins girded, your sandals on your feet, and your staff in your hand, and ye have eaten it in haste; it is Jehovah's passover,
and I have passed over through the land of Egypt during this night, and have smitten every first-born in the land of Egypt, from man even unto beast, and on all the gods of Egypt I do judgments; I [am] Jehovah.
'And the blood hath become a sign for you on the houses where ye [are], and I have seen the blood, and have passed over you, and a plague is not on you for destruction in My smiting in the land of Egypt.
'And this day hath become to you a memorial, and ye have kept it a feast to Jehovah to your generations; — a statute age-during; ye keep it a feast.
Seven days ye eat unleavened things; only — in the first day ye cause leaven to cease out of your houses; for any one eating anything fermented from the first day till the seventh day, even that person hath been cut off from Israel.
'And in the first day [is] a holy convocation, and in the seventh day ye have a holy convocation; any work is not done in them, only that which is eaten by any person — it alone is done by you,
and ye have observed the unleavened things, for in this self-same day I have brought out your hosts from the land of Egypt, and ye have observed this day to your generations — a statute age-during.
'In the first [month], in the fourteenth day of the month, in the evening, ye do eat unleavened things until the one and twentieth day of the month, at evening;
seven days leaven is not found in your houses, for any [one] eating anything fermented — that person hath been cut off from the company of Israel, among the sojourners or among the natives of the land;
anything fermented ye do not eat, in all your dwellings ye do eat unleavened things.'
And Moses calleth for all the elders of Israel, and saith unto them, 'Draw out and take for yourselves [from] the flock, for your families, and slaughter the passover-sacrifice;
and ye have taken a bunch of hyssop, and have dipped [it] in the blood which [is] in the basin, and have struck [it] on the lintel, and on the two side-posts, from the blood which [is] in the basin, and ye, ye go not out each from the opening of his house till morning.
'And Jehovah hath passed on to smite the Egyptians, and hath seen the blood on the lintel, and on the two side-posts, and Jehovah hath passed over the opening, and doth not permit the destruction to come into your houses to smite.
'And ye have observed this thing, for a statute to thee, and to thy sons — unto the age;
and it hath been, when ye come in unto the land which Jehovah giveth to you, as He hath spoken, that ye have kept this service;
and it hath come to pass when your sons say unto you, What [is] this service ye have?
that ye have said, A sacrifice of passover it [is] to Jehovah, who passed over the houses of the sons of Israel in Egypt, in His smiting the Egyptians, and our houses He delivered.'
And the people bow and do obeisance, and the sons of Israel go and do as Jehovah commanded Moses and Aaron; so have they done.
And it cometh to pass, at midnight, that Jehovah hath smitten every first-born in the land of Egypt, from the first-born of Pharaoh who is sitting on his throne, unto the first-born of the captive who [is] in the prison-house, and every first-born of beasts.
And Pharaoh riseth by night, he and all his servants, and all the Egyptians, and there is a great cry in Egypt, for there is not a house where there is not [one] dead,
and he calleth for Moses and for Aaron by night, and saith, 'Rise, go out from the midst of my people, both ye and the sons of Israel, and go, serve Jehovah according to your word;
both your flock and your herd take ye, as ye have spoken, and go; then ye have blessed also me.'
And the Egyptians are urgent on the people, hasting to send them away out of the land, for they said, 'We are all dead;'
and the people taketh up its dough before it is fermented, their kneading-troughs [are] bound up in their garments on their shoulder.
And the sons of Israel have done according to the word of Moses, and they ask from the Egyptians vessels of silver and vessels of gold, and garments;
and Jehovah hath given the grace of the people in the eyes of the Egyptians, and they cause them to ask, and they spoil the Egyptians.
And the sons of Israel journey from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand men on foot, apart from infants;
and a great rabble also hath gone up with them, and flock and herd — very much cattle.
And they bake with the dough which they have brought out from Egypt unleavened cakes, for it hath not fermented; for they have been cast out of Egypt, and have not been able to delay, and also provision they have not made for themselves.
And the dwelling of the sons of Israel which they have dwelt in Egypt [is] four hundred and thirty years;
and it cometh to pass, at the end of four hundred and thirty years — yea, it cometh to pass in this self-same day — all the hosts of Jehovah have gone out from the land of Egypt.
A night of watchings it [is] to Jehovah, to bring them out from the land of Egypt; it [is] this night to Jehovah of watchings to all the sons of Israel to their generations.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses and Aaron, 'This [is] a statute of the passover; Any son of a stranger doth not eat of it;
and any man's servant, the purchase of money, when thou hast circumcised him — then he doth eat of it;
a settler or hired servant doth not eat of it;
in one house it is eaten, thou dost not carry out of the house [any] of the flesh without, and a bone ye do not break of it;
all the company of Israel do keep it.
'And when a sojourner sojourneth with thee, and hath made a passover to Jehovah, every male of his [is] to be circumcised, and then he doth come near to keep it, and he hath been as a native of the land, but any uncircumcised one doth not eat of it;
one law is to a native, and to a sojourner who is sojourning in your midst.'
And all the sons of Israel do as Jehovah commanded Moses and Aaron; so have they done.
And it cometh to pass in this self-same day, Jehovah hath brought out the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt, by their hosts.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Sanctify to Me every first-born, opening any womb among the sons of Israel, among man and among beast; it [is] Mine.'
And Moses saith unto the people, 'Remember this day [in] which ye have gone out from Egypt, from the house of servants, for by strength of hand hath Jehovah brought you out from this, and any thing fermented is not eaten;
To-day ye are going out, in the month of Abib.
'And it hath been, when Jehovah bringeth thee in unto the land of the Canaanite, and of the Hittite, and of the Amorite, and of the Hivite, and of the Jebusite, which He hath sworn to thy fathers to give to thee, a land flowing with milk and honey, that thou hast done this service in this month.
'Seven days thou dost eat unleavened things, and in the seventh day [is] a feast to Jehovah;
unleavened things are eaten the seven days, and any thing fermented is not seen with thee; yea, leaven is not seen with thee in all thy border.
'And thou hast declared to thy son in that day, saying, '[It is] because of what Jehovah did to me, in my going out from Egypt,
and it hath been to thee for a sign on thy hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, so that the law of Jehovah is in thy mouth, for by a strong hand hath Jehovah brought thee out from Egypt;
and thou hast kept this statute at its appointed season from days to days.
'And it hath been, when Jehovah bringeth thee in unto the land of the Canaanite, as He hath sworn to thee and to thy fathers, and hath given it to thee,
that thou hast caused every one opening a womb to pass over to Jehovah, and every firstling — the increase of beasts which thou hast: the males [are] Jehovah's.
'And every firstling of an ass thou dost ransom with a lamb, and if thou dost not ransom [it], then thou hast beheaded it: and every first-born of man among thy sons thou dost ransom.
'And it hath been, when thy son asketh thee hereafter, saying, What [is] this? that thou hast said unto him, By strength of hand hath Jehovah brought us out from Egypt, from a house of servants;
yea, it cometh to pass, when Pharaoh hath been pained to send us away, that Jehovah doth slay every first-born in the land of Egypt, from the first-born of man even unto the first-born of beast; therefore I am sacrificing to Jehovah all opening a womb who [are] males, and every first-born of my sons I ransom;
and it hath been for a token on thy hand, and for frontlets between thine eyes, for by strength of hand hath Jehovah brought us out of Egypt.'
And it cometh to pass in Pharaoh's sending the people away, that God hath not led them the way of the land of the Philistines, for it [is] near; for God said, 'Lest the people repent in their seeing war, and have turned back towards Egypt;'
and God turneth round the people the way of the wilderness of the Red Sea, and by fifties have the sons of Israel gone up from the land of Egypt.
And Moses taketh the bones of Joseph with him, for he certainly caused the sons of Israel to swear, saying, 'God doth certainly inspect you, and ye have brought up my bones from this with you.'
And they journey from Succoth, and encamp in Etham at the extremity of the wilderness,
and Jehovah is going before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them in the way, and by night in a pillar of fire, to give light to them, to go by day and by night;
He removeth not the pillar of the cloud by day, and the pillar of the fire by night, [from] before the people.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, and they turn back and encamp before Pi-Hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, before Baal-Zephon; over-against it ye do encamp by the sea,
and Pharaoh hath said of the sons of Israel, They are entangled in the land, the wilderness hath shut upon them;
and I have strengthened the heart of Pharaoh, and he hath pursued after them, and I am honoured on Pharaoh, and on all his force, and the Egyptians have known that I [am] Jehovah;' and they do so.
And it is declared to the king of Egypt that the people hath fled, and the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants is turned against the people, and they say, 'What [is] this we have done? that we have sent Israel away from our service.'
And he harnesseth his chariot, and his people he hath taken with him,
and he taketh six hundred chosen chariots, even all the chariots of Egypt, and captains over them all;
and Jehovah strengtheneth the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he pursueth after the sons of Israel, and the sons of Israel are going out with a high hand,
and the Egyptians pursue after them, and all the chariot horses of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his force, overtake them, encamping by the sea, by Pi-Hahiroth, before Baal-Zephon.
And Pharaoh hath drawn near, and the sons of Israel lift up their eyes, and lo, the Egyptians are journeying after them, and they fear exceedingly, and the sons of Israel cry unto Jehovah.
And they say unto Moses, 'Because there are no graves in Egypt, hast thou taken us away to die in a wilderness? what is this thou hast done to us — to bring us out from Egypt?
Is not this the word which we spake unto thee in Egypt, saying, Cease from us, and we serve the Egyptians; for better for us to serve the Egyptians than to die in a wilderness?'
And Moses saith unto the people, 'Fear not, station yourselves, and see the salvation of Jehovah, which He doth for you to-day; for, as ye have seen the Egyptians to-day, ye add no more to see them — to the age;
Jehovah doth fight for you, and ye keep silent.'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'What? thou criest unto Me — speak unto the sons of Israel, and they journey;
and thou, lift up thy rod, and stretch out thy hand towards the sea, and cleave it, and the sons of Israel go into the midst of the sea on dry land.
'And I — lo, I am strengthening the heart of the Egyptians, and they go in after them, and I am honoured on Pharaoh, and on all his force, on his chariots, and on his horsemen;
and the Egyptians have known that I [am] Jehovah, in My being honoured on Pharaoh, on his chariots, and on his horsemen.'
And the messenger of God, who is going before the camp of Israel, journeyeth and goeth at their rear; and the pillar of the cloud journeyeth from their front, and standeth at their rear,
and cometh in between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel, and the cloud and the darkness are, and he enlighteneth the night, and the one hath not drawn near unto the other all the night.
And Moses stretcheth out his hand towards the sea, and Jehovah causeth the sea to go on by a strong east wind all the night, and maketh the sea become dry ground, and the waters are cleaved,
and the sons of Israel go into the midst of the sea, on dry land, and the waters [are] to them a wall, on their right and on their left.
And the Egyptians pursue, and go in after them (all the horses of Pharaoh, his chariots, and his horsemen) unto the midst of the sea,
and it cometh to pass, in the morning watch, that Jehovah looketh unto the camp of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire and of the cloud, and troubleth the camp of the Egyptians,
and turneth aside the wheels of their chariots, and they lead them with difficulty, and the Egyptians say, 'Let us flee from the face of Israel, for Jehovah is fighting for them against the Egyptians.'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Stretch out thy hand toward the sea, and the waters turn back on the Egyptians, on their chariots, and on their horsemen.'
And Moses stretcheth out his hand towards the sea, and the sea turneth back, at the turning of the morning, to its perennial flow, and the Egyptians are fleeing at its coming, and Jehovah shaketh off the Egyptians in the midst of the sea,
and the waters turn back, and cover the chariots and the horsemen, even all the force of Pharaoh, who are coming in after them into the sea — there hath not been left of them even one.
And the sons of Israel have gone on dry land in the midst of the sea, and the waters [are] to them a wall, on their right and on their left;
and Jehovah saveth Israel in that day out of the hand of the Egyptians, and Israel seeth the Egyptians dead on the sea-shore,
and Israel seeth the great hand with which Jehovah hath wrought against the Egyptians, and the people fear Jehovah, and remain stedfast in Jehovah, and in Moses His servant.
Then singeth Moses and the sons of Israel this song to Jehovah, and they speak, saying: — 'I sing to Jehovah, For triumphing He hath triumphed; The horse and its rider He hath thrown into the sea.
My strength and song is JAH, And He is become my salvation: This [is] my God, and I glorify Him; God of my father, and I exalt Him.
Jehovah [is] a man of battle; Jehovah [is] His name.
Chariots of Pharaoh and his force He hath cast into the sea; And the choice of his captains Have sunk in the Red Sea!
The depths do cover them; They went down into the depths as a stone.
Thy right hand, O Jehovah, Is become honourable in power; Thy right hand, O Jehovah, Doth crush an enemy.
And in the abundance of Thine excellency Thou throwest down Thy withstanders, Thou sendest forth Thy wrath — It consumeth them as stubble.
And by the spirit of Thine anger Have waters been heaped together; Stood as a heap have flowings; Congealed have been depths In the heart of a sea.
The enemy said, I pursue, I overtake; I apportion spoil; Filled is my soul with them; I draw out my sword; My hand destroyeth them: —
Thou hast blown with Thy wind The sea hath covered them; They sank as lead in mighty waters.
Who [is] like Thee among the gods, O Jehovah? Who [is] like Thee — honourable in holiness — Fearful in praises — doing wonders?
Thou hast stretched out Thy right hand — Earth swalloweth them!
Thou hast led forth in Thy kindness The people whom Thou hast redeemed. Thou hast led on in Thy strength Unto Thy holy habitation.
Peoples have heard, they are troubled; Pain hath seized inhabitants of Philistia.
Then have chiefs of Edom been troubled: Mighty ones of Moab — Trembling doth seize them! Melted have all inhabitants of Canaan!
Fall on them doth terror and dread; By the greatness of Thine arm They are still as a stone, Till Thy people pass over, O Jehovah; Till the people pass over Whom Thou hast purchased.
Thou dost bring them in, And dost plant them In a mountain of Thine inheritance, A fixed place for Thy dwelling Thou hast made, O Jehovah; A sanctuary, O Lord, Thy hands have established;
Jehovah reigneth — to the age, and for ever!'
For the horse of Pharaoh hath gone in with his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea, and Jehovah turneth back on them the waters of the sea, and the sons of Israel have gone on dry land in the midst of the sea.
And Miriam the inspired one, sister of Aaron, taketh the timbrel in her hand, and all the women go out after her, with timbrels and with choruses;
and Miriam answereth to them: — 'Sing ye to Jehovah, For Triumphing He hath triumphed; The horse and its rider He hath thrown into the sea!'
And Moses causeth Israel to journey from the Red Sea, and they go out unto the wilderness of Shur, and they go three days in the wilderness, and have not found water,
and they come in to Marah, and have not been able to drink the waters of Marah, for they [are] bitter; therefore hath [one] called its name Marah.
And the people murmur against Moses, saying, 'What do we drink?'
and he crieth unto Jehovah, and Jehovah sheweth him a tree, and he casteth unto the waters, and the waters become sweet. There He hath made for them a statute, and an ordinance, and there He hath tried them,
and He saith, 'If thou dost really hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God, and dost that which is right in His eyes, and hast hearkened to His commands, and kept all His statutes: none of the sickness which I laid on the Egyptians do I lay on thee, for I, Jehovah, am healing thee.
And they come to Elim, and there [are] twelve fountains of water, and seventy palm trees; and they encamp there by the waters.
And they journey from Elim, and all the company of the sons of Israel come in unto the wilderness of Sin, which [is] between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month of their going out from the land of Egypt.
And all the company of the sons of Israel murmur against Moses and against Aaron in the wilderness;
and the sons of Israel say unto them, 'Oh that we had died by the hand of Jehovah in the land of Egypt, in our sitting by the flesh-pot, in our eating bread to satiety — for ye have brought us out unto this wilderness to put all this assembly to death with hunger.'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Lo, I am raining to you bread from the heavens — and the people have gone out and gathered the matter of a day in its day — so that I try them whether they walk in My law, or not;
and it hath been on the sixth day, that they have prepared that which they bring in, and it hath been double above that which they gather day [by] day.'
And Moses saith — Aaron also — unto all the sons of Israel, 'Evening — and ye have known that Jehovah hath brought you out from the land of Egypt;
and morning — and ye have seen the honour of Jehovah, in His hearing your murmurings against Jehovah, and what [are] we, that ye murmur against us?'
And Moses saith, 'In Jehovah's giving to you in the evening flesh to eat, and bread in the morning to satiety — in Jehovah's hearing your murmurings, which ye are murmuring against Him, and what [are] we? your murmurings [are] not against us, but against Jehovah.'
And Moses saith unto Aaron, 'Say unto all the company of the sons of Israel, Come ye near before Jehovah, for He hath heard your murmurings;'
and it cometh to pass, when Aaron is speaking unto all the company of the sons of Israel, that they turn towards the wilderness, and lo, the honour of Jehovah is seen in the cloud.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'I have heard the murmurings of the sons of Israel; speak unto them, saying, Between the evenings ye eat flesh, and in the morning ye are satisfied [with] bread, and ye have known that I [am] Jehovah your God.'
And it cometh to pass in the evening, that the quail cometh up, and covereth the camp, and in the morning there hath been the lying of dew round about the camp,
and the lying of the dew goeth up, and lo, on the face of the wilderness a thin, bare thing, thin as hoar-frost on the earth.
And the sons of Israel see, and say one unto another, 'What [is] it?' for they have not known what it [is]; and Moses saith unto them, 'It [is] the bread which Jehovah hath given to you for food.
'This [is] the thing which Jehovah hath commanded: Gather of it each according to his eating, an omer for a poll; and the number of your persons, take ye each for those in his tent.'
And the sons of Israel do so, and they gather, he who is [gathering] much, and he who is [gathering] little;
and they measure with an omer, and he who is [gathering] much hath nothing over, and he who is [gathering] little hath no lack, each according to his eating they have gathered.
And Moses saith unto them, 'Let no man leave of it till morning;'
and they have not hearkened unto Moses, and some of them do leave of it till morning, and it bringeth up worms and stinketh; and Moses is wroth with them.
And they gather it morning by morning, each according to his eating; when the sun hath been warm, then it hath melted.
And it cometh to pass on the sixth day, they have gathered a second bread, two omers for one, and all the princes of the company come in, and declare to Moses.
And he saith unto them, 'It [is] that which Jehovah hath spoken [of]; a rest — a holy sabbath to Jehovah — [is] to-morrow; that which ye bake, bake; and that which ye boil, boil; and all that is over, let rest for yourselves in charge till the morning.'
And they let it rest until the morning, as Moses hath commanded, and it hath not stank, and a worm hath not been in it.
And Moses saith, 'Eat it to-day, for to-day [is] a sabbath to Jehovah; to-day ye find it not in the field:
six days ye do gather it, and in the seventh day — the sabbath — in it there is none.'
And it cometh to pass on the seventh day, some of the people have gone out to gather, and have not found.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'How long have ye refused to keep My commands, and My laws?
see, because Jehovah hath given to you the sabbath, therefore He is giving to you on the sixth day bread of two days; abide ye each [in] his place, no one doth go out from his place on the seventh day.'
And the people rest on the seventh day,
and the house of Israel call its name Manna, and it [is] as coriander seed, white; and its taste [is] as a cake with honey.
And Moses saith, 'This [is] the thing which Jehovah hath commanded: Fill the omer with it, for a charge for your generations, so that they see the bread which I have caused you to eat in the wilderness, in My bringing you out from the land of Egypt.'
And Moses saith unto Aaron, 'Take one pot, and put there the fulness of the omer of manna, and let it rest before Jehovah, for a charge for your generations;'
as Jehovah hath given commandment unto Moses, so doth Aaron let it rest before the Testimony, for a charge.
And the sons of Israel have eaten the manna forty years, until their coming in unto the land to be inhabited; the manna they have eaten till their coming in unto the extremity of the land of Canaan.
and the omer is a tenth of the ephah.
And all the company of the sons of Israel journey from the wilderness of Sin, on their journeyings, by the command of Jehovah, and encamp in Rephidim, and there is no water for the people to drink;
and the people strive with Moses, and say, 'Give us water, and we drink.' And Moses saith to them, 'What? — ye strive with me, what? — ye try Jehovah?'
and the people thirst there for water, and the people murmur against Moses, and say, 'Why [is] this? — thou hast brought us up out of Egypt, to put us to death, also our sons and our cattle, with thirst.'
And Moses crieth to Jehovah, saying, 'What do I to this people? yet a little, and they have stoned me.'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Pass over before the people, and take with thee of the elders of Israel, and thy rod with which thou hast smitten the River take in thy hand, and thou hast gone:
Lo, I am standing before thee there on the rock in Horeb, and thou hast smitten on the rock, and waters have come out from it, and the people have drunk.' And Moses doth so before the eyes of the elders of Israel,
and he calleth the name of the place Massah, and Meribah, because of the 'strife' of the sons of Israel, and because of their 'trying' Jehovah, saying, 'Is Jehovah in our midst or not?'
And Amalek cometh, and fighteth with Israel in Rephidim,
and Moses saith unto Joshua, 'Choose for us men, and go out, fight with Amalek: to-morrow I am standing on the top of the hill, and the rod of God in my hand.'
And Joshua doth as Moses hath said to him, to fight with Amalek, and Moses, Aaron, and Hur, have gone up [to] the top of the height;
and it hath come to pass, when Moses lifteth up his hand, that Israel hath been mighty, and when he letteth his hands rest, that Amalek hath been mighty.
And the hands of Moses [are] heavy, and they take a stone, and set [it] under him, and he sitteth on it: and Aaron and Hur have taken hold on his hands, on this side one, and on that one, and his hands are stedfast till the going in of the sun;
and Joshua weakeneth Amalek and his people by the mouth of the sword.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Write this, a memorial in a Book, and set [it] in the ears of Joshua, that I do utterly wipe away the remembrance of Amalek from under the heavens;'
and Moses buildeth an altar, and calleth its name Jehovah-Nissi,
and saith, 'Because a hand [is] on the throne of Jah, war [is] to Jehovah with Amalek from generation — generation.'
And Jethro priest of Midian, father-in-law of Moses, heareth all that God hath done for Moses, and for Israel his people, that Jehovah hath brought out Israel from Egypt,
and Jethro, father-in-law of Moses, taketh Zipporah, wife of Moses, besides her parents,
and her two sons, of whom the name of the one [is] Gershom, for he said, 'a sojourner I have been in a strange land:'
and the name of the other [is] Eliezer, for, 'the God of my father [is] for my help, and doth deliver me from the sword of Pharaoh.'
And Jethro, father-in-law of Moses, cometh, and his sons, and his wife, unto Moses, unto the wilderness where he is encamping — the mount of God;
and he saith unto Moses, 'I, thy father-in-law, Jethro, am coming unto thee, and thy wife, and her two sons with her.'
And Moses goeth out to meet his father-in-law, and boweth himself, and kisseth him, and they ask one at another of welfare, and come into the tent;
and Moses recounteth to his father-in-law all that Jehovah hath done to Pharaoh, and to the Egyptians, on account of Israel, all the travail which hath found them in the way, and Jehovah doth deliver them.
And Jethro rejoiceth for all the good which Jehovah hath done to Israel, whom He hath delivered from the hand of the Egyptians;
and Jethro saith, 'Blessed [is] Jehovah, who hath delivered you from the hand of the Egyptians, and from the hand of Pharaoh — who hath delivered this people from under the hand of the Egyptians;
now I have known that Jehovah [is] greater than all the gods, for in the thing they have acted proudly — [He is] above them!'
And Jethro, father-in-law of Moses, taketh a burnt-offering and sacrifices for God; and Aaron cometh in, and all the elders of Israel, to eat bread with the father-in-law of Moses, before God.
And it cometh to pass on the morrow, that Moses sitteth to judge the people, and the people stand before Moses, from the morning unto the evening;
and the father-in-law of Moses seeth all that he is doing to the people, and saith, 'What [is] this thing which thou art doing to the people? wherefore art thou sitting by thyself, and all the people standing by thee from morning till evening?'
And Moses saith to his father-in-law, 'Because the people come unto me to seek God;
when they have a matter, it hath come unto me, and I have judged between a man and his neighbour, and made known the statutes of God, and His laws.'
And the father-in-law of Moses saith unto him, 'The thing which thou art doing [is] not good;
thou dost surely wear away, both thou, and this people which [is] with thee, for the thing is too heavy for thee, thou art not able to do it by thyself.
'Now, hearken to my voice, I counsel thee, and God is with thee: be thou for the people over-against God, and thou hast brought in the things unto God;
and thou hast warned them [concerning] the statutes and the laws, and hast made known to them the way in which they go, and the work which they do.
'And thou — thou dost provide out of all the people men of ability, fearing God, men of truth, hating dishonest gain, and hast placed [these] over them, heads of thousands, heads of hundreds, heads of fifties, and heads of tens,
and they have judged the people at all times; and it hath come to pass, every great matter they bring in unto thee, and every small matter they judge themselves; and lighten it from off thyself, and they have borne with thee.
If thou dost this thing, and God hath commanded thee, then thou hast been able to stand, and all this people also goeth in unto its place in peace.'
And Moses hearkeneth to the voice of his father-in-law, and doth all that he said,
and Moses chooseth men of ability out of all Israel, and maketh them chiefs over the people, heads of thousands, heads of hundreds, heads of fifties, and heads of tens,
and they have judged the people at all times; the hard matter they bring in unto Moses, and every small matter they judge themselves.
And Moses sendeth his father-in-law away, and he goeth away unto his own land.
In the third month of the going out of the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt, in this day they have come into the wilderness of Sinai,
and they journey from Rephidim, and enter the wilderness of Sinai, and encamp in the wilderness; and Israel encampeth there before the mount.
And Moses hath gone up unto God, and Jehovah calleth unto him out of the mount, saying, 'Thus dost thou say to the house of Jacob, and declare to the sons of Israel,
Ye — ye have seen that which I have done to the Egyptians, and I bear you on eagles' wings, and bring you in unto Myself.
'And now, if ye really hearken to My voice, then ye have kept My covenant, and been to Me a peculiar treasure more than all the peoples, for all the earth [is] Mine;
and ye — ye are to Me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation: these [are] the words which thou dost speak unto the sons of Israel.'
And Moses cometh, and calleth for the elders of the people, and setteth before them all these words which Jehovah hath commanded him;
and all the people answer together and say, 'All that Jehovah hath spoken we do;' and Moses returneth the words of the people unto Jehovah.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Lo, I am coming unto thee in the thickness of the cloud, so that the people hear in My speaking with thee, and also believe in thee to the age;' and Moses declareth the words of the people unto Jehovah.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Go unto the people; and thou hast sanctified them to-day and to-morrow, and they have washed their garments,
and have been prepared for the third day; for on the third day doth Jehovah come down before the eyes of all the people, on mount Sinai.
'And thou hast made a border [for] the people round about, saying, Take heed to yourselves, going up into the mount, or coming against its extremity; whoever is coming against the mount is certainly put to death;
a hand cometh not against him, for he is certainly stoned or shot through, whether beast or man it liveth not; in the drawing out of the jubilee cornet they go up into the mount.'
And Moses cometh down from the mount unto the people, and sanctifieth the people, and they wash their garments;
and he saith unto the people, 'Be ye prepared for the third day, come not nigh unto a woman.'
And it cometh to pass, on the third day, while it is morning, that there are voices, and lightnings, and a heavy cloud, on the mount, and the sound of a trumpet very strong; and all the people who [are] in the camp do tremble.
And Moses bringeth out the people to meet God from the camp, and they station themselves at the lower part of the mount,
and mount Sinai [is] wholly a smoke from the presence of Jehovah, who hath come down on it in fire, and its smoke goeth up as smoke of the furnace, and the whole mount trembleth exceedingly;
and the sound of the trumpet is going on, and very strong; Moses speaketh, and God doth answer him with a voice.
And Jehovah cometh down on mount Sinai, unto the top of the mount, and Jehovah calleth for Moses unto the top of the mount, and Moses goeth up.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Go down, protest to the people, lest they break through unto Jehovah to see, and many of them have fallen;
and also the priests who are coming nigh unto Jehovah do sanctify themselves, lest Jehovah break forth on them.'
And Moses saith unto Jehovah, 'The people [is] unable to come up unto mount Sinai, for Thou — Thou hast protested to us, saying, Make a border [for] the mount, then thou hast sanctified it.'
And Jehovah saith unto him, 'Go, descend, then thou hast come up, thou, and Aaron with thee; and the priests and the people do not break through, to come up unto Jehovah, lest He break forth upon them.'
And Moses goeth down unto the people, and saith unto them: —
'And God speaketh all these words, saying,
I [am] Jehovah thy God, who hath brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of a house of servants.
'Thou hast no other Gods before Me.
'Thou dost not make to thyself a graven image, or any likeness which [is] in the heavens above, or which [is] in the earth beneath, or which [is] in the waters under the earth.
Thou dost not bow thyself to them, nor serve them: for I, Jehovah thy God, [am] a zealous God, charging iniquity of fathers on sons, on the third [generation], and on the fourth, of those hating Me,
and doing kindness to thousands, of those loving Me and keeping My commands.
'Thou dost not take up the name of Jehovah thy God for a vain thing, for Jehovah acquitteth not him who taketh up His name for a vain thing.
'Remember the Sabbath-day to sanctify it;
six days thou dost labour, and hast done all thy work,
and the seventh day [is] a Sabbath to Jehovah thy God; thou dost not do any work, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, thy man-servant, and thy handmaid, and thy cattle, and thy sojourner who is within thy gates, —
for six days hath Jehovah made the heavens and the earth, the sea, and all that [is] in them, and resteth in the seventh day; therefore hath Jehovah blessed the Sabbath-day, and doth sanctify it.
'Honour thy father and thy mother, so that thy days are prolonged on the ground which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee.
'Thou dost not murder.
'Thou dost not commit adultery.
'Thou dost not steal.
'Thou dost not answer against thy neighbour a false testimony.
'Thou dost not desire the house of thy neighbour, thou dost not desire the wife of thy neighbour, or his man-servant, or his handmaid, or his ox, or his ass, or anything which [is] thy neighbour's.'
And all the people are seeing the voices, and the flames, and the sound of the trumpet, and the mount smoking; and the people see, and move, and stand afar off,
and say unto Moses, 'Speak thou with us, and we hear, and let not God speak with us, lest we die.'
And Moses saith unto the people, 'Fear not, for to try you hath God come, and in order that His fear may be before your faces — that ye sin not.'
And the people stand afar off, and Moses hath drawn nigh unto the thick darkness where God [is].
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Thus dost thou say unto the sons of Israel: Ye — ye have seen that from the heavens I have spoken with you;
ye do not make with Me gods of silver, even gods of gold ye do not make to yourselves.
'An altar of earth thou dost make for Me, and thou hast sacrificed on it thy burnt-offerings and thy peace-offerings, thy flock and thy herd; in every place where I cause My name to be remembered I come in unto thee, and have blessed thee.
'And if an altar of stones thou dost make to Me, thou dost not build them of hewn work; when thy tool thou hast waved over it, then thou dost pollute it;
neither dost thou go up by steps on Mine altar, that thy nakedness be not revealed upon it.
'And these [are] the judgments which thou dost set before them:
'When thou buyest a Hebrew servant — six years he doth serve, and in the seventh he goeth out as a freeman for nought;
if by himself he cometh in, by himself he goeth out; if he [is] owner of a wife, then his wife hath gone out with him;
if his lord give to him a wife, and she hath borne to him sons or daughters — the wife and her children are her lord's, and he goeth out by himself.
'And if the servant really say: I have loved my lord, my wife, and my sons — I do not go out free;
then hath his lord brought him nigh unto God, and hath brought him nigh unto the door, or unto the side-post, and his lord hath bored his ear with an awl, and he hath served him — to the age.
'And when a man selleth his daughter for a handmaid, she doth not go out according to the going out of the men-servants;
if evil in the eyes of her lord, so that he hath not betrothed her, then he hath let her be ransomed; to a strange people he hath not power to sell her, in his dealing treacherously with her.
'And if to his son he betroth her, according to the right of daughters he doth to her.
'If another [woman] he take for him, her food, her covering, and her habitation, he doth not withdraw;
and if these three he do not to her, then she hath gone out for nought, without money.
'He who smiteth a man so that he hath died, is certainly put to death;
as to him who hath not laid wait, and God hath brought to his hand, I have even set for thee a place whither he doth flee.
'And when a man doth presume against his neighbour to slay him with subtilty, from Mine altar thou dost take him to die.
'And he who smiteth his father or his mother is certainly put to death.
'And he who stealeth a man, and hath sold him, and he hath been found in his hand, is certainly put to death.
'And he who is reviling his father or his mother is certainly put to death.
'And when men contend, and a man hath smitten his neighbour with a stone, or with the fist, and he die not, but hath fallen on the bed;
if he rise, and hath gone up and down without on his staff, then hath the smiter been acquitted; only his cessation he giveth, and he is thoroughly healed.
'And when a man smiteth his man-servant or his handmaid, with a rod, and he hath died under his hand — he is certainly avenged;
only if he remain a day, or two days, he is not avenged, for he [is] his money.
'And when men strive, and have smitten a pregnant woman, and her children have come out, and there is no mischief, he is certainly fined, as the husband of the woman doth lay upon him, and he hath given through the judges;
and if there is mischief, then thou hast given life for life,
eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.
'And when a man smiteth the eye of his man-servant, or the eye of his handmaid, and hath destroyed it, as a freeman he doth send him away for his eye;
and if a tooth of his man-servant or a tooth of his handmaid he knock out, as a freeman he doth send him away for his tooth.
'And when an ox doth gore man or woman, and they have died, the ox is certainly stoned, and his flesh is not eaten, and the owner of the ox [is] acquitted;
and if the ox is [one] accustomed to gore heretofore, and it hath been testified to its owner, and he doth not watch it, and it hath put to death a man or woman, the ox is stoned, and its owner also is put to death.
'If atonement is laid upon him, then he hath given the ransom of his life, according to all that is laid upon him;
whether it gore a son or gore a daughter, according to this judgment it is done to him.
'If the ox gore a man-servant or a handmaid, thirty silver shekels he doth give to their lord, and the ox is stoned.
'And when a man doth open a pit, or when a man doth dig a pit, and doth not cover it, and an ox or ass hath fallen thither, —
the owner of the pit doth repay, money he doth give back to its owner, and the dead is his.
'And when a man's ox doth smite the ox of his neighbour, and it hath died, then they have sold the living ox, and halved its money, and also the dead one they do halve;
or, it hath been known that the ox is [one] accustomed to gore heretofore, and its owner doth not watch it, he certainly repayeth ox for ox, and the dead is his.
'When a man doth steal an ox or sheep, and hath slaughtered it or sold it, five of the herd he doth repay for the ox, and four of the flock for the sheep.
'If in the breaking through, the thief is found, and he hath been smitten, and hath died, there is no blood for him;
if the sun hath risen upon him, blood [is] for him, he doth certainly repay; if he have nothing, then he hath been sold for his theft;
if the theft is certainly found in his hand alive, whether ox, or ass, or sheep — double he repayeth.
'When a man depastureth a field or vineyard, and hath sent out his beast, and it hath pastured in the field of another, [of] the best of his field, and the best of his vineyard, he doth repay.
'When fire goeth forth, and hath found thorns, and a stack, or the standing corn, or the field, hath been consumed, he who causeth the burning doth certainly repay.
'When a man doth give unto his neighbour silver, or vessels to keep, and it hath been stolen out of the man's house; if the thief is found, he repayeth double.
'If the thief is not found, then the master of the house hath been brought near unto God, whether he hath not put forth his hand against the work of his neighbour;
for every matter of transgression, for ox, for ass, for sheep, for raiment, for any lost thing of which it is said that it is his; unto God cometh the matter of them both; he whom God doth condemn, he repayeth double to his neighbour.
'When a man doth give unto his neighbour an ass, or ox, or sheep, or any beast to keep, and it hath died, or hath been hurt, or taken captive, none seeing —
an oath of Jehovah is between them both, that he hath not put forth his hand against the work of his neighbour, and its owner hath accepted, and he doth not repay;
but if it is certainly stolen from him, he doth repay to its owner;
if it is certainly torn, he bringeth it in — a witness; the torn thing he doth not repay.
'And when a man doth ask [anything] from his neighbour, and it hath been hurt or hath died — its owner not being with it — he doth certainly repay;
if its owner [is] with it, he doth not repay, — if it [is] a hired thing, it hath come for its hire.
'And when a man doth entice a virgin who [is] not betrothed, and hath lain with her, he doth certainly endow her to himself for a wife;
if her father utterly refuse to give her to him, money he doth weigh out according to the dowry of virgins.
'A witch thou dost not keep alive.
'Whoever lieth with a beast is certainly put to death.
'He who is sacrificing to a god, save to Jehovah alone, is devoted.
'And a sojourner thou dost not oppress, nor crush him, for sojourners ye have been in the land of Egypt.
'Any widow or orphan ye do not afflict;
if thou dost really afflict him, surely if he at all cry unto Me, I certainly hear his cry;
and Mine anger hath burned, and I have slain you by the sword, and your wives have been widows, and your sons orphans.
'If thou dost lend My poor people with thee money, thou art not to him as a usurer; thou dost not lay on him usury;
if thou dost at all take in pledge the garment of thy neighbour, during the going in of the sun thou dost return it to him:
for it alone is his covering, it [is] his garment for his skin; wherein doth he lie down? and it hath come to pass, when he doth cry unto Me, that I have heard, for I [am] gracious.
'God thou dost not revile, and a prince among thy people thou dost not curse.
'Thy fulness and thy liquids thou dost not delay; the first-born of thy sons thou dost give to Me;
so thou dost to thine ox, to thy sheep; seven days it is with its dam, on the eighth day thou dost give it to Me.
'And ye are holy men to Me, and flesh torn in the field ye do not eat, to a dog ye do cast it.
'Thou dost not lift up a vain report; thou dost not put thy hand with a wicked man to be a violent witness.
'Thou art not after many to evil, nor dost thou testify concerning a strife, to turn aside after many to cause [others] to turn aside;
and a poor man thou dost not honour in his strife.
'When thou meetest thine enemy's ox or his ass going astray, thou dost certainly turn it back to him;
when thou seest the ass of him who is hating thee crouching under its burden, then thou hast ceased from leaving [it] to it — thou dost certainly leave [it] with him.
'Thou dost not turn aside the judgment of thy needy one in his strife;
from a false matter thou dost keep far off, and an innocent and righteous man thou dost not slay; for I do not justify a wicked man.
'And a bribe thou dost not take; for the bribe bindeth the open -[eyed], and perverteth the words of the righteous.
'And a sojourner thou dost not oppress, and ye — ye have known the soul of the sojourner, for sojourners ye have been in the land of Egypt.
'And six years thou dost sow thy land, and hast gathered its increase;
and the seventh thou dost release it, and hast left it, and the needy of thy people have eaten, and their leaving doth the beast of the field eat; so dost thou to thy vineyard — to thine olive-yard.
'Six days thou dost do thy work, and on the seventh day thou dost rest, so that thine ox and thine ass doth rest, and the son of thine handmaid and the sojourner is refreshed;
and in all that which I have said unto you ye do take heed; and the name of other gods ye do not mention; it is not heard on thy mouth.
'Three times thou dost keep a feast to Me in a year;
the Feast of Unleavened things thou dost keep; seven days thou dost eat unleavened things, as I have commanded thee, at the time appointed [in] the month of Abib; for in it thou hast come forth out of Egypt, and ye do not appear [in] My presence empty;
and the Feast of Harvest, the first fruits of thy works which thou sowest in the field; and the Feast of the In-Gathering, in the outgoing of the year, in thy gathering thy works out of the field.
'Three times in a year do all thy males appear before the face of the Lord Jehovah.
'Thou dost not sacrifice on a fermented thing the blood of My sacrifice, and the fat of My festival doth not remain till morning;
the beginning of the first-fruits of thy ground thou dost bring into the house of Jehovah thy God; thou dost not boil a kid in its mother's milk.
'Lo, I am sending a messenger before thee to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee in unto the place which I have prepared;
be watchful because of his presence, and hearken to his voice, rebel not against him, for he beareth not with your transgression, for My name [is] in his heart;
for, if thou diligently hearken to his voice, and hast done all that which I speak, then I have been at enmity with thine enemies, and have distressed those distressing thee.
'For My messenger goeth before thee, and hath brought thee in unto the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Canaanite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, and I have cut them off.
'Thou dost not bow thyself to their gods, nor serve them, nor do according to their doings, but dost utterly devote them, and thoroughly break their standing pillars.
'And ye have served Jehovah your God, and He hath blessed thy bread and thy water, and I have turned aside sickness from thine heart;
there is not a miscarrying and barren one in thy land; the number of thy days I fulfil:
My terror I send before thee, and I have put to death all the people among whom thou comest, and I have given the neck of all thine enemies unto thee.
'And I have sent the hornet before thee, and it hath cast out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite, from before thee;
I cast them not out from before thee in one year, lest the land be a desolation, and the beast of the field hath multiplied against thee;
little [by] little I cast them out from before thee, till thou art fruitful, and hast inherited the land.
'And I have set thy border from the Red Sea, even unto the sea of the Philistines, and from the wilderness unto the River: for I give into your hand the inhabitants of the land, and thou hast cast them out from before thee;
thou dost not make a covenant with them, and with their gods;
they do not dwell in thy land, lest they cause thee to sin against Me when thou servest their gods, when it becometh a snare to thee.'
And unto Moses He said, 'Come up unto Jehovah, thou, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel, and ye have bowed yourselves afar off;'
and Moses hath drawn nigh by himself unto Jehovah; and they draw not nigh, and the people go not up with him.
And Moses cometh in, and recounteth to the people all the words of Jehovah, and all the judgments, and all the people answer — one voice, and say, 'All the words which Jehovah hath spoken we do.'
And Moses writeth all the words of Jehovah, and riseth early in the morning, and buildeth an altar under the hill, and twelve standing pillars for the twelve tribes of Israel;
and he sendeth the youths of the sons of Israel, and they cause burnt-offerings to ascend, and sacrifice sacrifices of peace-offerings to Jehovah — calves.
And Moses taketh half of the blood, and putteth in basins, and half of the blood hath he sprinkled on the altar;
and he taketh the Book of the Covenant, and proclaimeth in the ears of the people, and they say, 'All that which Jehovah hath spoken we do, and obey.'
And Moses taketh the blood, and sprinkleth on the people, and saith, 'Lo, the blood of the covenant which Jehovah hath made with you, concerning all these things.'
And Moses goeth up, Aaron also, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel,
and they see the God of Israel, and under His feet [is] as the white work of the sapphire, and as the substance of the heavens for purity;
and unto those of the sons of Israel who are near He hath not put forth His hand, and they see God, and eat and drink.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Come up unto Me to the mount, and be there, and I give to thee the tables of stone, and the law, and the command, which I have written to direct them.'
And Moses riseth — Joshua his minister also — and Moses goeth up unto the mount of God;
and unto the elders he hath said, 'Abide ye for us in this [place], until that we turn back unto you, and lo, Aaron and Hur [are] with you — he who hath matters doth come nigh unto them.'
And Moses goeth up unto the mount, and the cloud covereth the mount;
and the honour of Jehovah doth tabernacle on mount Sinai, and the cloud covereth it six days, and He calleth unto Moses on the seventh day from the midst of the cloud.
And the appearance of the honour of Jehovah [is] as a consuming fire on the top of the mount, before the eyes of the sons of Israel;
and Moses goeth into the midst of the cloud, and goeth up unto the mount, and Moses is on the mount forty days and forty nights.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, and they take for Me a heave-offering; from every man whose heart impelleth him ye do take My heave-offering.
'And this [is] the heave-offering which ye take from them; gold, and silver, and brass,
and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and linen, and goats' [hair],
and rams' skins made red, and badgers' skins, and shittim wood,
oil for the light, spices for the anointing oil, and for the perfume of the spices,
shoham stones, and stones for setting for an ephod, and for a breastplate.
'And they have made for Me a sanctuary, and I have tabernacled in their midst;
according to all that which I am shewing thee, the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all its vessels, even so ye do make [it].
'And they have made an ark of shittim wood; two cubits and a half its length, and a cubit and a half its breadth, and a cubit and a half its height;
and thou hast overlaid it [with] pure gold, within and without thou dost overlay it, and thou hast made on it a ring of gold round about.
'And thou hast cast for it four rings of gold, and hast put [them] on its four feet, even two rings on its one side, and two rings on its second side;
and thou hast made staves of shittim wood, and hast overlaid them [with] gold,
and hast brought the staves into the rings on the sides of the ark, to bear the ark by them,
in the rings of the ark are the staves, they are not turned aside from it;
and thou hast put unto the ark the testimony which I give unto thee.
'And thou hast made a mercy-seat of pure gold, two cubits and a half its length, and a cubit and a half its breadth;
and thou hast made two cherubs of gold, beaten work dost thou make them, at the two ends of the mercy-seat;
and make thou one cherub at the end on this side, and one cherub at the end on that; at the mercy-seat ye do make the cherubs on its two ends.
'And the cherubs have been spreading out wings on high, covering the mercy-seat over with their wings, and their faces [are] one towards another — towards the mercy-seat are the faces of the cherubs.
'And thou hast put the mercy-seat on the ark above, and unto the ark thou dost put the testimony which I give unto thee;
and I have met with thee there, and have spoken with thee from off the mercy-seat (from between the two cherubs, which [are] on the ark of the testimony) all that which I command thee concerning the sons of Israel.
'And thou hast made a table of shittim wood, two cubits its length, and a cubit its breadth, and a cubit and a half its height,
and hast overlaid it [with] pure gold, and hast made for it a crown of gold round about,
and hast made for it a border of a handbreadth round about, and hast made a crown of gold to its border round about.
'And thou hast made to it four rings of gold, and hast put the rings on the four corners, which [are] to its four feet;
over-against the border are the rings for places for staves to bear the table;
and thou hast made the staves of shittim wood, and hast overlaid them with gold, and the table hath been borne with them;
and thou hast made its dishes, and its bowls, and its covers, and its cups, with which they pour out; of pure gold thou dost make them;
and thou hast put on the table bread of the presence before Me continually.
'And thou hast made a candlestick of pure gold, of beaten work is the candlestick made; its base, and its branch, its calyxes, its knops, and its flowers are of the same;
and six branches are coming out of its sides, three branches of the candlestick out of the one side, and three branches of the candlestick out of the second side;
three calyxes made like almonds in the one branch, a knop and a flower, and three calyxes made like almonds in one branch, a knop and a flower; so for the six branches which are coming out from the candlestick.
'And in the candlestick [are] four calyxes made like almonds, its knops and its flowers;
and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, [are] to the six branches which are coming out of the candlestick;
their knops and their branches are of the same, all of it one beaten work of pure gold;
and thou hast made its seven lamps, and [one] hath caused its lights to go up, and it hath given light over-against its front.
'And its snuffers and its snuff dishes [are] of pure gold;
of a talent of pure gold he doth make it, with all these vessels.
And see thou and do [them] by their pattern which thou art shewn in the mount.
'And thou dost make the tabernacle: ten curtains of twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet; [with] cherubs, work of a designer, thou dost make them;
the length of the one curtain [is] eight and twenty by the cubit, and the breadth of the one curtain four by the cubit, one measure [is] to all the curtains;
five of the curtains are joining one unto another, and five curtains are joining one to another.
'And thou hast made loops of blue upon the edge of the one curtain, at the end in the joining; and so thou makest in the edge of the outermost curtain, in the joining of the second.
fifty loops thou dost make in the one curtain, and fifty loops thou dost make in the edge of the curtain which [is] in the joining of the second, causing the loops to take hold one unto another;
and thou hast made fifty hooks of gold, and hast joined the curtains one to another by the hooks, and the tabernacle hath been one.
'And thou hast made curtains of goats' [hair], for a tent over the tabernacle; thou dost make eleven curtains:
the length of the one curtain [is] thirty by the cubit, and the breadth of the one curtain four by the cubit; one measure [is] to the eleven curtains;
and thou hast joined the five curtains apart, and the six curtains apart, and hast doubled the six curtains over-against the front of the tent.
'And thou hast made fifty loops on the edge of the one curtain, the outermost in the joining, and fifty loops on the edge of the curtain which is joining the second;
and thou hast made fifty hooks of brass, and hast brought in the hooks into the loops, and hast joined the tent, and it hath been one.
'And the superfluity in the curtains of the tent — the half of the curtain which is superfluous — hath spread over the hinder part of the tabernacle;
and the cubit on this side, and the cubit on that, in the superfluity in the length of the curtains of the tent, is spread out over the sides of the tabernacle, on this and on that, to cover it;
and thou hast made a covering for the tent, of rams' skins made red, and a covering of badgers' skins above.
'And thou hast made the boards for the tabernacle, of shittim wood, standing up;
ten cubits [is] the length of the board, and a cubit and a half the breadth of the one board;
two handles [are] to the one board, joined one unto another; so thou dost make for all the boards of the tabernacle;
and thou hast made the boards of the tabernacle: twenty boards for the south side southward;
and forty sockets of silver thou dost make under the twenty boards, two sockets under the one board for its two handles, and two sockets under the other board for its two handles.
'And for the second side of the tabernacle, for the north side, [are] twenty boards,
and their forty sockets of silver, two sockets under the one board, and two sockets under another board.
And for the sides of the tabernacle westward, thou dost make six boards.
And two boards thou dost make for the corners of the tabernacle in the two sides.
And they are pairs beneath, and together they are pairs above its head unto the one ring; so is it for them both, they are for the two corners.
And they have been eight boards, and their sockets of silver [are] sixteen sockets, two sockets under the one board, and two sockets under another board.
'And thou hast made bars of shittim wood: five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,
and five bars for the boards of the second side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the side of the tabernacle at the two sides, westward;
and one hath caused the middle bar in the midst of the boards to reach from end unto end;
and the boards thou dost overlay [with] gold, and their rings thou dost make of gold places for bars, and hast overlaid their bars with gold;
and thou hast raised up the tabernacle according to its fashion which thou hast been shewn in the mount.
'And thou hast made a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen, work of a designer; he maketh it [with] cherubs;
and thou hast put it on four pillars of shittim wood, overlaid [with] gold, their pegs [are] of gold, on four sockets of silver.
'And thou hast put the vail under the hooks, and hast brought in thither within the vail the ark of the testimony; and the vail hath made a separation for you between the holy and the holy of holies.
'And thou hast put the mercy-seat on the ark of the testimony, in the holy of holies.
'And thou hast set the table at the outside of the vail, and the candlestick over-against the table on the side of the tabernacle southward, and the table thou dost put on the north side.
'And thou hast made a covering for the opening of the tent, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen, work of an embroiderer;
and thou hast made for the covering five pillars of shittim [wood], and hast overlaid them [with] gold, their pegs [are] of gold, and thou hast cast for them five sockets of brass.
'And thou hast made the altar of shittim wood, five cubits the length, and five cubits the breadth — the altar is square — and three cubits its height.
And thou hast made its horns on its four corners, its horns are of the same, and thou hast overlaid it [with] brass.
And thou hast made its pots to remove its ashes, and its shovels, and its bowls, and its forks, and its fire-pans, even all its vessels thou dost make of brass.
'And thou hast made for it a grate of net-work of brass, and hast made on the net four rings of brass on its four extremities,
and hast put it under the compass of the altar beneath, and the net hath been unto the middle of the altar.
'And thou hast made staves for the altar, staves of shittim wood, and hast overlaid them [with] brass.
And the staves have been brought into the rings, and the staves have been on the two sides of the altar in bearing it.
Hollow with boards thou dost make it, as it hath been shewed thee in the mount, so do they make [it].
'And thou hast made the court of the tabernacle: for the south side southward, hangings for the court of twined linen, a hundred by the cubit [is] the length for the one side,
and its twenty pillars and their twenty sockets [are] of brass, the pegs of the pillars and their fillets [are] of silver;
and so for the north side in length, hangings of a hundred [cubits] in length, and its twenty pillars and their twenty sockets [are] of brass, the pegs of the pillars and their fillets [are] of silver.
'And [for] the breadth of the court at the west side [are] hangings of fifty cubits, their pillars ten, and their sockets ten.
And [for] the breadth of the court at the east side, eastward, [are] fifty cubits.
And the hangings at the side [are] fifteen cubits, their pillars three, and their sockets three.
And at the second side [are] hangings fifteen [cubits], their pillars three, and their sockets three.
'And for the gate of the court a covering of twenty cubits, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen, work of an embroiderer; their pillars four, their sockets four.
All the pillars of the court round about [are] filleted [with] silver, their pegs [are] silver, and their sockets brass.
'The length of the court [is] a hundred by the cubit, and the breadth fifty by fifty, and the height five cubits, of twined linen, and their sockets [are] brass,
even all the vessels of the tabernacle, in all its service, and all its pins, and all the pins of the court, [are] brass.
'And thou — thou dost command the sons of Israel, and they bring unto thee pure beaten olive oil for the light, to cause the lamp to go up continually;
in the tent of meeting, at the outside of the vail, which [is] over the testimony, doth Aaron — his sons also — arrange it from evening till morning before Jehovah — a statute age-during to their generations, from the sons of Israel.
'And thou, bring thou near unto thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from the midst of the sons of Israel, for his being priest to Me, [even] Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, sons of Aaron;
and thou hast made holy garments for Aaron thy brother, for honour and for beauty;
and thou — thou dost speak unto all the wise of heart, whom I have filled [with] a spirit of wisdom, and they have made the garments of Aaron to sanctify him for his being priest to Me.
'And these [are] the garments which they make: a breastplate, and an ephod, and an upper robe, and an embroidered coat, a mitre, and a girdle; yea, they have made holy garments for Aaron thy brother, and for his sons, for his being priest to Me.
'And they take the gold, and the blue, and the purple, and the scarlet, and the linen,
and have made the ephod of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen, work of a designer;
it hath two shoulders joining at its two ends, and it is joined.
'And the girdle of his ephod which [is] on him, according to its work, is of the same, of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen.
'And thou hast taken the two shoham stones, and hast opened on them the names of the sons of Israel;
six of their names on the one stone, and the names of the remaining six on the second stone, according to their births;
the work of an engraver in stone, openings of a signet, thou dost open the two stones by the names of the sons of Israel; turned round, embroidered [with] gold, thou dost make them.
'And thou hast set the two stones on the shoulders of the ephod — stones of memorial to the sons of Israel — and Aaron hath borne their names before Jehovah, on his two shoulders, for a memorial.
'And thou hast made embroidered things of gold,
and two chains of pure gold, wreathed work thou dost make them, work of thick bands, and thou hast put the thick chains on the embroidered things.
'And thou hast made a breastplate of judgment, work of a designer; according to the work of the ephod thou dost make it; of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen thou dost make it;
it is square, doubled, a span its length, and a span its breadth.
'And thou hast set in it settings of stone, four rows of stone; a row of sardius, topaz, and carbuncle [is] the first row;
and the second row [is] emerald, sapphire, and diamond;
and the third row [is] opal, agate, and amethyst;
and the fourth row [is] beryl, and onyx, and jasper; embroidered with gold are they in their settings,
and the stones are according to the names of the sons of Israel, twelve, according to their names, openings of a signet, each by his name are they for the twelve tribes.
'And thou hast made on the breastplate wreathed chains, work of thick bands, of pure gold;
and thou hast made on the breastplate two rings of gold, and hast put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate;
and thou hast put the two thick bands of gold on the two rings at the ends of the breastplate;
and the two ends of the two thick bands thou dost put on the two embroidered things, and thou hast put [them] on the shoulders of the ephod over-against its face.
'And thou hast made two rings of gold, and hast set them on the two ends of the breastplate, on its border, which [is] over-against the ephod within;
and thou hast made two rings of gold, and hast put them on the two shoulders of the ephod, beneath, over-against its front, over-against its joining, above the girdle of the ephod,
and they bind the breastplate by its rings unto the rings of the ephod with a ribbon of blue, to be above the girdle of the ephod, and the breastplate is not loosed from the ephod.
'And Aaron hath borne the names of the sons of Israel in the breastplate of judgment, on his heart, in his going in unto the sanctuary, for a memorial before Jehovah continually.
'And thou hast put unto the breastplate of judgment the Lights and the Perfections, and they have been on the heart of Aaron, in his going in before Jehovah, and Aaron hath borne the judgment of the sons of Israel on his heart before Jehovah continually.
'And thou hast made the upper robe of the ephod completely of blue,
and the opening for its head hath been in its midst, a border is to its opening round about, work of a weaver, as the opening of a habergeon there is to it; it is not rent.
'And thou hast made on its hem pomegranates of blue, and purple, and scarlet, on its hem round about, and bells of gold in their midst round about;
a bell of gold and a pomegranate, a bell of gold and a pomegranate [are] on the hems of the upper robe round about.
'And it hath been on Aaron to minister in, and its sound hath been heard in his coming in unto the sanctuary before Jehovah, and in his going out, and he doth not die.
'And thou hast made a flower of pure gold, and hast opened on it — openings of a signet — 'Holy to Jehovah;'
and thou hast put it on a blue ribbon, and it hath been on the mitre — over-against the front of the mitre it is;
and it hath been on the forehead of Aaron, and Aaron hath borne the iniquity of the holy things which the sons of Israel do hallow, even all their holy gifts; and it hath been on his forehead continually for a pleasing thing for them before Jehovah.
'And thou hast embroidered the coat of linen, and hast made a mitre of linen, and a girdle thou dost make — work of an embroiderer.
'And for the sons of Aaron thou dost make coats, and thou hast made for them girdles, yea, bonnets thou dost make for them, for honour and for beauty;
and thou hast clothed Aaron thy brother with them, and his sons with him, and hast anointed them, and hast consecrated their hand, and hast sanctified them, and they have been priests to Me.
'And make thou for them linen trousers to cover the naked flesh: they are from the loins even unto the thighs;
and they have been on Aaron and on his sons, in their going in unto the tent of meeting, or in their drawing nigh unto the altar to minister in the sanctuary, and they do not bear iniquity nor have they died; a statute age-during to him, and to his seed after him.
'And this [is] the thing which thou dost to them, to hallow them, for being priests to Me: Take one bullock, a son of the herd, and two rams, perfect ones,
and bread unleavened, and cakes unleavened anointed with oil, of fine wheaten flour thou dost make them,
and thou hast put them on one basket, and hast brought them near in the basket, also the bullock and the two rams.
'And Aaron and his sons thou dost bring near unto the opening of the tent of meeting, and hast bathed them with water;
and thou hast taken the garments, and hast clothed Aaron with the coat, and the upper robe of the ephod, and the ephod, and the breastplate, and hast girded him with the girdle of the ephod,
and hast set the mitre on his head, and hast put the holy crown on the mitre,
and hast taken the anointing oil, and hast poured [it] on his head, and hast anointed him.
'And his sons thou dost bring near, and hast clothed them [with] coats,
and hast girded them [with] a girdle (Aaron and his sons), and hast bound on them bonnets; and the priesthood hath been theirs by a statute age-during, and thou hast consecrated the hand of Aaron, and the hand of his sons,
and hast brought near the bullock before the tent of meeting, and Aaron hath laid — his sons also — their hands on the head of the bullock.
'And thou hast slaughtered the bullock before Jehovah, at the opening of the tent of meeting,
and hast taken of the blood of the bullock, and hast put [it] on the horns of the altar with thy finger, and all the blood thou dost pour out at the foundation of the altar;
and thou hast taken all the fat which is covering the inwards, and the redundance on the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat which [is] on them, and hast made perfume on the altar;
and the flesh of the bullock, and his skin, and his dung, thou dost burn with fire at the outside of the camp; it [is] a sin-offering.
'And the one ram thou dost take, and Aaron and his sons have laid their hands on the head of the ram,
and thou hast slaughtered the ram, and hast taken its blood, and hast sprinkled [it] on the altar round about,
and the ram thou dost cut into its pieces, and hast washed its inwards, and its legs, and hast put [them] on its pieces, and on its head;
and thou hast made perfume with the whole ram on the altar. It [is] a burnt-offering to Jehovah, a sweet fragrance; a fire-offering it [is] to Jehovah.
'And thou hast taken the second ram, and Aaron hath laid — his sons also — their hands on the head of the ram,
and thou hast slaughtered the ram, and hast taken of its blood, and hast put on the tip of the right ear of Aaron, and on the tip of the right ear of his sons, and on the thumb of their right hand, and on the great toe of their right foot, and hast sprinkled the blood on the altar round about;
and thou hast taken of the blood which [is] on the altar, and of the anointing oil, and hast sprinkled on Aaron, and on his garments, and on his sons, and on the garments of his sons with him, and he hath been hallowed, he, and his garments, and his sons, and the garments of his sons with him.
'And thou hast taken from the ram the fat, and the fat tail, and the fat which is covering the inwards, and the redundance on the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat which [is] on them, and the right leg, for it [is] a ram of consecration,
and one round cake of bread, and one cake of oiled bread, and one thin cake out of the basket of the unleavened things which [is] before Jehovah.
'And thou hast set the whole on the hands of Aaron, and on the hands of his sons, and hast waved them — a wave-offering before Jehovah;
and thou hast taken them out of their hand, and hast made perfume on the altar beside the burnt-offering, for sweet fragrance before Jehovah; a fire-offering it [is] to Jehovah.
'And thou hast taken the breast from the ram of the consecration which [is] for Aaron, and hast waved it — a wave-offering before Jehovah, and it hath become thy portion;
and thou hast sanctified the breast of the wave-offering, and the leg of the heave-offering, which hath been waved, and which hath been lifted up from the ram of the consecration, of that which [is] for Aaron, and of that which [is] for his sons;
and it hath been for Aaron and for his sons, by a statute age-during from the sons of Israel, for it [is] a heave-offering; and it is a heave offering from the sons of Israel, from the sacrifices of their peace-offerings — their heave-offering to Jehovah.
'And the holy garments which are Aaron's, are for his sons after him, to be anointed in them, and to consecrate in them their hand;
seven days doth the priest in his stead (of his sons) put them on, when he goeth in unto the tent of meeting, to minister in the sanctuary.
'And the ram of the consecration thou dost take, and hast boiled its flesh in the holy place;
and Aaron hath eaten — his sons also — the flesh of the ram, and the bread which [is] in the basket, at the opening of the tent of meeting;
and they have eaten those things by which there is atonement to consecrate their hand, to sanctify them; and a stranger doth not eat — for they [are] holy;
and if there be left of the flesh of the consecration or of the bread till the morning, then thou hast burned that which is left with fire; it is not eaten, for it [is] holy.
'And thou hast done thus to Aaron and to his sons, according to all that I have commanded thee; seven days thou dost consecrate their hand;
and a bullock, a sin-offering, thou dost prepare daily for the atonements, and thou hast atoned for the altar, in thy making atonement on it, and hast anointed it to sanctify it;
seven days thou dost make atonement for the altar, and hast sanctified it, and the altar hath been most holy; all that is coming against the altar is holy.
'And this [is] that which thou dost prepare on the altar; two lambs, sons of a year, daily continually;
the one lamb thou dost prepare in the morning, and the second lamb thou dost prepare between the evenings;
and a tenth [deal] of fine flour, mixed with beaten oil, a fourth part of a hin, and a libation, a fourth part of a hin, of wine, [is] for the one lamb.
'And the second lamb thou dost prepare between the evenings; according to the present of the morning, and according to its libation, thou dost prepare for it, for sweet fragrance, a fire-offering, to Jehovah: —
a continual burnt-offering for your generations, at the opening of the tent of meeting, before Jehovah, whither I am met with you, to speak unto thee there,
and I have met there with the sons of Israel, and it hath been sanctified by My honour.
'And I have sanctified the tent of meeting, and the altar, and Aaron and his sons I sanctify for being priests to Me,
and I have tabernacled in the midst of the sons of Israel, and have become their God,
and they have known that I [am] Jehovah their God, who hath brought them out of the land of Egypt, that I may tabernacle in their midst; I [am] Jehovah their God.
'And thou hast made an altar [for] making perfume; [of] shittim wood thou dost make it;
a cubit its length, and a cubit its breadth, (it is square), and two cubits its height; its horns [are] of the same.
'And thou hast overlaid it with pure gold, its top, and its sides round about, and its horns; and thou hast made to it a crown of gold round about;
and two rings of gold thou dost make to it under its crown; on its two ribs thou dost make [them], on its two sides, and they have become places for staves, to bear it with them.
'And thou hast made the staves of shittim wood, and hast overlaid them with gold;
and thou hast put it before the vail, which [is] by the ark of the testimony, before the mercy-seat which [is] over the testimony, whither I am met with thee.
'And Aaron hath made perfume on it, perfume of spices, morning by morning; in his making the lamps right he doth perfume it,
and in Aaron's causing the lamps to go up between the evenings, he doth perfume it; a continual perfume before Jehovah to your generations.
'Ye do not cause strange perfume to go up upon it, and burnt-offering, and present, and libation ye do not pour out on it;
and Aaron hath made atonement on its horns, once in a year, by the blood of the sin-offering of atonements; once in a year doth he make atonement for it, to your generations; it [is] most holy to Jehovah.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'When thou takest up the sum of the sons of Israel for their numbers, then they have given each an atonement [for] his soul to Jehovah in their being numbered, and there is no plague among them in their being numbered.
'This they do give, every one passing over unto those numbered, half a shekel, by the shekel of the sanctuary (the shekel [is] twenty gerahs); half a shekel [is] the heave-offering to Jehovah;
every one passing over unto those numbered, from a son of twenty years and upwards, doth give the heave-offering of Jehovah;
the rich doth not multiply, and the poor doth not diminish from the half-shekel, to give the heave-offering of Jehovah, to make atonement for your souls.
'And thou hast taken the atonement-money from the sons of Israel, and hast given it for the service of the tent of meeting; and it hath been to the sons of Israel for a memorial before Jehovah, to make atonement for your souls.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'And thou hast made a laver of brass (and its base of brass), for washing; and thou hast put it between the tent of meeting and the altar, and hast put water there;
and Aaron and his sons have washed at it their hands and their feet,
in their going in unto the tent of meeting they wash [with] water, and die not; or in their drawing nigh unto the altar to minister, to perfume a fire-offering to Jehovah,
then they have washed their hands and their feet, and they die not, and it hath been to them a statute age-during, to him and to his seed to their generations.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'And thou, take to thyself principal spices, wild honey five hundred [shekels]; and spice-cinnamon, the half of that, two hundred and fifty; and spice-cane two hundred and fifty;
and cassia five hundred, by the shekel of the sanctuary, and olive oil a hin;
and thou hast made it a holy anointing oil, a compound mixture, work of a compounder; it is a holy anointing oil.
'And thou hast anointed with it the tent of meeting, and the ark of the testimony,
and the table and all its vessels, and the candlestick and its vessels, and the altar of perfume,
and the altar of burnt-offering and all its vessels, and the laver and its base;
and thou hast sanctified them, and they have been most holy; all that is coming against them is holy;
and Aaron and his sons thou dost anoint, and hast sanctified them for being priests to Me.
'And unto the sons of Israel thou dost speak, saying, A holy anointing oil is this to Me, to your generations;
on flesh of man it is not poured, and with its proper proportion ye make none like it; it [is] holy; it is holy to you;
a man who compoundeth [any] like it, or who putteth of it on a stranger — hath even been cut off from his people.'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Take to thee spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum, spices and pure frankincense; they are part for part;
and thou hast made it a perfume, a compound, work of a compounder, salted, pure, holy;
and thou hast beaten [some] of it small, and hast put of it before the testimony, in the tent of meeting, whither I am met with thee; most holy it is to you.
'As to the perfume which thou makest, with its proper proportion ye do not make to yourselves, holy it is to thee to Jehovah;
a man who maketh [any] like it — to be refreshed by it — hath even been cut off from his people.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'See, I have called by name Bezaleel, son of Uri, son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah,
and I fill him [with] the Spirit of God, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all work,
to devise devices to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass,
and in graving of stone for settings, and in graving of wood to work in all work.
'And I, lo, I have given with him Aholiab, son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, and in the heart of every wise-hearted one I have given wisdom, and they have made all that which I have commanded thee.
'The tent of meeting, and the ark of testimony, and the mercy-seat which [is] on it, and all the vessels of the tent,
and the table and its vessels, and the pure candlestick and all its vessels, and the altar of the perfume,
and the altar of the burnt-offering and all its vessels, and the laver and its base,
and the coloured garments, and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, for acting as priests in;
and the anointing oil, and the perfume of the spices for the sanctuary; according to all that I have commanded thee — they do.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'And thou, speak unto the sons of Israel, saying, Only, My sabbaths ye do keep, for it [is] a sign between Me and you, to your generations, to know that I, Jehovah, am sanctifying you;
and ye have kept the sabbath, for it [is] holy to you, he who is polluting it is certainly put to death — for any who doeth work in it — that person hath even been cut off from the midst of his people.
'Six days is work done, and in the seventh day [is] a sabbath of holy rest to Jehovah; any who doeth work in the sabbath-day is certainly put to death,
and the sons of Israel have observed the sabbath; to keep the sabbath to their generations [is] a covenant age-during,
between Me and the sons of Israel it [is] a sign — to the age; for six days Jehovah made the heavens and the earth, and in the seventh day He hath ceased, and is refreshed.'
And He giveth unto Moses, when He finisheth speaking with him in mount Sinai, two tables of the testimony, tables of stone, written by the finger of God.
And the people see that Moses is delaying to come down from the mount, and the people assemble against Aaron, and say unto him, 'Rise, make for us gods who go before us, for this Moses — the man who brought us up out of the land of Egypt — we have not known what hath happened to him.'
And Aaron saith unto them, 'Break off the rings of gold which [are] in the ears of your wives, your sons, and your daughters, and bring in unto me;'
and all the people themselves break off the rings of gold which [are] in their ears, and bring in unto Aaron,
and he receiveth from their hand, and doth fashion it with a graving tool, and doth make it a molten calf, and they say, 'These thy gods, O Israel, who brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.'
And Aaron seeth, and buildeth an altar before it, and Aaron calleth, and saith, 'A festival to Jehovah — to-morrow;'
and they rise early on the morrow, and cause burnt-offerings to ascend, and bring nigh peace-offerings; and the people sit down to eat and to drink, and rise up to play.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Go, descend, for thy people whom thou hast brought up out of the land of Egypt hath done corruptly,
they have turned aside hastily from the way that I have commanded them; they have made for themselves a molten calf, and bow themselves to it, and sacrifice to it, and say, These thy gods, O Israel, who brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'I have seen this people, and lo, it [is] a stiff-necked people;
and now, let Me alone, and My anger doth burn against them, and I consume them, and I make thee become a great nation.'
And Moses appeaseth the face of Jehovah his God, and saith, 'Why, O Jehovah, doth Thine anger burn against Thy people, whom Thou hast brought forth out of the land of Egypt with great power and with a strong hand?
why do the Egyptians speak, saying, For evil He brought them out to slay them among mountains, and to consume them from off the face of the ground? turn back from the heat of Thine anger, and repent of the evil against Thy people.
'Be mindful of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel, Thy servants, to whom Thou hast sworn by Thyself, and unto whom Thou speakest: I multiply your seed as stars of the heavens, and all this land, as I have said, I give to your seed, and they have inherited to the age;'
and Jehovah repenteth of the evil which He hath spoken of doing to His people.
And Moses turneth, and goeth down from the mount, and the two tables of the testimony [are] in his hand, tables written on both their sides, on this and on that [are] they written;
and the tables are the work of God, and the writing is the writing of God, graven on the tables.
And Joshua heareth the voice of the people in their shouting, and saith unto Moses, 'A noise of battle in the camp!'
and he saith, 'It is not the voice of the crying of might, nor is it the voice of the crying of weakness — a voice of singing I am hearing.'
And it cometh to pass, when he hath drawn near unto the camp, that he seeth the calf, and the dancing, and the anger of Moses burneth, and he casteth out of his hands the tables, and breaketh them under the mount;
and he taketh the calf which they have made, and burneth [it] with fire, and grindeth until [it is] small, and scattereth on the face of the waters, and causeth the sons of Israel to drink.
And Moses saith unto Aaron, 'What hath this people done to thee, that thou hast brought in upon it a great sin?'
and Aaron saith, 'Let not the anger of my lord burn; thou — thou hast known the people that it [is] in evil;
and they say to me, Make for us gods, who go before us, for this Moses — the man who brought us up out of the land of Egypt — we have not known what hath happened to him;
and I say to them, Whoso hath gold, let them break [it] off, and they give to me, and I cast it into the fire, and this calf cometh out.'
And Moses seeth the people that it [is] unbridled, for Aaron hath made it unbridled for contempt among its withstanders,
and Moses standeth in the gate of the camp, and saith, 'Who [is] for Jehovah? — unto me!' and all the sons of Levi are gathered unto him;
and he saith to them, 'Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, Put each his sword by his thigh, pass over and turn back from gate to gate through the camp, and slay each his brother, and each his friend, and each his relation.'
And the sons of Levi do according to the word of Moses, and there fall of the people on that day about three thousand men,
and Moses saith, 'Consecrate your hand to-day to Jehovah, for a man [is] against his son, and against his brother, so as to bring on you to-day a blessing.'
And it cometh to pass, on the morrow, that Moses saith unto the people, 'Ye — ye have sinned a great sin, and now I go up unto Jehovah, if so be I atone for your sin.'
And Moses turneth back unto Jehovah, and saith, 'Oh this people hath sinned a great sin, that they make to themselves a god of gold;
and now, if Thou takest away their sin — and if not — blot me, I pray thee, out of Thy book which Thou hast written.'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Whoso hath sinned against Me — I blot him out of My book;
and now, go, lead the people whithersoever I have spoken to thee of; lo, My messenger goeth before thee, and in the day of my charging — then I have charged upon them their sin.'
And Jehovah plagueth the people, because they made the calf which Aaron made.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, 'Go, ascend from this [place], thou and the people, whom thou hast brought up out of the land of Egypt, unto the land which I have sworn to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, To thy seed I give it,'
(and I have sent before thee a messenger, and have cast out the Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite,)
unto a land flowing with milk and honey, for I do not go up in thy midst, for thou [art] a stiff-necked people — lest I consume thee in the way.'
And the people hear this sad thing, and mourn; and none put his ornaments on him.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Say unto the sons of Israel, Ye [are] a stiff-necked people; one moment — I come up into thy midst, and have consumed thee; and now, put down thine ornaments from off thee, and I know what I do to thee;'
and the sons of Israel take off their ornaments at mount Horeb.
And Moses taketh the tent, and hath stretched it out at the outside of the camp, afar off from the camp, and hath called it, 'Tent of Meeting;' and it hath come to pass, every one seeking Jehovah goeth out unto the tent of meeting, which [is] at the outside of the camp.
And it hath come to pass, at the going out of Moses unto the tent, all the people rise, and have stood, each at the opening of his tent, and have looked expectingly after Moses, until his going into the tent.
And it hath come to pass, at the going in of Moses to the tent, the pillar of the cloud cometh down, and hath stood at the opening of the tent, and He hath spoken with Moses;
and all the people have seen the pillar of the cloud standing at the opening of the tent, and all the people have risen and bowed themselves, each at the opening of his tent.
And Jehovah hath spoken unto Moses face unto face, as a man speaketh unto his friend; and he hath turned back unto the camp, and his minister Joshua, son of Nun, a youth, departeth not out of the tent.
And Moses saith unto Jehovah, 'See, Thou art saying unto me, Bring up this people, and Thou hast not caused me to know whom Thou dost send with me; and Thou hast said, I have known thee by name, and also thou hast found grace in Mine eyes.
'And now, if, I pray Thee, I have found grace in Thine eyes, cause me to know, I pray Thee, Thy way, and I know Thee, so that I find grace in Thine eyes, and consider that this nation [is] Thy people;'
and He saith, 'My presence doth go, and I have given rest to thee.'
And he saith unto Him, 'If Thy presence is not going — take us not up from this [place];
and in what is it known now, that I have found grace in Thine eyes — I and Thy people — is it not in Thy going with us? and we have been distinguished — I and Thy people — from all the people who [are] on the face of the ground.'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Even this thing which thou hast spoken I do; for thou hast found grace in Mine eyes, and I know thee by name.'
And he saith, 'Shew me, I pray Thee, Thine honour;'
and He saith, 'I cause all My goodness to pass before thy face, and have called concerning the Name of Jehovah before thee, and favoured him whom I favour, and loved him whom I love.'
He saith also, 'Thou art unable to see My face, for man doth not see Me, and live;'
Jehovah also saith, 'Lo, a place [is] by Me, and thou hast stood on the rock,
and it hath come to pass, in the passing by of Mine honour, that I have set thee in a cleft of the rock, and spread out My hands over thee, until My passing by,
and I have turned aside My hands, and thou hast seen My back parts, and My face is not seen.'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Hew for thyself two tables of stone like the first, and I have written on the tables the words which were on the first tables which thou hast broken;
and be prepared at morning, and thou hast come up in the morning unto mount Sinai, and hast stood before Me there, on the top of the mount,
and no man cometh up with thee, and also no man is seen in all the mount, also the flock and the herd do not feed over-against that mount.'
And he heweth two tables of stone like the first, and Moses riseth early in the morning, and goeth up unto mount Sinai, as Jehovah commanded him, and he taketh in his hand two tables of stone.
And Jehovah cometh down in a cloud, and stationeth Himself with him there, and calleth in the Name of Jehovah,
and Jehovah passeth over before his face, and calleth: 'Jehovah, Jehovah God, merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in kindness and truth,
keeping kindness for thousands, taking away iniquity, and transgression, and sin, and not entirely acquitting, charging iniquity of fathers on children, and on children's children, on a third [generation], and on a fourth.'
And Moses hasteth, and boweth to the earth, and doth obeisance,
and saith, 'If, I pray Thee, I have found grace in Thine eyes, O my Lord, let my Lord, I pray Thee, go in our midst (for it [is] a stiff-necked people), and thou hast forgiven our iniquity and our sin, and hast inherited us.'
And He saith, 'Lo, I am making a covenant: before all thy people I do wonders, which have not been done in all the earth, or in any nation, and all the people in whose midst thou [art] have seen the work of Jehovah, for it [is] fearful that which I am doing with thee.
'Observe for thyself that which I am commanding thee to-day: lo, I am casting out from before thee the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite;
take heed to thyself, lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitant of the land into which thou art going, lest it become a snare in thy midst;
for their altars ye break down, and their standing pillars ye shiver, and its shrines ye cut down;
for ye do not bow yourselves to another god — for Jehovah, whose name [is] Zealous, is a zealous God.
'Lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitant of the land, and they have gone a-whoring after their gods, and have sacrificed to their gods, and [one] hath called to thee, and thou hast eaten of his sacrifice,
and thou hast taken of their daughters to thy sons, and their daughters have gone a-whoring after their gods, and have caused thy sons to go a-whoring after their gods;
a molten god thou dost not make to thyself.
'The feast of unleavened things thou dost keep; seven days thou dost eat unleavened things, as I have commanded thee, at an appointed time, the month of Abib: for in the month of Abib thou didst come out from Egypt.
'All opening a womb [are] Mine, and every firstling of thy cattle born a male, ox or sheep;
and the firstling of an ass thou dost ransom with a lamb; and if thou dost not ransom, then thou hast beheaded it; every first-born of thy sons thou dost ransom, and they do not appear before Me empty.
'Six days thou dost work, and on the seventh day thou dost rest; in ploughing-time and in harvest thou dost rest.
'And a feast of weeks thou dost observe for thyself; first-fruits of wheat-harvest; and the feast of in-gathering, at the revolution of the year.
'Three times in a year do all thy males appear before the Lord Jehovah, God of Israel;
for I dispossess nations from before thee, and have enlarged thy border, and no man doth desire thy land in thy going up to appear before Jehovah thy God three times in a year.
'Thou dost not slaughter with a fermented thing the blood of My sacrifice; and the sacrifice of the feast of the passover doth not remain till morning:
the first of the first-fruits of the land thou dost bring into the house of Jehovah thy God; thou dost not boil a kid in its mother's milk.'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Write for thyself these words, for, according to the tenor of these words I have made with thee a covenant, and with Israel.'
And he is there with Jehovah forty days and forty nights; bread he hath not eaten, and water he hath not drunk; and he writeth on the tables the matters of the covenant — the ten matters.
And it cometh to pass, when Moses is coming down from mount Sinai (and the two tables of the testimony [are] in the hand of Moses in his coming down from the mount), that Moses hath not known that the skin of his face hath shone in His speaking with him,
and Aaron seeth — all the sons of Israel also — Moses, and lo, the skin of his face hath shone, and they are afraid of coming nigh unto him.
And Moses calleth unto them, and Aaron and all the princes in the company return unto him, and Moses speaketh unto them;
and afterwards have all the sons of Israel come nigh, and he chargeth them with all that Jehovah hath spoken with him in mount Sinai.
And Moses finisheth speaking with them, and putteth on his face a vail;
and in the going in of Moses before Jehovah to speak with Him, he turneth aside the vail until his coming out; and he hath come out and hath spoken unto the sons of Israel that which he is commanded;
and the sons of Israel have seen the face of Moses that the skin of the face of Moses hath shone, and Moses hath put back the vail on his face until his going in to speak with Him.
And Moses assembleth all the company of the sons of Israel, and saith unto them, 'These [are] the things which Jehovah hath commanded — to do them:
Six days is work done, and on the seventh day there is to you a holy [day], a sabbath of rest to Jehovah; any who doeth work in it is put to death;
ye do not burn a fire in any of your dwellings on the sabbath-day.'
And Moses speaketh unto all the company of the sons of Israel, saying, 'This [is] the thing which Jehovah hath commanded, saying,
Take ye from among you a heave-offering to Jehovah; every one whose heart [is] willing doth bring it, — the heave-offering of Jehovah, — gold, and silver, and brass,
and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and linen, and goats' [hair],
and rams' skins made red, and badgers' skins, and shittim wood,
and oil for the light, and spices for the anointing oil, and for the spice perfume,
and shoham stones, and stones for settings, for an ephod, and for a breastplate.
'And all the wise-hearted among you come in, and make all that Jehovah hath commanded:
'The tabernacle, its tent, and its covering, its hooks, and its boards, its bars, its pillars, and its sockets,
'The ark and its staves, the mercy-seat, and the vail of the covering,
'The table and its staves, and all its vessels, and the bread of the presence,
'And the candlestick for the light, and its vessels, and its lamps, and the oil for the light,
'And the altar of perfume, and its staves, and the anointing oil, and the spice perfume, and the covering of the opening at the opening of the tabernacle,
'The altar of burnt-offering and the brazen grate which it hath, its staves, and all its vessels, the laver and its base,
'The hangings of the court, its pillars, and their sockets, and the covering of the gate of the court,
'The pins of the tabernacle, and the pins of the court, and their cords,
'The coloured garments, to do service in the sanctuary, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons to act as priest in.'
And all the company of the sons of Israel go out from the presence of Moses,
and they come in — every man whom his heart hath lifted up, and every one whom his spirit hath made willing — they have brought in the heave-offering of Jehovah for the work of the tent of meeting, and for all its service, and for the holy garments.
And they come in — the men with the women — every willing-hearted one — they have brought in nose-ring, and ear-ring, and seal-ring, and necklace, all golden goods, even every one who hath waved a wave-offering of gold to Jehovah.
And every man with whom hath been found blue, and purple, and scarlet, and linen, and goats' [hair], and rams' skins made red, and badgers' skins, have brought [them] in;
every one lifting up a heave-offering of silver and brass have brought in the heave-offering of Jehovah; and every one with whom hath been found shittim wood for any work of the service brought [it] in.
And every wise-hearted woman hath spun with her hands, and they bring in yarn, the blue, and the purple, the scarlet, and the linen;
and all the women whose heart hath lifted them up in wisdom, have spun the goats' [hair].
And the princes have brought in the shoham stones, and the stones for settings, for the ephod, and for the breastplate,
and the spices, and the oil for the light, and for the anointing oil, and for the spice perfume;
every man and woman (whom their heart hath made willing to bring in for all the work which Jehovah commanded to be done by the hand of Moses) [of] the sons of Israel brought in a willing-offering to Jehovah.
And Moses saith unto the sons of Israel, 'See, Jehovah hath called by name Bezaleel, son of Uri, son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah,
and He doth fill him [with] the Spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all work,
even to devise devices to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass,
and in graving of stones for settings, and in graving of wood to work in any work of design.
'And to direct He hath put in his heart, he and Aholiab, son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan;
He hath filled them with wisdom of heart to do every work, of engraver, and designer, and embroiderer (in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and in linen), and weaver, who do any work, and of designers of designs.
And Bezaleel, and Aholiab, and every wise-hearted man, in whom Jehovah hath given wisdom and understanding to know to do every work of the service of the sanctuary, have done according to all that Jehovah commanded.
And Moses calleth unto Bezaleel, and unto Aholiab, and unto every wise-hearted man in whose heart Jehovah hath given wisdom, every one whom his heart lifted up, to come near unto the work to do it.
And they take from before Moses all the heave-offering which the sons of Israel have brought in for the work of the service of the sanctuary to do it; and still they have brought in unto him a willing-offering morning by morning.
And all the wise men, who are doing all the work of the sanctuary, come each from his work which they are doing,
and speak unto Moses, saying, 'The people are multiplying to bring in more than sufficient for the service of the work which Jehovah commanded to make.'
And Moses commandeth, and they cause a voice to pass over through the camp, saying, 'Let not man or woman make any more work for the heave-offering of the sanctuary;' and the people are restrained from bringing,
and the work hath been sufficient for them, for all the work, to do it, and to leave.
And all the wise-hearted ones among the doers of the work make the tabernacle; ten curtains of twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, [with] cherubs, work of a designer, he hath made them.
The length of the one curtain [is] eight and twenty by the cubit, and the breadth of the one curtain four by the cubit; one measure [is] to all the curtains.
And he joineth the five curtains one unto another, and the [other] five curtains he hath joined one unto another;
and he maketh loops of blue on the edge of the one curtain, at the end, in the joining; so he hath made in the edge of the outmost curtain, in the joining of the second;
fifty loops he hath made in the one curtain, and fifty loops hath he made in the end of the curtain which [is] in the joining of the second; the loops are taking hold one on another.
And he maketh fifty hooks of gold, and joineth the curtains one unto another by the hooks, and the tabernacle is one.
And he maketh curtains of goats' [hair] for a tent over the tabernacle; eleven curtains he hath made them;
the length of the one curtain [is] thirty by the cubit, and the breadth of the one curtain [is] four cubits; one measure [is] to the eleven curtains;
and he joineth the five curtains apart, and the six curtains apart.
And he maketh fifty loops on the outer edge of the curtain, in the joining; and fifty loops he hath made on the edge of the curtain which is joining the second;
and he maketh fifty hooks of brass to join the tent — to be one;
and he maketh a covering for the tent of rams' skins made red, and a covering of badgers' skins above.
And he maketh the boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood, standing up;
ten cubits [is] the length of the [one] board, and a cubit and a half the breadth of the [one] board;
two handles [are] to the one board, joined one unto another; so he hath made for all the boards of the tabernacle.
And he maketh the boards for the tabernacle; twenty boards for the south side southward;
and forty sockets of silver he hath made under the twenty boards, two sockets under the one board for its two handles, and two sockets under the other board for its two handles.
And for the second side of the tabernacle, for the north side, he hath made twenty boards,
and their forty sockets of silver, two sockets under the one board, and two sockets under the other board;
and for the sides of the tabernacle, westward, hath he made six boards;
and two boards hath he made for the corners of the tabernacle, in the two sides;
and they have been twins below, and together they are twins at its head, at the one ring; so he hath done to both of them at the two corners;
and there have been eight boards; and their sockets of silver [are] sixteen sockets, two sockets under the one board.
And he maketh bars of shittim wood, five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,
and five bars for the boards of the second side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the tabernacle, for the sides westward;
and he maketh the middle bar to enter into the midst of the boards from end to end;
and the boards he hath overlaid with gold, and their rings he hath made of gold, places for bars, and he overlayeth the bars with gold.
And he maketh the vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen, work of a designer he hath made it, [with] cherubs;
and he maketh for it four pillars of shittim [wood], and overlayeth them with gold; their pegs [are] of gold; and he casteth for them four sockets of silver.
And he maketh a covering for the opening of the tent, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen, work of an embroiderer,
also its five pillars, and their pegs; and he overlaid their tops and their fillets [with] gold, and their five sockets [are] brass.
And Bezaleel maketh the ark of shittim wood, two cubits and a half its length, and a cubit and a half its breadth, and a cubit and a half its height;
and he overlayeth it with pure gold within and without, and maketh for it a wreath of gold round about;
and he casteth for it four rings of gold, on its four feet, even two rings on its one side, and two rings on its second side;
and he maketh staves of shittim wood, and overlayeth them with gold,
and he bringeth in the staves into the rings, by the sides of the ark, to bear the ark.
And he maketh a mercy-seat of pure gold, two cubits and a half its length, and a cubit and a half its breadth;
and he maketh two cherubs of gold, of beaten work he hath made them, at the two ends of the mercy-seat;
one cherub at the end on this [side], and one cherub at the end on that, out of the mercy-seat he hath made the cherubs, at its two ends;
and the cherubs are spreading out wings on high, covering over the mercy-seat with their wings, and their faces [are] one towards another; towards the mercy-seat have the faces of the cherubs been.
And he maketh the table of shittim wood; two cubits its length, and a cubit its breadth, and a cubit and a half its height,
and overlayeth it with pure gold, and maketh for it a wreath of gold round about.
And he maketh for it a border of a handbreadth round about, and maketh a wreath of gold for its border round about;
and he casteth for it four rings of gold, and putteth the rings on the four corners which [are] to its four feet;
over-against the border have the rings been, places for staves to bear the table.
And he maketh the staves of shittim wood, and overlayeth them with gold, to bear the table;
and he maketh the vessels which [are] upon the table, its dishes, and its bowls, and its cups, and the cups by which they pour out, of pure gold.
And he maketh the candlestick of pure gold; of beaten work he hath made the candlestick, its base, and its branch, its calyxes, its knops, and its flowers, have been of the same;
and six branches are coming out of its sides, three branches of the candlestick out of its one side, and three branches of the candlestick out of its second side;
three calyxes, made like almonds, in the one branch, a knop and a flower; and three calyxes, made like almonds, in another branch, a knop and a flower; so to the six branches which are coming out of the candlestick.
And in the candlestick [are] four calyxes, made like almonds, its knops, and its flowers,
and a knop under the two branches of the same, and a knop under the two branches of the same, and a knop under the two branches of the same, [are] to the six branches which are coming out of it;
their knops and their branches have been of the same; all of it one beaten work of pure gold.
And he maketh its seven lamps, and its snuffers, and its snuff-dishes, of pure gold;
of a talent of pure gold he hath made it, and all its vessels.
And he maketh the perfume-altar of shittim wood; a cubit its length, and a cubit its breadth (square), and two cubits its height; its horns have been of the same;
and he overlayeth it with pure gold, its top and its sides round about, and its horns; and he maketh for it a wreath of gold round about;
and two rings of gold he hath made for it under its wreath, at its two corners, at its two sides, for places for staves to bear it with them.
And he maketh the staves of shittim wood, and overlayeth them with gold;
and he maketh the holy anointing oil, and the pure spice-perfume — work of a compounder.
And he maketh the altar of burnt-offering of shittim wood, five cubits its length, and five cubits its breadth (square), and three cubits its height;
and he maketh its horns on its four corners; its horns have been of the same; and he overlayeth it with brass;
and he maketh all the vessels of the altar, the pots, and the shovels, and the sprinkling-pans, the forks, and the fire-pans; all its vessels he hath made of brass.
And he maketh for the altar a brazen grate of net-work, under its border beneath, unto its midst;
and he casteth four rings for the four ends of the brazen grate — places for bars;
and he maketh the staves of shittim wood, and overlayeth them with brass;
and he bringeth in the staves into the rings on the sides of the altar, to bear it with them; hollow [with] boards he made it.
And he maketh the laver of brass, and its base of brass, with the looking-glasses of the women assembling, who have assembled at the opening of the tent of meeting.
And he maketh the court; at the south side southward, the hangings of the court of twined linen, a hundred by the cubit,
their pillars [are] twenty, and their brazen sockets twenty, the pegs of the pillars and their fillets [are] silver;
and at the north side, a hundred by the cubit, their pillars [are] twenty, and their sockets of brass twenty; the pegs of the pillars and their fillets [are] silver;
and at the west side [are] hangings, fifty by the cubit; their pillars [are] ten, and their sockets ten; the pegs of the pillars and their fillets [are] silver;
and at the east side eastward fifty cubits.
The hangings on the side [are] fifteen cubits, their pillars three, and their sockets three,
and at the second side at the gate of the court, on this and on that, [are] hangings, fifteen cubits, their pillars three, and their sockets three;
all the hangings of the court round about [are] of twined linen,
and the sockets for the pillars of brass, the pegs of the pillars and their fillets of silver, and the overlaying of their tops of silver, and all the pillars of the court are filleted with silver.
And the covering of the gate of the court [is] the work of an embroiderer, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen; and twenty cubits [is] the length, and the height with the breadth five cubits, over-against the hangings of the court;
and their pillars [are] four, and their sockets of brass four, their pegs [are] of silver, and the overlaying of their tops and their fillets [are] of silver;
and all the pins for the tabernacle, and for the court round about, [are] of brass.
These are the numberings of the tabernacle (the tabernacle of testimony), which hath been numbered by the command of Moses, the service of the Levites, by the hand of Ithamar son of Aaron the priest.
And Bezaleel son of Uri, son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, hath made all that Jehovah commanded Moses;
and with him [is] Aholiab son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an engraver, and designer, and embroiderer in blue, and in purple, and in scarlet, and in linen.
All the gold which is prepared for the work in all the work of the sanctuary (and it is the gold of the wave-offering) [is] twenty and nine talents, and seven hundred and thirty shekels, by the shekel of the sanctuary.
And the silver of those numbered of the company [is] a hundred talents, and a thousand and seven hundred and five and seventy shekels, by the shekel of the sanctuary;
a bekah for a poll (half a shekel, by the shekel of the sanctuary,) for every one who is passing over unto those numbered, from a son of twenty years and upwards, for six hundred thousand, and three thousand, and five hundred and fifty.
And a hundred talents of silver are to cast the sockets of the sanctuary, and the sockets of the vail; a hundred sockets for the hundred talents, a talent for a socket;
and the thousand and seven hundred and five and seventy he hath made pegs for the pillars, and overlaid their tops, and filleted them.
And the brass of the wave-offering [is] seventy talents, and two thousand and four hundred shekels;
and he maketh with it the sockets of the opening of the tent of meeting, and the brazen altar, and the brazen grate which it hath, and all the vessels of the altar,
and the sockets of the court round about, and the sockets of the gate of the court, and all the pins of the tabernacle, and all the pins of the court round about.
And of the blue, and the purple, and the scarlet, they made coloured garments, to minister in the sanctuary; and they make the holy garments which [are] for Aaron, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And he maketh the ephod, of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen,
and they expand the plates of gold, and have cut off wires to work in the midst of the blue, and in the midst of the purple, and in the midst of the scarlet, and in the midst of the linen — work of a designer;
shoulder-pieces they have made for it, joining; at its two ends it is joined.
And the girdle of his ephod which [is] on it is of the same, according to its work, of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And they prepare the shoham stones, set, embroidered [with] gold, opened with openings of a signet, by the names of the sons of Israel;
and he setteth them on the shoulders of the ephod — stones of memorial for the sons of Israel, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And he maketh the breastplate, work of a designer, like the work of the ephod, of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen;
it hath been square; double they have made the breastplate, a span its length, and a span its breadth, doubled.
And they fill in it four rows of stones; a row of a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle [is] the one row;
and the second row an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond;
and the third row an opal, an agate, and an amethyst;
and the fourth row a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper — set, embroidered [with] gold, in their settings.
And the stones, according to the names of the sons of Israel, are twelve, according to their names, openings of a signet, each according to his name, for the twelve tribes.
And they make on the breastplate wreathed chains, work of thick bands, of pure gold;
and they make two embroidered things of gold, and two rings of gold, and put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate,
and they put the two thick bands of gold on the two rings on the ends of the breastplate;
and the two ends of the two thick bands they have put on the two embroidered things, and they put them on the shoulders of the ephod, over-against its front.
And they make two rings of gold, and set [them] on the two ends of the breastplate, on its border, which [is] on the side of the ephod within;
and they make two rings of gold, and put them on the two shoulders of the ephod below, over-against its front, over-against its joining, above the girdle of the ephod;
and they bind the breastplate by its rings unto the rings of the ephod, with a ribbon of blue, to be above the girdle of the ephod, and the breastplate is not loosed from off the ephod, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And he maketh the upper robe of the ephod, work of a weaver, completely of blue;
and the opening of the upper robe [is] in its midst, as the opening of a habergeon, a border [is] to its opening round about, it is not rent;
and they make on the hems of the upper robe pomegranates of blue, and purple, and scarlet, twined.
And they make bells of pure gold, and put the bells in the midst of the pomegranates, on the hems of the upper robe, round about, in the midst of the pomegranates;
a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate, [are] on the hems of the upper robe, round about, to minister in, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And they make the coats of linen, work of a weaver, for Aaron and for his sons,
and the mitre of linen, and the beautiful bonnets of linen, and the linen trousers, of twined linen,
and the girdle of twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, work of an embroiderer, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And they make the flower of the holy crown of pure gold, and write on it a writing, openings of a signet, 'Holy to Jehovah;'
and they put on it a ribbon of blue, to put [it] on the mitre above, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And all the service of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting is completed; and the sons of Israel do according to all that Jehovah hath commanded Moses; so they have done.
And they bring in the tabernacle unto Moses, the tent, and all its vessels, its hooks, its boards, its bars, and its pillars, and its sockets;
and the covering of rams' skins, which are made red, and the covering of badgers' skins, and the vail of the covering;
the ark of the testimony and its staves, and the mercy-seat;
the table, all its vessels, and the bread of the presence;
the pure candlestick, its lamps, the lamps of arrangement, and all its vessels, and the oil for the light.
And the golden altar, and the anointing oil, and the spice-perfume, and the covering of the opening of the tent;
the brazen altar and the brazen grate which it hath, its staves, and all its vessels, the laver and its base.
The hangings of the court, its pillars, and its sockets; and the covering for the gate of the court, its cords, and its pins; and all the vessels of the service of the tabernacle, for the tent of meeting;
the coloured clothes to minister in the sanctuary, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to act as priest in.
According to all that Jehovah hath commanded Moses, so have the sons of Israel done all the service;
and Moses seeth all the work, and lo, they have done it as Jehovah hath commanded; so they have done. And Moses doth bless them.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'On the first day of the month, in the first month, thou dost raise up the tabernacle of the tent of meeting,
and hast set there the ark of the testimony, and hast covered over the ark with the vail,
and hast brought in the table, and set its arrangement in order, and hast brought in the candlestick, and caused its lamps to go up.
'And thou hast put the golden altar for perfume before the ark of the testimony, and hast put the covering of the opening to the tabernacle,
and hast put the altar of the burnt-offering before the opening of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting,
and hast put the laver between the tent of meeting and the altar, and hast put water there.
'And thou hast set the court round about, and hast placed the covering of the gate of the court,
and hast taken the anointing oil, and anointed the tabernacle, and all that [is] in it, and hallowed it, and all its vessels, and it hath been holy;
and thou hast anointed the altar of the burnt-offering, and all its vessels, and sanctified the altar, and the altar hath been most holy;
and thou hast anointed the laver and its base, and sanctified it.
'And thou hast brought near Aaron and his sons unto the opening of the tent of meeting, and hast bathed them with water;
and thou hast clothed Aaron with the holy garments, and anointed him, and sanctified him, and he hath acted as priest to Me.
'And his sons thou dost bring near, and hast clothed them with coats,
and anointed them as thou hast anointed their father, and they have acted as priests to Me, and their anointing hath been to be to them for a priesthood age-during, to their generations.'
And Moses doth according to all that Jehovah hath commanded him; so he hath done.
And it cometh to pass, in the first month, in the second year, in the first of the month, the tabernacle hath been raised up;
and Moses raiseth up the tabernacle, and setteth its sockets, and placeth its boards, and placeth its bars, and raiseth its pillars,
and spreadeth the tent over the tabernacle, and putteth the covering of the tent upon it above, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And he taketh and putteth the testimony unto the ark, and setteth the staves on the ark, and putteth the mercy-seat on the ark above;
and bringeth in the ark unto the tabernacle, and placeth the vail of the covering, and covereth over the ark of the testimony, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And he putteth the table in the tent of meeting, on the side of the tabernacle northward, at the outside of the vail,
and setteth in order upon it the arrangement of bread, before Jehovah, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And he putteth the candlestick in the tent of meeting, over-against the table, on the side of the tabernacle southward,
and causeth the lamps to go up before Jehovah, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And he setteth the golden altar in the tent of meeting, before the vail,
and maketh perfume on it — spice-perfume — as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And he setteth the covering of the opening to the tabernacle,
and the altar of the burnt-offering he hath set at the opening of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting, and causeth the burnt-offering to go up upon it, and the present, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And he putteth the laver between the tent of meeting and the altar, and putteth water there for washing,
and Moses and Aaron and his sons have washed their hands and their feet at the same;
in their going in unto the tent of meeting, and in their drawing near unto the altar, they wash, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And he raiseth up the court round about the tabernacle, and about the altar, and placeth the covering of the gate of the court; and Moses completeth the work.
And the cloud covereth the tent of meeting, and the honour of Jehovah hath filled the tabernacle;
and Moses hath not been able to go in unto the tent of meeting, for the cloud hath tabernacled on it, and the honour of Jehovah hath filled the tabernacle.
And in the going up of the cloud from off the tabernacle the sons of Israel journey in all their journeys;
and if the cloud go not up then they journey not, until the day of its going up:
for the cloud of Jehovah [is] on the tabernacle by day, and fire is in it by night, before the eyes of all the house of Israel in all their journeys.
And Jehovah calleth unto Moses, and speaketh unto him out of the tent of meeting, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, and thou hast said unto them, Any man of you when he doth bring near an offering to Jehovah, out of the cattle — out of the herd, or out of the flock — ye do bring near your offering.
'If his offering [is] a burnt-offering out of the herd — a male, a perfect one, he doth bring near, unto the opening of the tent of meeting he doth bring it near, at his pleasure, before Jehovah;
and he hath laid his hand on the head of the burnt-offering, and it hath been accepted for him to make atonement for him;
and he hath slaughtered the son of the herd before Jehovah; and sons of Aaron, the priests, have brought the blood near, and sprinkled the blood on the altar round about, which [is] at the opening of the tent of meeting.
'And he hath stripped the burnt-offering, and hath cut it into its pieces;
and the sons of Aaron the priest have put fire on the altar, and arranged wood on the fire;
and sons of Aaron, the priests, have arranged the pieces, with the head and the fat, on the wood, which [is] on the fire, which [is] on the altar;
and its inwards and its legs he doth wash with water; and the priest hath made perfume with the whole on the altar, a burnt-offering, a fire-offering of sweet fragrance to Jehovah.
'And if his offering [is] out of the flock — out of the sheep or out of the goats — for a burnt-offering, a male, a perfect one, he doth bring near,
and he hath slaughtered it by the side of the altar northward, before Jehovah; and sons of Aaron, the priests, have sprinkled its blood on the altar round about;
and he hath cut it into its pieces, and its head and its fat, and the priest hath arranged them on the wood, which [is] on the fire, which [is] on the altar;
and the inwards and the legs he doth wash with water, and the priest hath brought the whole near, and hath made perfume on the altar; it [is] a burnt-offering, a fire-offering of sweet fragrance to Jehovah.
'And if his offering [is] a burnt-offering out of the fowl to Jehovah, than he hath brought near his offering out of the turtle-doves or out of the young pigeons,
and the priest hath brought it near unto the altar, and hath wrung off its head, and hath made perfume on the altar, and its blood hath been wrung out by the side of the altar;
and he hath turned aside its crop with its feathers, and hath cast it near the altar, eastward, unto the place of ashes;
and he hath cleaved it with its wings (he doth not separate [it]), and the priest hath made it a perfume on the altar, on the wood, which [is] on the fire; it [is] a burnt-offering, a fire-offering of sweet fragrance to Jehovah.
'And when a person bringeth near an offering, a present to Jehovah, of flour is his offering, and he hath poured on it oil, and hath put on it frankincense;
and he hath brought it in unto the sons of Aaron, the priests, and he hath taken from thence the fulness of his hand of its flour and of its oil, besides all its frankincense, and the priest hath made perfume with its memorial on the altar, a fire-offering of sweet fragrance to Jehovah;
and the remnant of the present [is] for Aaron and for his sons, most holy, of the fire-offerings of Jehovah.
'And when thou bringest near an offering, a present baked in an oven, [it is of] unleavened cakes of flour mixed with oil, or thin unleavened cakes anointed with oil.
'And if thine offering [is] a present [made] on the girdel, it is of flour, mixed with oil, unleavened;
divide thou it into parts, and thou hast poured on it oil; it [is] a present.
'And if thine offering [is] a present [made] on the frying-pan, of flour with oil it is made,
and thou hast brought in the present which is made of these to Jehovah, and [one] hath brought it near unto the priest, and he hath brought it nigh unto the altar,
and the priest hath lifted up from the present its memorial, and hath made perfume on the altar, a fire-offering of sweet fragrance to Jehovah;
and the remnant of the present [is] for Aaron and for his sons, most holy, of the fire-offerings of Jehovah.
No present which ye bring near to Jehovah is made fermented, for with any leaven or any honey ye perfume no fire-offering to Jehovah.
'An offering of first -[fruits] — ye bring them near to Jehovah, but on the altar they go not up, for sweet fragrance.
And every offering — thy present — with salt thou dost season, and thou dost not let the salt of the covenant of thy God cease from thy present; with all thine offerings thou dost bring near salt.
'And if thou bring near a present of first-ripe [fruits] to Jehovah, — of green ears, roasted with fire, beaten out [corn] of a fruitful field thou dost bring near the present of thy first-ripe [fruits],
and thou hast put on it oil, and laid on it frankincense, it [is] a present;
and the priest hath made perfume with its memorial from its beaten out [corn], and from its oil, besides all its frankincense — a fire-offering to Jehovah.
'And if his offering [is] a sacrifice of peace-offerings, if out of the herd he is bringing near, whether male or female, a perfect one he doth bring near before Jehovah,
and he hath laid his hand on the head of his offering, and hath slaughtered it at the opening of the tent of meeting, and sons of Aaron, the priests, have sprinkled the blood on the altar round about.
'And he hath brought near from the sacrifice of the peace-offerings a fire-offering to Jehovah, the fat which is covering the inwards, and all the fat which [is] on the inwards,
and the two kidneys, and the fat which [is] on them, which [is] on the flanks, and the redundance above the liver, (beside the kidneys he doth turn it aside),
and sons of Aaron have made it a perfume on the altar, on the burnt-offering which [is] on the wood, which [is] on the fire — a fire-offering of sweet fragrance to Jehovah.
'And if his offering [is] out of the flock for a sacrifice of peace-offerings to Jehovah, male or female, a perfect one he doth bring near;
if a sheep he is bringing near [for] his offering, then he hath brought it near before Jehovah,
and hath laid his hand on the head of his offering, and hath slaughtered it before the tent of meeting, and sons of Aaron have sprinkled its blood on the altar round about.
'And he hath brought near from the sacrifice of the peace-offerings a fire-offering to Jehovah, its fat, the whole fat tail (over-against the bone he doth turn it aside), and the fat which is covering the inwards, and all the fat which [is] on the inwards,
and the two kidneys, and the fat which [is] on them, which [is] on the flanks, and the redundance above the liver, (beside the kidneys he doth turn it aside),
and the priest hath made it a perfume on the altar — bread of a fire-offering to Jehovah.
'And if his offering [is] a goat, then he hath brought it near before Jehovah,
and hath laid his hand on its head, and hath slaughtered it before the tent of meeting, and sons of Aaron have sprinkled its blood on the altar round about;
and he hath brought near from it his offering, a fire-offering to Jehovah, the fat which is covering the inwards, and all the fat which [is] on the inwards,
and the two kidneys, and the fat which [is] upon them, which [is] on the flanks, and the redundance above the liver, (beside the kidneys he doth turn it aside),
and the priest hath made them a perfume on the altar — bread of a fire-offering, for sweet fragrance; all the fat [is] Jehovah's.
'A statute age-during to your generations in all your dwellings: any fat or any blood ye do not eat.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, saying, When a person doth sin through ignorance against any of the commands of Jehovah [regarding things] which are not to be done, and hath done [something] against one of these —
'If the priest who is anointed doth sin according to the guilt of the people, then he hath brought near for his sin which he hath sinned a bullock, a son of the herd, a perfect one, to Jehovah, for a sin-offering,
and he hath brought in the bullock unto the opening of the tent of meeting before Jehovah, and hath laid his hand on the head of the bullock, and hath slaughtered the bullock before Jehovah.
'And the priest who is anointed hath taken of the blood of the bullock, and hath brought it in unto the tent of meeting,
and the priest hath dipped his finger in the blood, and sprinkled of the blood seven times before Jehovah, at the front of the vail of the sanctuary;
and the priest hath put of the blood on the horns of the altar of spice-perfume before Jehovah, which [is] in the tent of meeting, and all the blood of the bullock he doth pour out at the foundation of the altar of the burnt-offering, which [is] at the opening of the tent of meeting.
'And all the fat of the bullock of the sin-offering he doth lift up from it, the fat which is covering over the inwards, and all the fat which [is] on the inwards,
and the two kidneys, and the fat which [is] on them, which [is] on the flanks, and the redundance above the liver, (beside the kidneys he doth turn it aside),
as it is lifted up from the ox of the sacrifice of the peace-offerings; and the priest hath made them a perfume on the altar of the burnt-offering.
'And the skin of the bullock, and all its flesh, besides its head, and besides its legs, and its inwards, and its dung —
he hath even brought out the whole bullock unto the outside of the camp, unto a clean place, unto the place of the pouring out of the ashes, and he hath burnt it on the wood with fire; beside the place of the pouring out of the ashes it is burnt.
'And if the whole company of Israel err ignorantly, and the thing hath been hidden from the eyes of the assembly, and they have done [something against] one of all the commands of Jehovah [concerning things] which are not to be done, and have been guilty;
when the sin which they have sinned concerning it hath been known, then have the assembly brought near a bullock, a son of the herd, for a sin-offering, and they have brought it in before the tent of meeting;
and the elders of the company have laid their hands on the head of the bullock, before Jehovah, and [one] hath slaughtered the bullock before Jehovah.
'And the priest who is anointed hath brought in of the blood of the bullock unto the tent of meeting,
and the priest hath dipped his finger in the blood, and hath sprinkled seven times before Jehovah at the front of the vail,
and [some] of the blood he doth put on the horns of the altar which [is] before Jehovah, which [is] in the tent of meeting; and all the blood he doth pour out at the foundation of the altar of the burnt-offering, which [is] at the opening of the tent of meeting;
and all its fat he doth lift up from it, and hath made perfume on the altar.
'And he hath done to the bullock as he hath done to the bullock of the sin-offering, so he doth to it; and the priest hath made atonement for them, and it hath been forgiven them;
and he hath brought out the bullock unto the outside of the camp, and hath burned it as he hath burned the first bullock; it [is] a sin-offering of the assembly.
'When a prince doth sin, and hath done [something against] one of all the commands of Jehovah his God [regarding things] which are not to be done, through ignorance, and hath been guilty —
or his sin wherein he hath sinned hath been made known unto him, then he hath brought in his offering, a kid of the goats, a male, a perfect one,
and he hath laid his hand on the head of the goat, and hath slaughtered it in the place where he doth slaughter the burnt-offering before Jehovah; it [is] a sin-offering.
'And the priest hath taken of the blood of the sin-offering with his finger, and hath put on the horns of the altar of the burnt-offering, and its blood he doth pour out at the foundation of the altar of the burnt-offering,
and with all its fat he doth make perfume on the altar, as the fat of the sacrifice of the peace-offerings; and the priest hath made atonement for him because of his sin, and it hath been forgiven him.
'And if any person of the people of the land sin through ignorance, by his doing [something against] one of the commands of Jehovah [regarding things] which are not to be done, and hath been guilty —
or his sin which he hath sinned hath been made known unto him, then he hath brought in his offering, a kid of the goats, a perfect one, a female, for his sin which he hath sinned,
and he hath laid his hand on the head of the sin-offering, and hath slaughtered the sin-offering in the place of the burnt-offering.
'And the priest hath taken of its blood with his finger, and hath put on the horns of the altar of the burnt-offering, and all its blood he doth pour out at the foundation of the altar,
and all its fat he doth turn aside, as the fat hath been turned aside from off the sacrifice of the peace-offerings, and the priest hath made perfume on the altar, for sweet fragrance to Jehovah; and the priest hath made atonement for him, and it hath been forgiven him.
'And if he bring in a sheep [for] his offering, for a sin-offering, a female, a perfect one, he doth bring in,
and he hath laid his hand on the head of the sin-offering, and hath slaughtered it for a sin-offering in the place where he slaughtereth the burnt-offering.
'And the priest hath taken of the blood of the sin-offering with his finger, and hath put on the horns of the altar of the burnt-offering, and all its blood he poureth out at the foundation of the altar,
and all its fat he turneth aside, as the fat of the sheep is turned aside from the sacrifice of the peace-offerings, and the priest hath made them a perfume on the altar, according to the fire-offerings of Jehovah, and the priest hath made atonement for him, for his sin which he hath sinned, and it hath been forgiven him.
'And when a person doth sin, and hath heard the voice of an oath, and he [is] witness, or hath seen, or hath known — if he declare not, then he hath borne his iniquity:
'Or when a person cometh against any thing unclean, or against a carcase of an unclean beast, or against a carcase of unclean cattle, or against a carcase of an unclean teeming creature, and it hath been hidden from him, and he unclean, and guilty;
'Or when he cometh against uncleanness of man, even any of his uncleanness whereby he is unclean, and it hath been hidden from him, and he hath known, and hath been guilty:
'Or when a person sweareth, speaking wrongfully with the lips to do evil, or to do good, even anything which man speaketh wrongfully with an oath, and it hath been hid from him; — when he hath known then he hath been guilty of one of these;
'And it hath been when he is guilty of one of these, that he hath confessed concerning that which he hath sinned,
and hath brought in his guilt-offering to Jehovah for his sin which he hath sinned, a female out of the flock, a lamb, or a kid of the goats, for a sin-offering, and the priest hath made atonement for him, because of his sin.
'And if his hand reach not to the sufficiency of a lamb, then he hath brought in his guilt-offering — he who hath sinned — two turtle-doves or two young pigeons to Jehovah, one for a sin-offering, and one for a burnt-offering;
and he hath brought them in unto the priest, and hath brought near that which [is] for a sin-offering first, and hath wrung off its head from its neck, and doth not separate [it],
and he hath sprinkled of the blood of the sin-offering on the side of the altar, and that which is left of the blood is wrung out at the foundation of the altar; it [is] a sin-offering.
'And the second he maketh a burnt-offering, according to the ordinance, and the priest hath made atonement for him, because of his sin which he hath sinned, and it hath been forgiven him.
'And if his hand reach not to two turtle-doves, or to two young pigeons, then he hath brought in his offering — he who hath sinned — a tenth of an ephah of flour for a sin-offering; he putteth no oil on it, nor doth he put on it frankincense, for it [is] a sin-offering,
and he hath brought it in unto the priest, and the priest hath taken a handful from it — the fulness of his hand — its memorial — and hath made perfume on the altar, according to the fire-offerings of Jehovah; it [is] a sin-offering.
'And the priest hath made atonement for him, for his sin which he hath sinned against one of these, and it hath been forgiven him, and [the remnant] hath been to the priest, like the present.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'When a person committeth a trespass, and hath sinned through ignorance against the holy things of Jehovah, then he hath brought in his guilt-offering to Jehovah, a ram, a perfect one, out of the flock, at thy valuation [in] silver — shekels by the shekel of the sanctuary — for a guilt-offering.
'And that which he hath sinned against the holy thing he repayeth, and its fifth is adding to it, and hath given it to the priest, and the priest maketh atonement for him with the ram of the guilt-offering, and it hath been forgiven him.
'And when any person sinneth, and hath done [something against] one of all the commands of Jehovah [regarding things] which are not to be done, and hath not known, and he hath been guilty, and hath borne his iniquity,
'Then he hath brought in a ram, a perfect one, out of the flock, at thy valuation, for a guilt-offering, unto the priest; and the priest hath made atonement for him, for his ignorance in which he hath erred and he hath not known, and it hath been forgiven him;
it [is] a guilt-offering; he hath been certainly guilty before Jehovah.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'When any person doth sin, and hath committed a trespass against Jehovah, and hath lied to his fellow concerning a deposit, or concerning fellowship, or concerning violent robbery, or hath oppressed his fellow;
or hath found a lost thing, and hath lied concerning it, and hath sworn to a falsehood, concerning one of all [these] which man doth, sinning in them:
'Then it hath been, when he sinneth, and hath been guilty, that he hath returned the plunder which he hath taken violently away, or the thing which he hath got by oppression, or the deposit which hath been deposited with him, or the lost thing which he hath found;
or all that concerning which he sweareth falsely, he hath even repaid it in its principal, and its fifth he is adding to it; to him whose it [is] he giveth it in the day of his guilt-offering.
'And his guilt-offering he bringeth in to Jehovah, a ram, a perfect one, out of the flock, at thy estimation, for a guilt-offering, unto the priest,
and the priest hath made atonement for him before Jehovah, and it hath been forgiven him, concerning one thing of all that he doth, by being guilty therein.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Command Aaron and his sons, saying, This [is] a law of the burnt-offering (it [is] the burnt-offering, because of the burning on the altar all the night unto the morning, and the fire of the altar is burning on it,)
that the priest hath put on his long robe of fine linen, and his fine linen trousers he doth put on his flesh, and hath lifted up the ashes which the fire consumeth with the burnt-offering on the altar, and hath put them near the altar;
and he hath stripped off his garments, and hath put on other garments, and hath brought out the ashes unto the outside of the camp, unto a clean place.
'And the fire on the altar is burning on it, it is not quenched, and the priest hath burned on it wood morning by morning, and hath arranged on it the burnt-offering, and hath made perfume on it [with] the fat of the peace-offerings;
fire is continually burning on the altar, it is not quenched.
'And this [is] a law of the present: sons of Aaron have brought it near before Jehovah unto the front of the altar,
and [one] hath lifted up of it with his hand from the flour of the present, and from its oil, and all the frankincense which [is] on the present, and hath made perfume on the altar, sweet fragrance — its memorial to Jehovah.
'And the remnant of it do Aaron and his sons eat; [with] unleavened things it is eaten, in the holy place, in the court of the tent of meeting they do eat it.
It is not baken [with] any thing fermented, their portion I have given it, out of My fire-offerings; it [is] most holy, like the sin-offering, and like the guilt-offering.
Every male among the sons of Aaron doth eat it — a statute age-during to your generations, out of the fire-offerings of Jehovah: all that cometh against them is holy.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'This [is] an offering of Aaron and of his sons, which they bring near to Jehovah in the day of his being anointed; a tenth of the ephah of flour [for] a continual present, half of it in the morning, and half of it in the evening;
on a girdel with oil it is made — fried thou dost bring it in; baked pieces of the present thou dost bring near, a sweet fragrance to Jehovah.
'And the priest who is anointed in his stead, from among his sons, doth make it, — a statute age-during of Jehovah: it is completely perfumed;
and every present of a priest is a whole burnt-offering; it is not eaten.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto Aaron and unto his sons, saying, This [is] a law of the sin-offering: in the place where the burnt-offering is slaughtered is the sin-offering slaughtered before Jehovah; it [is] most holy.
'The priest who is making atonement with it doth eat it, in the holy place it is eaten, in the court of the tent of meeting;
all that cometh against its flesh is holy, and when [any] of its blood is sprinkled on the garment, that on which it is sprinkled thou dost wash in the holy place;
and an earthen vessel in which it is boiled is broken, and if in a brass vessel it is boiled, then it is scoured and rinsed with water.
'Every male among the priests doth eat it — it [is] most holy;
and no sin-offering, [any] of whose blood is brought in unto the tent of meeting to make atonement in the sanctuary is eaten; with fire it is burnt.
'And this [is] a law of the guilt-offering: it [is] most holy;
in the place where they slaughter the burnt-offering they do slaughter the guilt-offering, and its blood [one] doth sprinkle on the altar round about,
and all its fat he bringeth near out of it, the fat tail, and the fat which is covering the inwards,
and the two kidneys, and the fat which [is] on them, which [is] on the flanks, and the redundance above the liver (beside the kidneys he doth turn it aside);
and the priest hath made them a perfume on the altar, a fire-offering to Jehovah; it [is] a guilt-offering.
'Every male among the priests doth eat it; in the holy place it is eaten — it [is] most holy;
as [is] a sin-offering, so [is] a guilt-offering; one law [is] for them; the priest who maketh atonement by it — it is his.
'And the priest who is bringing near any man's burnt-offering, the skin of the burnt-offering which he hath brought near, it is the priest's, his own;
and every present which is baked in an oven, and every one done in a frying-pan, and on a girdel, [is] the priest's who is bringing it near; it is his;
and every present, mixed with oil or dry, is for all the sons of Aaron — one as another.
'And this [is] a law of the sacrifice of the peace-offerings which [one] bringeth near to Jehovah:
if for a thank-offering he bring it near, then he hath brought near with the sacrifice of thank-offering unleavened cakes mixed with oil, and thin unleavened cakes anointed with oil, and of fried flour cakes mixed with oil;
besides the cakes, fermented bread he doth bring near [with] his offering, besides the sacrifice of thank-offering of his peace-offerings;
and he hath brought near out of it one of the whole offering — a heave-offering to Jehovah; to the priest who is sprinkling the blood of the peace-offerings — it is his;
as to the flesh of the sacrifice of the thank-offering of his peace-offerings, in the day of his offering it is eaten; he doth not leave of it till morning.
'And if the sacrifice of his offering [is] a vow or free-will offering, in the day of his bringing near his sacrifice it is eaten; and on the morrow also the remnant of it is eaten;
and the remnant of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day with fire is burnt;
and if any of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace-offerings be really eaten on the third day, it is not pleasing; for him who is bringing it near it is not reckoned; it is an abominable thing, and the person who is eating of it his iniquity doth bear.
'And the flesh which cometh against any unclean thing is not eaten; with fire it is burnt; as to the flesh, every clean one doth eat of the flesh;
and the person who eateth of the flesh of the sacrifice of the peace-offerings which [are] Jehovah's, and his uncleanness upon him, even that person hath been cut off from his people.
'And when a person cometh against any thing unclean, of the uncleanness of man, or of the uncleanness of beasts, or of any unclean teeming creature, and hath eaten of the flesh of the sacrifice of the peace-offerings which [are] Jehovah's, even that person hath been cut off from his people.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, saying, Any fat of ox and sheep and goat ye do not eat;
and the fat of a carcase, and the fat of a torn thing is prepared for any work, but ye do certainly not eat it;
for whoever eateth the fat of the beast, of which [one] bringeth near a fire-offering to Jehovah, even the person who eateth hath been cut off from his people.
'And any blood ye do not eat in all your dwellings, of fowl, or of beast;
any person who eateth any blood, even that person hath been cut off from his people.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, saying, He who is bringing near the sacrifice of his peace-offerings to Jehovah doth bring in his offering to Jehovah from the sacrifice of his peace-offerings;
his own hands do bring in the fire-offerings of Jehovah, the fat beside the breast, it he doth bring in with the breast, to wave it — a wave-offering before Jehovah.
'And the priest hath made perfume with the fat on the altar, and the breast hath been Aaron's and his sons;
and the right leg ye do make a heave-offering to the priest of the sacrifices of your peace-offerings;
he of the sons of Aaron who is bringing near the blood of the peace-offerings, and the fat, his is the right leg for a portion.
'For the breast of the wave-offering, and the leg of the heave-offering, I have taken from the sons of Israel, from the sacrifices of their peace-offerings, and I give them to Aaron the priest, and to his sons, by a statute age-during, from the sons of Israel.'
This [is] the anointing of Aaron, and the anointing of his sons out of the fire-offerings of Jehovah, in the day he hath brought them near to act as priest to Jehovah,
which Jehovah hath commanded to give to them in the day of His anointing them, from the sons of Israel — a statute age-during to their generations.
This [is] the law for burnt-offering, for present, and for sin-offering, and for guilt-offering, and for consecrations, and for a sacrifice of the peace-offerings,
which Jehovah hath commanded Moses in Mount Sinai, in the day of his commanding the sons of Israel to bring near their offerings to Jehovah, in the wilderness of Sinai.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Take Aaron and his sons with him, and the garments, and the anointing oil, and the bullock of the sin-offering, and the two rams, and the basket of unleavened things,
and all the company assemble thou unto the opening of the tent of meeting.'
And Moses doth as Jehovah hath commanded him, and the company is assembled unto the opening of the tent of meeting,
and Moses saith unto the company, 'This [is] the thing which Jehovah hath commanded to do.'
And Moses bringeth near Aaron and his sons, and doth bathe them with water,
and doth put on him the coat, and doth gird him with the girdle, and doth clothe him with the upper robe, and doth put on him the ephod, and doth gird him with the girdle of the ephod, and doth bind [it] to him with it,
and doth put on him the breastplate, and doth put unto the breastplate the Lights and the Perfections,
and doth put the mitre on his head, and doth put on the mitre, over-against its front, the golden flower of the holy crown, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And Moses taketh the anointing oil, and anointeth the tabernacle, and all that [is] in it, and sanctifieth them;
and he sprinkleth of it on the altar seven times, and anointeth the altar, and all its vessels, and the laver, and its base, to sanctify them;
and he poureth of the anointing oil on the head of Aaron, and anointeth him to sanctify him.
And Moses bringeth near the sons of Aaron, and doth clothe them [with] coats, and girdeth them [with] girdles, and bindeth for them turbans, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And he bringeth nigh the bullock of the sin-offering, and Aaron layeth — his sons also — their hands on the head of the bullock of the sin-offering,
and [one] slaughtereth, and Moses taketh the blood, and putteth on the horns of the altar round about with his finger, and cleanseth the altar, and the blood he hath poured out at the foundation of the altar, and sanctifieth it, to make atonement upon it.
And he taketh all the fat that [is] on the inwards, and the redundance above the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and Moses maketh Perfume on the altar,
and the bullock, and its skin, and its flesh, and its dung, he hath burnt with fire, at the outside of the camp, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And he bringeth near the ram of the burnt-offering, and Aaron and his sons lay their hands on the head of the ram,
and [one] slaughtereth, and Moses sprinkleth the blood on the altar round about;
and the ram he hath cut into its pieces, and Moses maketh perfume with the head, and the pieces, and the fat,
and the inwards and the legs he hath washed with water, and Moses maketh perfume with the whole ram on the altar; it [is] a burnt-offering, for sweet fragrance; it [is] a fire-offering to Jehovah, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And he bringeth near the second ram, a ram of the consecrations, and Aaron and his sons lay their hands on the head of the ram,
and [one] slaughtereth, and Moses taketh of its blood, and putteth on the tip of the right ear of Aaron, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the great toe of his right foot;
and he bringeth near the sons of Aaron, and Moses putteth of the blood on the tip of their right ear, and on the thumb of their right hand, and on the great toe of their right foot. And Moses sprinkleth the blood on the altar round about,
and taketh the fat, and the fat tail, and all the fat that [is] on the inwards, and the redundance above the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and the right leg;
and out of the basket of unleavened things, which [is] before Jehovah, he hath taken one unleavened cake, and one cake of oiled bread, and one thin cake, and putteth [them] on the fat, and on the right leg;
and putteth the whole on the hands of Aaron, and on the hands of his sons, and waveth them — a wave-offering before Jehovah.
And Moses taketh them from off their hands, and maketh perfume on the altar, on the burnt-offering, they [are] consecrations for sweet fragrance; it [is] a fire-offering to Jehovah;
and Moses taketh the breast, and waveth it — a wave-offering before Jehovah; of the ram of the consecrations it hath been to Moses for a portion, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And Moses taketh of the anointing oil, and of the blood which [is] on the altar, and sprinkleth on Aaron, on his garments, and on his sons, and on the garments of his sons with him, and he sanctifieth Aaron, his garments, and his sons, and the garments of his sons with him.
And Moses saith unto Aaron, and unto his sons, 'Boil ye the flesh at the opening of the tent of meeting, and there ye do eat it and the bread which [is] in the basket of the consecrations, as I have commanded, saying, Aaron and his sons do eat it.
'And the remnant of the flesh and of the bread with fire ye burn;
and from the opening of the tent of meeting ye go not out seven days, till the day of the fulness, the days of your consecration — for seven days he doth consecrate your hand;
as he hath done on this day, Jehovah hath commanded to do, to make atonement for you;
and at the opening of the tent of meeting ye abide, by day and by night seven days, and ye have kept the charge of Jehovah, and die not, for so I have been commanded.'
And Aaron doth — his sons also — all the things which Jehovah hath commanded by the hand of Moses.
And it cometh to pass on the eighth day, Moses hath called for Aaron and for his sons, and for the elders of Israel,
and he saith unto Aaron, 'Take to thyself a calf, a son of the herd, for a sin-offering, and a ram for a burnt-offering, perfect ones, and bring near before Jehovah.
'And unto the sons of Israel thou dost speak, saying, Take ye a kid of the goats for a sin-offering, and a calf, and a lamb, sons of a year, perfect ones, for a burnt-offering,
and a bullock and a ram for peace-offerings, to sacrifice before Jehovah, and a present mixed with oil; for to-day Jehovah hath appeared unto you.'
And they take that which Moses hath commanded unto the front of the tent of meeting, and all the company draw near and stand before Jehovah;
and Moses saith, 'This [is] the thing which Jehovah hath commanded; do [it], and the honour of Jehovah doth appear unto you.'
And Moses saith unto Aaron, 'Draw near unto the altar, and make thy sin-offering, and thy burnt-offering, and make atonement for thyself, and for the people, and make the offering of the people, and make atonement for them, as Jehovah hath commanded.'
And Aaron draweth near unto the altar, and slaughtereth the calf of the sin-offering, which [is] for himself;
and the sons of Aaron bring the blood near unto him, and he dippeth his finger in the blood, and putteth [it] on the horns of the altar, and the blood he hath poured out at the foundation of the altar;
and the fat, and the kidneys, and the redundance of the liver, of the sin-offering, he hath made a perfume on the altar, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses;
and the flesh and the skin he hath burnt with fire, at the outside of the camp.
And he slaughtereth the burnt-offering, and the sons of Aaron have presented unto him the blood, and he sprinkleth it on the altar round about;
and the burnt-offering they have presented unto him, by its pieces, and the head, and he maketh perfume on the altar;
and he washeth the inwards and the legs, and maketh perfume for the burnt-offering on the altar.
And he bringeth near the offering of the people, and taketh the goat of the sin-offering which [is] for the people, and slaughtered it, and maketh it a sin-offering, like the first;
and he bringeth near the burnt-offering, and maketh it, according to the ordinance;
and he bringeth near the present, and filleth his palm with it, and maketh perfume on the altar, apart from the burnt-offering of the morning.
And he slaughtereth the bullock and the ram, a sacrifice of the peace-offerings, which [are] for the people, and sons of Aaron present the blood unto him (and he sprinkleth it on the altar round about),
and the fat of the bullock, and of the ram, the fat tail, and the covering [of the inwards], and the kidneys, and the redundance above the liver,
and they set the fat on the breasts, and he maketh perfume with the fat on the altar;
and the breasts, and the right leg hath Aaron waved — a wave-offering before Jehovah, as He hath commanded Moses.
And Aaron lifteth up his hand towards the people, and blesseth them, and cometh down from making the sin-offering, and the burnt-offering, and the peace-offerings.
And Moses goeth in — Aaron also — unto the tent of meeting, and they come out, and bless the people, and the honour of Jehovah appeareth unto all the people;
and fire cometh out from before Jehovah, and consumeth on the altar the burnt-offering, and the fat; and all the people see, and cry aloud, and fall on their faces.
And the sons of Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, take each his censer, and put in them fire, and put on it perfume, and bring near before Jehovah strange fire, which He hath not commanded them;
and fire goeth out from before Jehovah, and consumeth them, and they die before Jehovah.
And Moses saith unto Aaron, 'It [is] that which Jehovah hath spoken, saying, By those drawing near to Me I am sanctified, and in the face of all the people I am honoured;' and Aaron is silent.
And Moses calleth unto Mishael and unto Elzaphan, sons of Uzziel, uncle of Aaron, and saith unto them, 'Come near, bear your brethren from the front of the sanctuary unto the outside of the camp;'
and they come near, and bear them in their coats unto the outside of the camp, as Moses hath spoken.
And Moses saith unto Aaron, and to Eleazar, and to Ithamar his sons, 'Your heads ye do not uncover, and your garments ye do not rend, that ye die not, and on all the company He be wroth; as to your brethren, the whole house of Israel, they bewail the burning which Jehovah hath kindled;
and from the opening of the tent of meeting ye do not go out, lest ye die, for the anointing oil of Jehovah [is] upon you;' and they do according to the word of Moses.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Aaron, saying,
'Wine and strong drink thou dost not drink, thou, and thy sons with thee, in your going in unto the tent of meeting, and ye die not — a statute age-during to your generations;
so as to make a separation between the holy and the common, and between the unclean and the pure;
and to teach the sons of Israel all the statutes which Jehovah hath spoken unto them by the hand of Moses.'
And Moses speaketh unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar, and unto Ithamar his sons, who are left, 'Take ye the present that is left from the fire-offerings of Jehovah, and eat it unleavened near the altar, for it [is] most holy,
and ye have eaten it in the holy place, for it [is] thy portion, and the portion of thy sons, from the fire-offerings of Jehovah; for so I have been commanded.
'And the breast of the wave-offering, and the leg of the heave-offering, ye do eat in a clean place, thou, and thy sons, and thy daughters with thee; for thy portion and the portion of thy sons they have been given, out of the sacrifices of peace-offerings of the sons of Israel;
the leg of the heave-offering, and breast of the wave-offering, besides fire-offerings of the fat, they do bring in to wave a wave-offering before Jehovah, and it hath been to thee, and to thy sons with thee, by a statute age-during, as Jehovah hath commanded.'
And the goat of the sin-offering hath Moses diligently sought, and lo, it is burnt, and he is wroth against Eleazar, and against Ithamar, sons of Aaron, who are left, saying,
'Wherefore have ye not eaten the sin-offering in the holy place, for it [is] most holy — and it He hath given to you to take away the iniquity of the company, to make atonement for them before Jehovah?
lo, its blood hath not been brought in unto the holy place within; eating ye do eat it in the holy place, as I have commanded.'
And Aaron speaketh unto Moses, 'Lo, to-day they have brought near their sin-offering and their burnt-offering before Jehovah; and [things] like these meet me, yet I have eaten a sin-offering to-day; is it good in the eyes of Jehovah?'
And Moses hearkeneth, and it is good in his eyes.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying unto them,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, saying, This [is] the beast which ye do eat out of all the beasts which [are] on the earth:
any dividing a hoof, and cleaving the cleft of the hoofs, bringing up the cud, among the beasts, it ye do eat.
'Only, this ye do not eat — of those bringing up the cud, and of those dividing the hoof — the camel, though it is bringing up the cud, yet the hoof not dividing — it [is] unclean to you;
and the rabbit, though it is bringing up the cud, yet the hoof it divideth not — unclean it [is] to you;
and the hare, though it is bringing up the cud, yet the hoof hath not divided — unclean it [is] to you;
and the sow, though it is dividing the hoof, and cleaving the cleft of the hoof, yet the cud it bringeth not up — unclean it [is] to you.
'Of their flesh ye do not eat, and against their carcase ye do not come — unclean they [are] to you.
'This ye do eat of all which [are] in the waters; any one that hath fins and scales in the waters, in the seas, and in the brooks, them ye do eat;
and any one that hath not fins and scales in the seas, and in the brooks, of any teeming creature of the waters, and of any creature which liveth, which [is] in the waters — an abomination they [are] to you;
yea, an abomination they are to you; of their flesh ye do not eat, and their carcase ye abominate.
'Any one that hath not fins and scales in the waters — an abomination it [is] to you.
'And these ye do abominate of the fowl; they are not eaten, an abomination they [are]: the eagle, and the ossifrage, and the ospray,
and the vulture, and the kite after its kind,
every raven after its kind,
and the owl, and the night-hawk, and the cuckoo, and the hawk after its kind,
and the little owl, and the cormorant, and the great owl,
and the swan, and the pelican, and the gier eagle,
and the stork, the heron after its kind, and the lapwing, and the bat.
'Every teeming creature which is flying, which is going on four — an abomination it [is] to you.
'Only — this ye do eat of any teeming thing which is flying, which is going on four, which hath legs above its feet, to move with them on the earth;
these of them ye do eat: the locust after its kind, and the bald locust after its kind, and the beetle after its kind, and the grasshopper after its kind;
and every teeming thing which is flying, which hath four feet — an abomination it [is] to you.
'And by these ye are made unclean, any one who is coming against their carcase is unclean till the evening;
and anyone who is lifting up [aught] of their carcase doth wash his garments, and hath been unclean till the evening: —
even every beast which is dividing the hoof, and is not cloven-footed, and the cud is not bringing up — unclean they [are] to you; any one who is coming against them is unclean.
'And any one going on its paws, among all the beasts which are going on four — unclean they [are] to you; any one who is coming against their carcase is unclean until the evening;
and he who is lifting up their carcase doth wash his garments, and hath been unclean until the evening — unclean they [are] to you.
'And this [is] to you the unclean among the teeming things which are teeming on the earth: the weasel, and the mouse, and the tortoise after its kind,
and the ferret, and the chameleon, and the lizard, and the snail, and the mole;
these [are] the unclean to you among all which are teeming; any one who is coming against them in their death is unclean till the evening.
'And anything on which any one of them falleth, in their death, is unclean, of any vessel of wood or garment or skin or sack, any vessel in which work is done is brought into water, and hath been unclean till the evening, then it hath been clean;
and any earthen vessel, into the midst of which [any] one of them falleth, all that [is] in its midst is unclean, and it ye do break.
'Of all the food which is eaten, that on which cometh [such] water, is unclean, and all drink which is drunk in any [such] vessel is unclean;
and anything on which [any] of their carcase falleth is unclean (oven or double pots), it is broken down, unclean they [are], yea, unclean they are to you.
'Only — a fountain or pit, a collection of water, is clean, but that which is coming against their carcase is unclean;
and when [any] of their carcase falleth on any sown seed which is sown — it [is] clean;
and when water is put on the seed, and [any] of its carcase hath fallen on it — unclean it [is] to you.
'And when any of the beasts which are to you for food dieth, he who is coming against its carcase is unclean till the evening;
and he who is eating of its carcase doth wash his garments, and hath been unclean till the evening; and he who is lifting up its carcase doth wash his garments, and hath been unclean till the evening.
'And every teeming thing which is teeming on the earth is an abomination, it is not eaten;
any thing going on the belly, and any going on four, unto every multiplier of feet, to every teeming thing which is teeming on the earth — ye do not eat them, for they [are] an abomination;
ye do not make yourselves abominable with any teeming thing which is teeming, nor do ye make yourselves unclean with them, so that ye have been unclean thereby.
'For I [am] Jehovah your God, and ye have sanctified yourselves, and ye have been holy, for I [am] holy; and ye do not defile your persons with any teeming thing which is creeping on the earth;
for I [am] Jehovah who am bringing you up out of the land of Egypt to become your God; and ye have been holy, for I [am] holy.
'This [is] a law of the beasts, and of the fowl, and of every living creature which is moving in the waters, and of every creature which is teeming on the earth,
to make separation between the unclean and the pure, and between the beast that is eaten, and the beast that is not eaten.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, saying, A woman when she giveth seed, and hath born a male, then she hath been unclean seven days, according to the days of separation for her sickness she is unclean;
and in the eighth day is the flesh of his foreskin circumcised;
and thirty and three days she doth abide in the blood of her cleansing; against any holy thing she doth not come, and unto the sanctuary she doth not go in, till the fulness of the days of her cleansing.
'And if a female she bear, then she hath been unclean two weeks, as in her separation; and sixty and six days she doth abide for the blood of her cleansing.
'And in the fulness of the days of her cleansing for son or for daughter she doth bring in a lamb, a son of a year, for a burnt-offering, and a young pigeon or a turtle-dove for a sin-offering, unto the opening of the tent of meeting, unto the priest;
and he hath brought it near before Jehovah, and hath made atonement for her, and she hath been cleansed from the fountain of her blood; this [is] the law of her who is bearing, in regard to a male or to a female.
'And if her hand find not the sufficiency of a sheep, then she hath taken two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, one for a burnt-offering, and one for a sin-offering, and the priest hath made atonement for her, and she hath been cleansed.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, and unto Aaron, saying,
'When a man hath in the skin of his flesh a rising, or scab, or bright spot, and it hath become in the skin of his flesh a leprous plague, then he hath been brought in unto Aaron the priest, or unto one of his sons the priests;
and the priest hath seen the plague in the skin of the flesh, and the hair in the plague hath turned white, and the appearance of the plague [is] deeper than the skin of his flesh — it [is] a plague of leprosy, and the priest hath seen him, and hath pronounced him unclean.
'And if the bright spot is white in the skin of his flesh, and its appearance is not deeper than the skin, and its hair hath not turned white, then hath the priest shut up [him who hath] the plague seven days.
'And the priest hath seen him on the seventh day, and lo, the plague hath stood in his eyes, the plague hath not spread in the skin, and the priest hath shut him up a second seven days.
'And the priest hath seen him on the second seventh day, and lo, the plague is become weak, and the plague hath not spread in the skin — and the priest hath pronounced him clean, it [is] a scab, and he hath washed his garments, and hath been clean.
'And if the scab spread greatly in the skin, after his being seen by the priest for his cleansing, then he hath been seen a second time by the priest;
and the priest hath seen, and lo, the scab hath spread in the skin, and the priest hath pronounced him unclean; it [is] leprosy.
'When a plague of leprosy is in a man, then he hath been brought in unto the priest,
and the priest hath seen, and lo, a white rising in the skin, and it hath turned the hair white, and a quickening of raw flesh [is] in the rising, —
an old leprosy it [is] in the skin of his flesh, and the priest hath pronounced him unclean; he doth not shut him up, for he [is] unclean.
'And if the leprosy break out greatly in the skin, and the leprosy hath covered all the skin of [him who hath] the plague, from his head even unto his feet, to all that appeareth to the eyes of the priest,
then hath the priest seen, and lo, the leprosy hath covered all his flesh, and he hath pronounced [him who hath] the plague clean; it hath all turned white; he [is] clean.
'And in the day of raw flesh being seen in him he is unclean;
and the priest hath seen the raw flesh, and hath pronounced him unclean; the raw flesh is unclean, it [is] leprosy.
Or when the raw flesh turneth back, and hath been turned to white, then he hath come in unto the priest,
and the priest hath seen him, and lo, the plague hath been turned to white, and the priest hath pronounced clean [him who hath] the plague; he [is] clean.
'And when flesh hath in it, in its skin, an ulcer, and it hath been healed,
and there hath been in the place of the ulcer a white rising, or a bright white spot, very red, then it hath been seen by the priest,
and the priest hath seen, and lo, its appearance [is] lower than the skin, and its hair hath turned white, and the priest hath pronounced him unclean; it [is] a plague of leprosy — in an ulcer it hath broken out.
'And if the priest see it, and lo, there is no white hair in it, and it is not lower than the skin, and is become weak, then hath the priest shut him up seven days;
and if it spread greatly in the skin, then hath the priest pronounced him unclean, it [is] a plague;
and if in its place the bright spot stay — it hath not spread — it [is] an inflammation of the ulcer; and the priest hath pronounced him clean.
'Or when flesh hath in its skin a fiery burning, and the quickening of the burning, the bright white spot, hath been very red or white,
and the priest hath seen it, and lo, the hair hath turned white in the bright spot, and its appearance [is] deeper than the skin; leprosy it [is], in the burning it hath broken out, and the priest hath pronounced him unclean; it [is] a plague of leprosy.
'And if the priest see it, and lo, there is no white hair on the bright spot, and it is not lower than the skin, and it is become weak, then the priest hath shut him up seven days;
and the priest hath seen him on the seventh day, if it spread greatly in the skin, then the priest hath pronounced him unclean; a plague of leprosy it [is].
'And if the bright spot stay in its place, it hath not spread in the skin, and is become weak; a rising of the burning it [is], and the priest hath pronounced him clean; for it [is] inflammation of the burning.
'And when a man (or a woman) hath in him a plague in the head or in the beard,
then hath the priest seen the plague, and lo, its appearance is deeper than the skin, and in it a thin shining hair, and the priest hath pronounced him unclean; it [is] a scall — it [is] a leprosy of the head or of the beard.
'And when the priest seeth the plague of the scall, and lo, its appearance is not deeper than the skin, and there is no black hair in it, then hath the priest shut up [him who hath] the plague of the scall seven days.
'And the priest hath seen the plague on the seventh day, and lo, the scall hath not spread, and a shining hair hath not been in it, and the appearance of the scall is not deeper than the skin,
then he hath shaved himself, but the scall he doth not shave; and the priest hath shut up [him who hath] the scall a second seven days.
And the priest hath seen the scall on the seventh day, and lo, the scall hath not spread in the skin, and its appearance is not deeper than the skin, and the priest hath pronounced him clean, and he hath washed his garments, and hath been clean.
'And if the scall spread greatly in the skin after his cleansing,
and the priest hath seen him, and lo, the scall hath spread in the skin, the priest seeketh not for the shining hair, he is unclean;
and if in his eyes the scall hath stayed, and black hair hath sprung up in it, the scall hath been healed — he [is] clean — and the priest hath pronounced him clean.
'And when a man or woman hath in the skin of their flesh bright spots, white bright spots,
and the priest hath seen, and lo, in the skin of their flesh white weak bright spots, it [is] a freckled spot broken out in the skin; he [is] clean.
'And when a man's head [is] polished, he [is] bald, he [is] clean;
and if from the corner of his face his head is polished, he [is] bald of the forehead; he [is] clean.
'And when there is in the bald back of the head, or in the bald forehead, a very red white plague, it [is] a leprosy breaking out in the bald back of the head, or in the bald forehead;
and the priest hath seen him, and lo, the rising of the very red white plague in the bald back of the head, or in the bald forehead, [is] as the appearance of leprosy, in the skin of the flesh,
he [is] a leprous man, he [is] unclean; the priest doth pronounce him utterly unclean; his plague [is] in his head.
'As to the leper in whom [is] the plague, his garments are rent, and his head is uncovered, and he covereth over the upper lip, and 'Unclean! unclean!' he calleth;
all the days that the plague [is] in him he is unclean; he [is] unclean, alone he doth dwell, at the outside of the camp [is] his dwelling.
'And when there is in any garment a plague of leprosy, — in a garment of wool, or in a garment of linen,
or in the warp, or in the woof, of linen or of wool, or in a skin, or in any work of skin,
and the plague hath been very green or very red in the garment, or in the skin, or in the warp, or in the woof, or in any vessel of skin, it [is] a plague of leprosy, and it hath been shewn the priest.
'And the priest hath seen the plague, and hath shut up [that which hath] the plague, seven days;
and he hath seen the plague on the seventh day, and the plague hath spread in the garment, or in the warp, or in the woof, or in the skin, of all that is made of skin for work; the plague [is] a fretting leprosy, it [is] unclean.
'And he hath burnt the garment, or the warp, or the woof, in wool or in linen, or any vessel of skin in which the plague is; for it [is] a fretting leprosy; with fire it is burnt.
'And if the priest see, and lo, the plague hath not spread in the garment, or in the warp, or in the woof, or in any vessel of skin,
then hath the priest commanded, and they have washed that in which the plague [is], and he hath shut it up a second seven days.
And the priest hath seen [that which hath] the plague after it hath been washed, and lo, the plague hath not changed its aspect, and the plague hath not spread, — it [is] unclean; with fire thou dost burn it; it [is] a fretting in its back-part or in its front-part.
'And if the priest hath seen, and lo, the plague [is] become weak after it hath been washed, then he hath rent it out of the garment, or out of the skin, or out of the warp, or out of the woof;
and if it still be seen in the garment, or in the warp, or in the woof, or in any vessel of skin, it [is] a fretting; with fire thou dost burn it — that in which the plague [is].
'And the garment, or the warp, or the woof, or any vessel of skin which thou dost wash when the plague hath turned aside from them, then it hath been washed a second time, and hath been clean.
'This [is] the law of a plague of leprosy [in] a garment of wool or of linen, or of the warp or of the woof, or of any vessel of skin, to pronounce it clean or to pronounce it unclean.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'This is a law of the leper, in the day of his cleansing, that he hath been brought in unto the priest,
and the priest hath gone out unto the outside of the camp, and the priest hath seen, and lo, the plague of leprosy hath ceased from the leper,
and the priest hath commanded, and he hath taken for him who is to be cleansed, two clean living birds, and cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop.
'And the priest hath commanded, and he hath slaughtered the one bird upon an earthen vessel, over running water;
[as to] the living bird, he taketh it, and the cedar wood, and the scarlet, and the hyssop, and hath dipped them and the living bird in the blood of the slaughtered bird, over the running water,
and he hath sprinkled on him who is to be cleansed from the leprosy seven times, and hath pronounced him clean, and hath sent out the living bird on the face of the field.
'And he who is to be cleansed hath washed his garments, and hath shaved all his hair, and hath bathed with water, and hath been clean, and afterwards he doth come in unto the camp, and hath dwelt at the outside of his tent seven days.
'And it hath been, on the seventh day — he shaveth all his hair, his head, and his beard, and his eyebrows, even all his hair he doth shave, and he hath washed his garments, and hath bathed his flesh with water, and hath been clean.
'And on the eighth day he taketh two lambs, perfect ones, and one ewe-lamb, daughter of a year, a perfect one, and three tenth deals of flour [for] a present, mixed with oil, and one log of oil.
'And the priest who is cleansing hath caused the man who is to be cleansed to stand with them before Jehovah, at the opening of the tent of meeting,
and the priest hath taken the one he-lamb, and hath brought it near for a guilt-offering, also the log of oil, and hath waved them — a wave offering before Jehovah.
'And he hath slaughtered the lamb in the place where he slaughtereth the sin-offering and the burnt-offering, in the holy place; for like the sin-offering the guilt-offering is to the priest; it [is] most holy.
'And the priest hath taken of the blood of the guilt-offering, and the priest hath put on the tip of the right ear of him who is to be cleansed, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the great toe of his right foot;
and the priest hath taken of the log of oil, and hath poured on the left palm of the priest,
and the priest hath dipped his right finger in the oil which [is] on his left palm, and hath sprinkled of the oil with his finger seven times before Jehovah.
'And of the residue of the oil which [is] on his palm, the priest putteth on the tip of the right ear of him who is to be cleansed, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the great toe of his right foot, on the blood of the guilt-offering;
and the remnant of the oil which [is] on the palm of the priest, he putteth on the head of him who is to be cleansed, and the priest hath made atonement for him before Jehovah.
'And the priest hath made the sin-offering, and hath made atonement for him who is to be cleansed from his uncleanness, and afterwards he doth slaughter the burnt-offering;
and the priest hath caused the burnt-offering to ascend, also the present, on the altar, and the priest hath made atonement for him, and he hath been clean.
'And if he [is] poor, and his hand is not reaching [these things], then he hath taken one lamb — a guilt-offering, for a wave-offering, to make atonement for him, and one-tenth deal of flour mixed with oil for a present, and a log of oil,
and two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, which his hand reacheth to, and one hath been a sin-offering, and the one a burnt-offering;
and he hath brought them in on the eighth day for his cleansing unto the priest, unto the opening of the tent of meeting, before Jehovah.
'And the priest hath taken the lamb of the guilt-offering, and the log of oil, and the priest hath waved them — a wave-offering before Jehovah;
and he hath slaughtered the lamb of the guilt-offering, and the priest hath taken of the blood of the guilt-offering, and hath put on the tip of the right ear of him who is to be cleansed, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the great toe of his right foot;
and the priest doth pour of the oil on the left palm of the priest;
and the priest hath sprinkled with his right finger of the oil which [is] on his left palm, seven times before Jehovah.
'And the priest hath put of the oil which [is] on his palm, on the tip of the right ear of him who is to be cleansed, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the great toe of his right foot, on the place of the blood of the guilt-offering;
and the remnant of the oil which [is] on the palm of the priest he doth put on the head of him who is to be cleansed, to make atonement for him, before Jehovah.
'And he hath made the one of the turtle-doves, or of the young pigeons (from that which his hand reacheth to,
[even] that which his hand reacheth to), the one a sin-offering, and the one a burnt offering, besides the present, and the priest hath made atonement for him who is to be cleansed before Jehovah.
This [is] a law of him in whom [is] a plague of leprosy, whose hand reacheth not to his cleansing.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, and unto Aaron, saying,
'When ye come in unto the land of Canaan, which I am giving to you for a possession, and I have put a plague of leprosy in a house [in] the land of your possession;
then hath he whose the house [is] come in and declared to the priest, saying, As a plague hath appeared to me in the house;
and the priest hath commanded, and they have prepared the house before the priest cometh in to see the plague (that all which [is] in the house be not unclean), and afterwards doth the priest come in to see the house;
and he hath seen the plague, and lo, the plague [is] in the walls of the house, hollow strakes, very green or very red, and their appearance [is] lower than the wall,
and the priest hath gone out of the house unto the opening of the house, and hath shut up the house seven days.
'And the priest hath turned back on the seventh day, and hath seen, and lo, the plague hath spread in the walls of the house,
and the priest hath commanded, and they have drawn out the stones in which the plague [is], and have cast them unto the outside of the city, unto an unclean place;
and the house he doth cause to be scraped within round about, and they have poured out the clay which they have scraped off, at the outside of the city, at an unclean place;
and they have taken other stones, and brought [them] in unto the place of the stones, and other clay he taketh and hath daubed the house.
'And if the plague return, and hath broken out in the house, after he hath drawn out the stones, and after the scraping of the house, and after the daubing;
then hath the priest come in and seen, and lo, the plague hath spread in the house; it [is] a fretting leprosy in the house; it [is] unclean.
'And he hath broken down the house, its stones, and its wood, and all the clay of the house, and he hath brought [them] forth unto the outside of the city, unto an unclean place.
'And he who is going in unto the house all the days he hath shut it up, is unclean till the evening;
and he who is lying in the house doth wash his garments; and he who is eating in the house doth wash his garments.
'And if the priest certainly come in, and hath seen, and lo, the plague hath not spread in the house after the daubing of the house, then hath the priest pronounced the house clean, for the plague hath been healed.
'And he hath taken for the cleansing of the house two birds, and cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop;
and he hath slaughtered the one bird upon an earthen vessel, over running water;
and he hath taken the cedar wood, and the hyssop, and the scarlet, and the living bird, and hath dipped them in the blood of the slaughtered bird, and in the running water, and hath sprinkled upon the house seven times.
'And he hath cleansed the house with the blood of the bird, and with the running water, and with the living bird, and with the cedar wood, and with the hyssop, and with the scarlet;
and he hath sent away the living bird unto the outside of the city unto the face of the field, and hath made atonement for the house, and it hath been clean.
'This [is] the law for every plague of the leprosy and for scall,
and for leprosy of a garment, and of a house,
and for a rising, and for a scab, and for a bright spot, —
to direct in the day of being unclean, and in the day of being clean; this [is] the law of the leprosy.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, and unto Aaron, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, and ye have said unto them, When there is an issue out of the flesh of any man, [for] his issue he [is] unclean;
and this is his uncleanness in his issue — his flesh hath run with his issue, or his flesh hath stopped from his issue; it [is] his uncleanness.
'All the bed on which he lieth who hath the issue is unclean, and all the vessel on which he sitteth is unclean;
and any one who cometh against his bed doth wash his garments, and hath bathed with water, and been unclean till the evening.
'And he who is sitting on the vessel on which he sitteth who hath the issue, doth wash his garments, and hath bathed with water, and been unclean till the evening.
'And he who is coming against the flesh of him who hath the issue, doth wash his garments, and hath bathed with water, and hath been unclean till the evening.
'And when he who hath the issue spitteth on him who is clean, then he hath washed his garments, and hath bathed with water, and been unclean till the evening.
'And all the saddle on which he rideth who hath the issue is unclean;
and any one who is coming against anything which is under him is unclean till the evening, and he who is bearing them doth wash his garments, and hath bathed with water, and been unclean till the evening.
'And anyone against whom he cometh who hath the issue (and his hands hath not rinsed with water) hath even washed his garments, and bathed with water, and been unclean till the evening.
'And the earthen vessel which he who hath the issue cometh against is broken; and every wooden vessel is rinsed with water.
'And when he who hath the issue is clean from his issue, then he hath numbered to himself seven days for his cleansing, and hath washed his garments, and hath bathed his flesh with running water, and been clean.
'And on the eighth day he taketh to himself two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, and hath come in before Jehovah unto the opening of the tent of meeting, and hath given them unto the priest;
and the priest hath made them, one a sin-offering, and the one a burnt-offering; and the priest hath made atonement for him before Jehovah, because of his issue.
'And when a man's seed of copulation goeth out from him, then he hath bathed with water all his flesh, and been unclean till the evening.
'And any garment, or any skin on which there is seed of copulation, hath also been washed with water, and been unclean till the evening.
'And a woman with whom a man lieth with seed of copulation, they also have bathed with water, and been unclean till the evening.
'And when a woman hath an issue — blood is her issue in her flesh — seven days she is in her separation, and any one who is coming against her is unclean till the evening.
'And anything on which she lieth in her separation is unclean, and anything on which she sitteth is unclean;
and any one who is coming against her bed doth wash his garments, and hath bathed with water, and been unclean till the evening.
'And any one who is coming against any vessel on which she sitteth doth wash his garments, and hath washed with water, and been unclean till the evening.
'And if it [is] on the bed, or on the vessel on which she is sitting, in his coming against it, he is unclean till the evening.
'And if a man really lie with her, and her separation is on him, then he hath been unclean seven days, and all the bed on which he lieth is unclean.
'And when a woman's issue of blood floweth many days within the time of her separation, or when it floweth over her separation — all the days of the issue of her uncleanness are as the days of her separation; she [is] unclean.
'All the bed on which she lieth all the days of her issue is as the bed of her separation to her, and all the vessel on which she sitteth is unclean as the uncleanness of her separation;
and any one who is coming against them is unclean, and hath washed his garments, and hath bathed with water, and been unclean till the evening.
'And if she hath been clean from her issue, then she hath numbered to herself seven days, and afterwards she is clean;
and on the eighth day she taketh to herself two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, and hath brought them in unto the priest, unto the opening of the tent of meeting;
and the priest hath made the one a sin-offering, and the one a burnt-offering, and the priest hath made atonement for her before Jehovah, because of the issue of her uncleanness.
'And ye have separated the sons of Israel from their uncleanness, and they die not in their uncleanness, in their defiling My tabernacle which [is] in their midst.
'This [is] the law of him who hath an issue, and of him whose seed of copulation goeth out from him, for uncleanness thereby,
and of her who is sick in her separation, and of him who hath an issue, the issue of a male or of a female, and of a man who lieth with an unclean woman.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, after the death of the two sons of Aaron, in their drawing near before Jehovah, and they die;
yea, Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Speak unto Aaron thy brother, and he cometh not in at all times unto the sanctuary within the vail, unto the front of the mercy-seat, which [is] upon the ark, and he dieth not, for in a cloud I am seen upon the mercy-seat.
'With this doth Aaron come in unto the sanctuary; with a bullock, a son of the herd, for a sin-offering, and a ram for a burnt-offering;
a holy linen coat he putteth on, and linen trousers are on his flesh, and with a linen girdle he girdeth himself, and with a linen mitre he wrappeth himself up; they [are] holy garments; and he hath bathed with water his flesh, and hath put them on.
'And from the company of the sons of Israel he taketh two kids of the goats for a sin-offering, and one ram for a burnt-offering;
and Aaron hath brought near the bullock of the sin-offering which is his own, and hath made atonement for himself, and for his house;
and he hath taken the two goats, and hath caused them to stand before Jehovah, at the opening of the tent of meeting.
'And Aaron hath given lots over the two goats, one lot for Jehovah, and one lot for a goat of departure;
and Aaron hath brought near the goat on which the lot for Jehovah hath gone up, and hath made it a sin-offering.
'And the goat on which the lot for a goat of departure hath gone up is caused to stand living before Jehovah to make atonement by it, to send it away for a goat of departure into the wilderness.
'And Aaron hath brought near the bullock of the sin-offering which is his own, and hath made atonement for himself, and for his house, and hath slaughtered the bullock of the sin-offering which [is] his own,
and hath taken the fulness of the censer of burning coals of fire from off the altar, from before Jehovah, and the fulness of his hands of thin spice-perfume, and hath brought [it] within the vail;
and he hath put the perfume on the fire before Jehovah, and the cloud of the perfume hath covered the mercy-seat which [is] on the testimony, and he dieth not.
'And he hath taken of the blood of the bullock, and hath sprinkled with his finger on the front of the mercy-seat eastward; even at the front of the mercy-seat he doth sprinkle seven times of the blood with his finger.
'And he hath slaughtered the goat of the sin-offering which [is] the people's, and hath brought in its blood unto the inside of the vail, and hath done with its blood as he hath done with the blood of the bullock, and hath sprinkled it on the mercy-seat, and at the front of the mercy-seat,
and he hath made atonement for the sanctuary because of the uncleanness of the sons of Israel, and because of their transgressions in all their sins; and so he doth for the tent of meeting which is tabernacling with them in the midst of their uncleannesses.
'And no man is in the tent of meeting in his going in to make atonement in the sanctuary, till his coming out; and he hath made atonement for himself, and for his house, and for all the assembly of Israel.
'And he hath gone out unto the altar which [is] before Jehovah, and hath made atonement for it; and he hath taken of the blood of the bullock, and of the blood of the goat, and hath put on the horns of the altar round about;
and he hath sprinkled on it of the blood with his finger seven times, and hath cleansed it, and hath hallowed it from the uncleannesses of the sons of Israel.
'And he hath ceased from making atonement [for] the sanctuary, and the tent of meeting, and the altar, and hath brought near the living goat;
and Aaron hath laid his two hands on the head of the living goat, and hath confessed over it all the iniquities of the sons of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their sins, and hath put them on the head of the goat, and hath sent [it] away by the hand of a fit man into the wilderness;
and the goat hath borne on him all their iniquities unto a land of separation. 'And he hath sent the goat away into the wilderness,
and Aaron hath come in unto the tent of meeting, and hath stripped off the linen garments which he had put on in his going in unto the sanctuary, and hath placed them there;
and he hath bathed his flesh with water in the holy place, and hath put on his garments, and hath come out, and hath made his burnt-offering, and the burnt-offering of the people, and hath made atonement for himself and for the people;
and with the fat of the sin-offering he doth make perfume on the altar.
'And he who is sending away the goat for a goat of departure doth wash his garments, and hath bathed his flesh with water, and afterwards he cometh in unto the camp.
'And the bullock of the sin-offering, and the goat of the sin-offering, whose blood hath been brought in to make atonement in the sanctuary, doth [one] bring out unto the outside of the camp, and they have burnt with fire their skins, and their flesh, and their dung;
and he who is burning them doth wash his garments, and hath bathed his flesh with water, and afterwards he cometh in unto the camp.
'And it hath been to you for a statute age-during, in the seventh month, in the tenth of the month, ye humble yourselves, and do no work — the native, and the sojourner who is sojourning in your midst;
for on this day he maketh atonement for you, to cleanse you; from all your sins before Jehovah ye are clean;
it [is] to you a sabbath of rest, and ye have humbled yourselves — a statute age-during.
'And the priest whom he doth anoint, and whose hand he doth consecrate to act as priest instead of his father, hath made atonement, and hath put on the linen garments, the holy garments;
and he hath made atonement [for] the holy sanctuary; and [for] the tent of meeting, even [for] the altar he doth make atonement; yea, for the priests, and for all the people of the assembly he maketh atonement.
'And this hath been to you for a statute age-during, to make atonement for the sons of Israel, because of all their sins, once in a year;' and he doth as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto Aaron, and unto his sons, and unto all the sons of Israel; and thou hast said unto them, This [is] the thing which Jehovah hath commanded, saying,
Any man of the house of Israel who slaughtereth ox, or lamb, or goat, in the camp, or who slaughtereth at the outside of the camp,
and unto the opening of the tent of meeting hath not brought it in to bring near an offering to Jehovah before the tabernacle of Jehovah, blood is reckoned to that man — blood he hath shed — and that man hath been cut off from the midst of his people;
so that the sons of Israel do bring in their sacrifices which they are sacrificing on the face of the field, yea, they have brought them in to Jehovah, unto the opening of the tent of meeting, unto the priest, and they have sacrificed sacrifices of peace-offerings to Jehovah with them.
'And the priest hath sprinkled the blood upon the altar of Jehovah, at the opening of the tent of meeting, and hath made perfume with the fat for sweet fragrance to Jehovah;
and they sacrifice not any more their sacrifices to goats after which they are going a-whoring; a statute age-during is this to them, to their generations.
'And unto them thou sayest: Any man of the house of Israel, or of the sojourners, who sojourneth in your midst, who causeth burnt-offering or sacrifice to ascend,
and unto the opening of the tent of meeting doth not bring it in to make it to Jehovah — that man hath been cut off from his people.
'And any man of the house of Israel, or of the sojourners, who is sojourning in your midst, who eateth any blood, I have even set My face against the person who is eating the blood, and have cut him off from the midst of his people;
for the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I have given it to you on the altar, to make atonement for your souls; for it [is] the blood which maketh atonement for the soul.
'Therefore I have said to the sons of Israel, No person among you doth eat blood, and the sojourner who is sojourning in your midst doth not eat blood;
and any man of the sons of Israel, or of the sojourners, who is sojourning in your midst, who hunteth venison, beast or fowl, which is eaten — hath even poured out its blood, and hath covered it with dust;
for [it is] the life of all flesh, its blood is for its life; and I say to the sons of Israel, Blood of any flesh ye do not eat, for the life of all flesh is its blood; any one eating it is cut off.
'And any person who eateth a carcase or torn thing, among natives or among sojourners — hath both washed his garments, and hath bathed with water, and hath been unclean until the evening — then he hath been clean;
and if he wash not, and his flesh bathe not — then he hath borne his iniquity.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, and thou hast said unto them, I [am] Jehovah your God;
according to the work of the land of Egypt in which ye have dwelt ye do not, and according to the work of the land of Canaan whither I am bringing you in, ye do not, and in their statutes ye walk not.
'My judgments ye do, and My statutes ye keep, to walk in them; I [am] Jehovah your God;
and ye have kept My statutes and My judgments which man doth and liveth in them; I [am] Jehovah.
'None of you unto any relation of his flesh doth draw near to uncover nakedness; I [am] Jehovah.
'The nakedness of thy father and the nakedness of thy mother thou dost not uncover, she [is] thy mother; thou dost not uncover her nakedness.
'The nakedness of the wife of thy father thou dost not uncover; it [is] the nakedness of thy father.
'The nakedness of thy sister, daughter of thy father, or daughter of thy mother, born at home or born without; thou dost not uncover their nakedness.
'The nakedness of thy son's daughter, or of thy daughter's daughter: thou dost not uncover their nakedness; for theirs [is] thy nakedness.
'The nakedness of a daughter of thy father's wife, begotten of thy father, she [is] thy sister; thou dost not uncover her nakedness.
'The nakedness of a sister of thy father thou dost not uncover; she [is] a relation of thy father.
'The nakedness of thy mother's sister thou dost not uncover; for she [is] thy mother's relation.
'The nakedness of thy father's brother thou dost not uncover; unto his wife thou dost not draw near; she [is] thine aunt.
'The nakedness of thy daughter-in-law thou dost not uncover; she [is] thy son's wife; thou dost not uncover her nakedness.
'The nakedness of thy brother's wife thou dost not uncover; it [is] thy brother's nakedness.
'The nakedness of a woman and her daughter thou dost not uncover; her son's daughter, and her daughter's daughter thou dost not take to uncover her nakedness; they [are] her relations; it [is] wickedness.
'And a woman unto another thou dost not take, to be an adversary, to uncover her nakedness beside her, in her life.
'And unto a woman in the separation of her uncleanness thou dost not draw near to uncover her nakedness.
'And unto the wife of thy fellow thou dost not give thy seed of copulation, for uncleanness with her.
'And of thy seed thou dost not give to pass over to the Molech; nor dost thou pollute the name of thy God; I [am] Jehovah.
'And with a male thou dost not lie as one lieth with a woman; abomination it [is].
'And with any beast thou dost not give thy copulation, for uncleanness with it; and a woman doth not stand before a beast to lie down with it; confusion it [is].
'Ye are not defiled with all these, for with all these have the nations been defiled which I am sending away from before you;
and the land is defiled, and I charge its iniquity upon it, and the land vomiteth out its inhabitants:
and ye — ye have kept My statutes and My judgments, and do not [any] of all these abominations, the native and the sojourner who is sojourning in your midst,
(for all these abominations have the men of the land done who [are] before you, and the land is defiled),
and the land doth not vomit you out in your defiling it, as it hath vomited out the nation which [is] before you;
for any one who doth [any] of all these abominations — even the persons who are doing [so], have been cut off from the midst of their people;
and ye have kept My charge, so as not to do [any] of the abominable statutes which have been done before you, and ye do not defile yourselves with them; I [am] Jehovah your God.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto all the company of the sons of Israel, and thou hast said unto them, Ye are holy, for holy [am] I, Jehovah, your God.
'Each his mother and his father ye do fear, and My sabbaths ye do keep; I [am] Jehovah your God.
'Ye do not turn unto the idols, and a molten god ye do not make to yourselves; I [am] Jehovah your God.
'And when ye sacrifice a sacrifice of peace-offerings to Jehovah, at your pleasure ye do sacrifice it;
in the day of your sacrificing it is eaten, and on the morrow, and that which is left unto the third day with fire is burnt,
and if it be really eaten on the third day, it [is] an abomination, it is not pleasing,
and he who is eating it his iniquity doth bear, for the holy thing of Jehovah he hath polluted, and that person hath been cut off from his people.
'And in your reaping the harvest of your land ye do not completely reap the corner of thy field, and the gleaning of thy harvest thou dost not gather,
and thy vineyard thou dost not glean, even the omitted part of thy vineyard thou dost not gather, to the poor and to the sojourner thou dost leave them; I [am] Jehovah your God.
'Ye do not steal, nor feign, nor lie one against his fellow.
'And ye do not swear by My name to falsehood, or thou hast polluted the name of thy God; I [am] Jehovah.
'Thou dost not oppress thy neighbour, nor take plunder; the wages of the hireling doth not remain with thee till morning.
'Thou dost not revile the deaf; and before the blind thou dost not put a stumbling block; and thou hast been afraid of thy God; I [am] Jehovah.
'Ye do not do perversity in judgment; thou dost not lift up the face of the poor, nor honour the face of the great; in righteousness thou dost judge thy fellow.
'Thou dost not go slandering among thy people; thou dost not stand against the blood of thy neighbour; I [am] Jehovah.
'Thou dost not hate thy brother in thy heart; thou dost certainly reprove thy fellow, and not suffer sin on him.
'Thou dost not take vengeance, nor watch the sons of thy people; and thou hast had love to thy neighbour as thyself; I [am] Jehovah.
'My statutes ye do keep: thy cattle thou dost not cause to gender [with] diverse kinds; thy field thou dost not sow with diverse kinds, and a garment of diverse kinds, shaatnez, doth not go up upon thee.
'And when a man lieth with a woman with seed of copulation, and she a maid-servant, betrothed to a man, and not really ransomed, or freedom hath not been given to her, an investigation there is; they are not put to death, for she [is] not free.
'And he hath brought in his guilt-offering to Jehovah, unto the opening of the tent of meeting, a ram [for] a guilt-offering,
and the priest hath made atonement for him with the ram of the guilt-offering before Jehovah, for his sin which he hath sinned, and it hath been forgiven him because of his sin which he hath sinned.
'And when ye come in unto the land, and have planted all [kinds] of trees [for] food, then ye have reckoned as uncircumcised its fruit, three years it is to you uncircumcised, it is not eaten,
and in the fourth year all its fruit is holy — praises for Jehovah.
And in the fifth year ye do eat its fruit — to add to you its increase; I [am] Jehovah your God.
'Ye do not eat with the blood; ye do not enchant, nor observe clouds.
'Ye do not round the corner of your head, nor destroy the corner of thy beard.
'And a cutting for the soul ye do not put in your flesh; and a writing, a cross-mark, ye do not put on you; I [am] Jehovah.
'Thou dost not pollute thy daughter to cause her to go a-whoring, that the land go not a-whoring, and the land hath been full of wickedness.
'My sabbaths ye do keep, and My sanctuary ye do reverence; I [am] Jehovah.
'Ye do not turn unto those having familiar spirits; and unto wizards ye do not seek, for uncleanness by them; I [am] Jehovah your God.
'At the presence of grey hairs thou dost rise up, and thou hast honoured the presence of an old man, and hast been afraid of thy God; I [am] Jehovah.
'And when a sojourner sojourneth with thee in your land, thou dost not oppress him;
as a native among you is the sojourner to you who is sojourning with you, and thou hast had love to him as to thyself, for sojourners ye have been in the land of Egypt; I [am] Jehovah your God.
'Ye do not do perversity in judgment, in mete-yard, in weight, or in liquid measure;
righteous balances, righteous weights, a righteous ephah, and a righteous hin ye have; I [am] Jehovah your God, who hath brought you out from the land of Egypt;
and ye have observed all my statutes, and all my judgments, and have done them; I [am] Jehovah.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'And unto the sons of Israel thou dost say, Any man of the sons of Israel, and of the sojourners who is sojourning in Israel, who giveth of his seed to the Molech, is certainly put to death; the people of the land do stone him with stones;
and I — I set My face against that man, and have cut him off from the midst of his people, for of his seed he hath given to the Molech, so as to defile My sanctuary, and to pollute My holy name.
'And if the people of the land really hide their eyes from that man, in his giving of his seed to the Molech, so as not to put him to death,
then I have set My face against that man, and against his family, and have cut him off, and all who are going a-whoring after him, even going a-whoring after the Molech, from the midst of their people.
'And the person who turneth unto those having familiar spirits, and unto the wizards, to go a-whoring after them, I have even set My face against that person, and cut him off from the midst of his people.
'And ye have sanctified yourselves, and ye have been holy, for I [am] Jehovah your God;
and ye have kept My statutes and have done them; I [am] Jehovah, sanctifying you.
'For any man who revileth his father and his mother is certainly put to death; his father and his mother he hath reviled: his blood [is] on him.
'And a man who committeth adultery with a man's wife — who committeth adultery with the wife of his neighbour — the adulterer and the adulteress are surely put to death.
'And a man who lieth with his father's wife — the nakedness of his father he hath uncovered — both of them are certainly put to death; their blood [is] on them.
'And a man who lieth with his daughter-in-law — both of them are certainly put to death; confusion they have made; their blood [is] on them.
'And a man who lieth with a male as one lieth with a woman; abomination both of them have done; they are certainly put to death; their blood [is] on them.
'And a man who taketh the woman and her mother — it [is] wickedness; with fire they burn him and them, and there is no wickedness in your midst.
'And a man who giveth his lying with a beast is certainly put to death, and the beast ye do slay.
'And a woman who draweth near unto any beast to lie with it — thou hast even slain the woman and the beast; they are certainly put to death; their blood [is] on them.
'And a man who taketh his sister, a daughter of his father or daughter of his mother, and he hath seen her nakedness, and she seeth his nakedness: it is a shame; and they have been cut off before the eyes of the sons of their people; the nakedness of his sister he hath uncovered; his iniquity he beareth.
'And a man who lieth with a sick woman, and hath uncovered her nakedness, her fountain he hath made bare, and she hath uncovered the fountain of her blood, — even both of them have been cut off from the midst of their people.
'And the nakedness of thy mother's sister, and of thy father's sister, thou dost not uncover; because his relation he hath made bare; their iniquity they bear.
'And a man who lieth with his aunt, the nakedness of his uncle he hath uncovered; their sin they bear; childless they die.
'And a man who taketh his brother's wife — it [is] impurity; the nakedness of his brother he hath uncovered; childless they are.
'And ye have kept all My statutes, and all My judgments, and have done them, and the land vomiteth you not out whither I am bringing you in to dwell in it;
and ye walk not in the statutes of the nation which I am sending away from before you, for all these they have done, and I am wearied with them;
and I say to you, Ye — ye do possess their ground, and I — I give it to you to possess it, a land flowing with milk and honey; I [am] Jehovah your God, who hath separated you from the peoples.
'And ye have made separation between the pure beasts and the unclean, and between the unclean fowl and the pure, and ye do not make yourselves abominable by beast or by fowl, or by anything which creepeth [on] the ground which I have separated to you for unclean;
and ye have been holy to Me; for holy [am] I, Jehovah; and I separate you from the peoples to become Mine.
'And a man or woman — when there is in them a familiar spirit, or who [are] wizards — are certainly put to death; with stones they stone them; their blood [is] on them.'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Speak unto the priests, sons of Aaron, and thou hast said unto them, For [any] person [a priest] is not defiled among his people,
except for his relation who [is] near unto him — for his mother, and for his father, and for his son, and for his daughter, and for his brother.
and for his sister, the virgin, who is near unto him, who hath not been to a man; for her he is defiled.
'A master [priest] doth not defile himself among his people — to pollute himself;
they do not make baldness on their head, and the corner of their beard they do not shave, and in their flesh they do not make a cutting;
they are holy to their God, and they pollute not the name of their God, for the fire-offerings of Jehovah, bread of their God, they are bringing near, and have been holy.
'A woman, a harlot, or polluted, they do not take, and a woman cast out from her husband they do not take, for he [is] holy to his God;
and thou hast sanctified him, for the bread of thy God he is bringing near; he is holy to thee; for holy [am] I, Jehovah, sanctifying you.
'And a daughter of any priest when she polluteth herself by going a-whoring — her father she is polluting; with fire she is burnt.
'And the high priest of his brethren, on whose head is poured the anointing oil, and hath consecrated his hand to put on the garments, his head doth not uncover, nor rend his garments,
nor beside any dead person doth he come; for his father and for his mother he doth not defile himself;
nor from the sanctuary doth he go out, nor doth he pollute the sanctuary of his God, for the separation of the anointing oil of his God [is] on him; I [am] Jehovah.
'And he taketh a wife in her virginity;
widow, or cast out, or polluted one — a harlot — these he doth not take, but a virgin of his own people he doth take [for] a wife,
and he doth not pollute his seed among his people; for I [am] Jehovah, sanctifying him.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto Aaron, saying, No man of thy seed to their generations in whom there is blemish doth draw near to bring near the bread of his God,
for no man in whom [is] blemish doth draw near — a man blind, or lame or dwarfed, or enlarged,
or a man in whom there is a breach in the foot, or a breach in the hand,
or hump-backed, or a dwarf, or with a mixture in his eye, or a scurvy person, or scabbed, or broken-testicled.
'No man in whom is blemish (of the seed of Aaron the priest) doth come nigh to bring near the fire-offerings of Jehovah; blemish [is] in him; the bread of his God he doth not come nigh to bring near.
'Bread of his God — of the most holy things, and of the holy things — he doth eat;
only, unto the vail he doth not enter, and unto the altar he doth not draw nigh; for blemish [is] in him; and he doth not pollute My sanctuaries; for I [am] Jehovah, sanctifying them.'
And Moses speaketh unto Aaron, and unto his sons, and unto all the sons of Israel.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto Aaron, and unto his sons, and they are separated from the holy things of the sons of Israel, and they pollute not My holy name in what they are hallowing to Me; I [am] Jehovah.
'Say unto them, To your generations, any man who draweth near, out of all your seed, unto the holy things which the sons of Israel do sanctify to Jehovah, and his uncleanness on him — even that person hath been cut off from before Me; I [am] Jehovah.
'Any man of the seed of Aaron, and is leprous or hath an issue — of the holy things he doth not eat till that he is clean; and he who is coming against any uncleanness of a person, or a man whose seed of copulation goeth out from him,
or a man who cometh against any teeming thing which is unclean to him, or against a man who is unclean to him, even any of his uncleanness —
the person who cometh against it — hath even been unclean till the evening, and doth not eat of the holy things, but hath bathed his flesh with water,
and the sun hath gone in, and he hath been clean, and afterwards he doth eat of the holy things, for it [is] his food;
a carcase or torn thing he doth not eat, for uncleanness thereby; I [am] Jehovah.
'And they have kept My charge, and bear no sin for it, that they have died for it when they pollute it; I [am] Jehovah sanctifying them.
'And no stranger doth eat of the holy thing; a settler of a priest and an hireling doth not eat of the holy thing;
and when a priest buyeth a person, the purchase of his money, he doth eat of it, also one born in his house; they do eat of his bread.
'And a priest's daughter, when she is a strange man's, — she, of the heave-offering of the holy things doth not eat;
and a priest's daughter, when she is a widow, or cast out, and hath no seed, and hath turned back unto the house of her father, as [in] her youth, of her father's bread she doth eat; but no stranger doth eat of it.
'And when a man doth eat of a holy thing through ignorance, then he hath added its fifth part to it, and hath given [it] to the priest, with the holy thing;
and they do not pollute the holy things of the sons of Israel — that which they lift up to Jehovah,
nor have caused them to bear the iniquity of the guilt-offering in their eating their holy things; for I [am] Jehovah, sanctifying them.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto Aaron, and unto his sons, and unto all the sons of Israel, and thou hast said unto them, Any man of the house of Israel, or of the sojourners in Israel, who bringeth near his offering, of all his vows, or of all his willing offerings which they bring near to Jehovah for a burnt-offering;
at your pleasure a perfect one, a male of the herd, of the sheep or of the goats;
nothing in which [is] blemish do ye bring near, for it is not for a pleasing thing for you.
'And when a man bringeth near a sacrifice of peace-offerings to Jehovah, to complete a vow, or for a willing-offering, of the herd or of the flock, it is perfect for a pleasing thing: no blemish is in it;
blind, or broken, or maimed, or having a wen, or scurvy, or scabbed — ye do not bring these near to Jehovah, and a fire-offering ye do not make of them on the altar to Jehovah.
'As to an ox or a sheep enlarged or dwarfed — a willing-offering ye do make it, but for a vow it is not pleasing.
As to a bruised, or beaten, or enlarged, or cut thing — ye do not bring [it] near to Jehovah; even in your land ye do not do it.
And from the hand of a son of a stranger ye do not bring near the bread of your God, of any of these, for their corruption [is] in them; blemish [is] in them; they are not pleasing for you.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'When ox or lamb or goat is born, and it hath been seven days under its dam, then from the eighth day and henceforth, it is pleasing for an offering, a fire-offering to Jehovah;
but an ox or sheep — it and its young one, ye do not slaughter in one day.
'And when ye sacrifice a sacrifice of thanksgiving to Jehovah, at your pleasure ye do sacrifice,
on that day it is eaten, ye do not leave of it till morning; I [am] Jehovah;
and ye have kept my commands, and have done them; I [am] Jehovah;
and ye do not pollute My holy name, and I have been hallowed in the midst of the sons of Israel; I [am] Jehovah, sanctifying you,
who am bringing you up out of the land of Egypt, to become your God; I [am] Jehovah.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, and thou hast said unto them, Appointed seasons of Jehovah, which ye proclaim, holy convocations, [are] these: they [are] My appointed seasons:
six days is work done, and in the seventh day [is] a sabbath of rest, a holy convocation; ye do no work; it [is] a sabbath to Jehovah in all your dwellings.
'These [are] appointed seasons of Jehovah, holy convocations, which ye proclaim in their appointed seasons:
in the first month, on the fourteenth of the month, between the evenings, [is] the passover to Jehovah;
and on the fifteenth day of this month [is] the feast of unleavened things to Jehovah; seven days unleavened things ye do eat;
on the first day ye have a holy convocation, ye do no servile work;
and ye have brought near a fire-offering to Jehovah seven days; in the seventh day [is] a holy convocation; ye do no servile work.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, and thou hast said unto them, When ye come in unto the land which I am giving to you, and have reaped its harvest, and have brought in the sheaf, the beginning of your harvest unto the priest,
then he hath waved the sheaf before Jehovah for your acceptance; on the morrow of the sabbath doth the priest wave it.
'And ye have prepared in the day of your waving the sheaf a lamb, a perfect one, a son of a year, for a burnt-offering to Jehovah,
and its present two tenth deals of flour mixed with oil, a fire-offering to Jehovah, a sweet fragrance, and its drink-offering, wine, a fourth of the hin.
'And bread and roasted corn and full ears ye do not eat until this self-same day, until your bringing in the offering of your God — a statute age-during to your generations, in all your dwellings.
'And ye have numbered to you from the morrow of the sabbath, from the day of your bringing in the sheaf of the wave-offering: they are seven perfect sabbaths;
unto the morrow of the seventh sabbath ye do number fifty days, and ye have brought near a new present to Jehovah;
out of your dwellings ye bring in bread of a wave-offering, two [loaves], of two tenth deals of flour they are, [with] yeast they are baken, first -[fruits] to Jehovah.
'And ye have brought near, besides the bread, seven lambs, perfect ones, sons of a year, and one bullock, a son of the herd, and two rams; they are a burnt-offering to Jehovah, with their present and their libations, a fire-offering of sweet fragrance to Jehovah.
'And ye have prepared one kid of the goats for a sin-offering, and two lambs, sons of a year, for a sacrifice of peace-offerings,
and the priest hath waved them, besides the bread of the first -[fruits] — a wave-offering before Jehovah, besides the two lambs; they are holy to Jehovah for the priest;
and ye have proclaimed on this self-same day: a holy convocation is to you, ye do no servile work — a statute age-during in all your dwellings, to your generations.
'And in your reaping the harvest of your land thou dost not complete the corner of thy field in thy reaping, and the gleaning of thy harvest thou dost not gather, to the poor and to the sojourner thou dost leave them; I Jehovah [am] your God.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, saying, In the seventh month, on the first of the month, ye have a sabbath, a memorial of shouting, a holy convocation;
ye do no servile work, and ye have brought near a fire-offering to Jehovah.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Only — on the tenth of this seventh month is a day of atonements; ye have a holy convocation, and ye have humbled yourselves, and have brought near a fire-offering to Jehovah;
and ye do no work in this self-same day, for it is a day of atonements, to make atonement for you, before Jehovah your God.
'For any person who is not humbled in this self-same day hath even been cut off from his people;
and any person who doth any work in this self-same day I have even destroyed that person from the midst of his people;
ye do no work — a statute age-during to your generations in all your dwellings.
It [is] a sabbath of rest to you, and ye have humbled yourselves in the ninth of the month at even; from evening till evening ye do keep your sabbath.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, saying, In the fifteenth day of this seventh month [is] a feast of booths seven days to Jehovah;
on the first day [is] a holy convocation, ye do no servile work,
seven days ye bring near a fire-offering to Jehovah, on the eighth day ye have a holy convocation, and ye have brought near a fire-offering to Jehovah; it [is] a restraint, ye do no servile work.
'These [are] appointed seasons of Jehovah, which ye proclaim holy convocations, to bring near a fire-offering to Jehovah, a burnt-offering, and a present, a sacrifice, and libations, a thing of a day in its day,
apart from the sabbaths of Jehovah, and apart from your gifts, and apart from all your vows, and apart from all your willing-offerings, which ye give to Jehovah.
'Only — in the fifteenth day of the seventh month, in your gathering the increase of the land, ye do keep the feast of Jehovah seven days; on the first day [is] a sabbath, and on the eighth day a sabbath;
and ye have taken to yourselves on the first day the fruit of beautiful trees, branches of palms, and boughs of thick trees, and willows of a brook, and have rejoiced before Jehovah your God seven days.
'And ye have kept it a feast to Jehovah, seven days in a year — a statute age-during to your generations; in the seventh month ye keep it a feast.
'In booths ye dwell seven days; all who are natives in Israel dwell in booths,
so that your generations do know that in booths I caused the sons of Israel to dwell; in my bringing them out of the land of Egypt; I, Jehovah, [am] your God.'
And Moses speaketh [concerning] the appointed seasons of Jehovah unto the sons of Israel.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Command the sons of Israel, and they bring unto thee pure olive oil, beaten, for the lamp, to cause a light to go up continually;
at the outside of the vail of the testimony in the tent of meeting doth Aaron arrange it from evening till morning before Jehovah continually — a statute age-during to your generations;
by the pure candlestick he doth arrange the lights before Jehovah continually.
'And thou hast taken flour, and hast baked twelve cakes with it, two tenth deals are in the one cake,
and thou hast set them two ranks (six in the rank) on the pure table before Jehovah,
and thou hast put on the rank pure frankincense, and it hath been to the bread for a memorial, a fire-offering to Jehovah.
'On each sabbath-day he arrangeth it before Jehovah continually, from the sons of Israel — a covenant age-during;
and it hath been to Aaron, and to his sons, and they have eaten it in the holy place, for it [is] most holy to him, from the fire-offerings of Jehovah — a statute age-during.'
And a son of an Israelitish woman goeth out (and he [is] son of an Egyptian man), in the midst of the sons of Israel, and strive in the camp do the son of the Israelitish woman and a man of Israel,
and the son of the Israelitish woman execrateth the Name, and revileth; and they bring him in unto Moses; and his mother's name [is] Shelomith daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan;
and he causeth him to rest in charge — to explain to them by the mouth of Jehovah.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Bring out the reviler unto the outside of the camp; and all those hearing have laid their hands on his head, and all the company have stoned him.
'And unto the sons of Israel thou dost speak, saying, When any man revileth his God — then he hath borne his sin;
and he who is execrating the name of Jehovah is certainly put to death; all the company do certainly cast stones at him; as a sojourner so a native, in his execrating the Name, is put to death.
'And when a man smiteth any soul of man, he is certainly put to death.
'And he who smiteth a beast repayeth it, body for body.
'And when a man putteth a blemish in his fellow, as he hath done so it is done to him;
breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth; as he putteth a blemish in a man so it is done in him.
'And he who smiteth a beast repayeth it, and he who smiteth [the life of] man is put to death;
one judgment is to you; as a sojourner so is a native; for I [am] Jehovah your God.'
And Moses speaketh unto the sons of Israel, and they bring out the reviler unto the outside of the camp, and stone him with stones; and the sons of Israel have done as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, in mount Sinai, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, and thou hast said unto them, When ye come in unto the land which I am giving to you, then hath the land kept a sabbath to Jehovah.
'Six years thou dost sow thy field, and six years thou dost prune thy vineyard, and hast gathered its increase,
and in the seventh year a sabbath of rest is to the land, a sabbath to Jehovah; thy field thou dost not sow, and thy vineyard thou dost not prune;
the spontaneous growth of thy harvest thou dost not reap, and the grapes of thy separated thing thou dost not gather, a year of rest it is to the land.
'And the sabbath of the land hath been to you for food, to thee, and to thy man-servant, and to thy handmaid, and to thy hireling, and to thy settler, who are sojourning with thee;
and to thy cattle, and to the beast which [is] in thy land, is all thine increase for food.
'And thou hast numbered to thee seven sabbaths of years, seven years seven times, and the days of the seven sabbaths of years have been to thee nine and forty years,
and thou hast caused a trumpet of shouting to pass over in the seventh month, in the tenth of the month; in the day of the atonements ye do cause a trumpet to pass over through all your land;
and ye have hallowed the year, the fiftieth year; and ye have proclaimed liberty in the land to all its inhabitants; a jubilee it is to you; and ye have turned back each unto his possession; yea, each unto his family ye do turn back.
'A jubilee it [is], the fiftieth year, a year it is to you; ye sow not, nor reap its spontaneous growth, nor gather its separated things;
for a jubilee it [is], holy it is to you; out of the field ye eat its increase;
in the year of this jubilee ye turn back each unto his possession.
'And when thou sellest anything to thy fellow, or buyest from the hand of thy fellow, ye do not oppress one another;
by the number of years after the jubilee thou dost buy from thy fellow; by the number of the years of increase he doth sell to thee;
according to the multitude of the years thou dost multiply its price, and according to the fewness of the years thou dost diminish its price; for a number of increases he is selling to thee;
and ye do not oppress one another, and thou hast been afraid of thy God; for I [am] Jehovah your God.
'And ye have done My statutes, and My judgments ye keep, and have done them, and ye have dwelt on the land confidently,
and the land hath given its fruit, and ye have eaten to satiety, and have dwelt confidently on it.
'And when ye say, What do we eat in the seventh year, lo, we do not sow, nor gather our increase?
then I have commanded My blessing on you in the sixth year, and it hath made the increase for three years;
and ye have sown the eighth year, and have eaten of the old increase; until the ninth year, until the coming in of its increase, ye do eat the old.
'And the land is not sold — to extinction, for the land [is] Mine, for sojourners and settlers [are] ye with Me;
and in all the land of your possession a redemption ye do give to the land.
'When thy brother becometh poor, and hath sold his possession, then hath his redeemer who is near unto him come, and he hath redeemed the sold thing of his brother;
and when a man hath no redeemer, and his own hand hath attained, and he hath found as sufficient [for] its redemption,
then he hath reckoned the years of its sale, and hath given back that which is over to the man to whom he sold [it], and he hath returned to his possession.
'And if his hand hath not found sufficiency to give back to him, then hath his sold thing been in the hand of him who buyeth it till the year of jubilee; and it hath gone out in the jubilee, and he hath returned to his possession.
'And when a man selleth a dwelling-house [in] a walled city, then hath his right of redemption been until the completion of a year from its selling; days — is his right of redemption;
and if it is not redeemed until the fulness to him of a perfect year, then hath the house which [is] in a walled city been established to extinction to the buyer of it, to his generations; it goeth not out in the jubilee;
and a house of the villages which have no wall round about, on the field of the country is reckoned; redemption is to it, and in the jubilee it goeth out.
'As to cities of the Levites — houses of the cities of their possession — redemption age-during is to the Levites;
as to him who redeemeth from the Levites, both the sale of a house and the city of his possession have gone out in the jubilee, for the houses of the cities of the Levites are their possession in the midst of the sons of Israel.
And a field, a suburb of their cities, is not sold; for a possession age-during it [is] to them.
'And when thy brother is become poor, and his hand hath failed with thee, then thou hast kept hold on him, sojourner and settler, and he hath lived with thee;
thou takest no usury from him, or increase; and thou hast been afraid of thy God; and thy brother hath lived with thee;
thy money thou givest not to him in usury, and for increase thou givest not thy food;
I [am] Jehovah your God, who hath brought you out of the land of Egypt, to give to you the land of Canaan, to become your God.
'And when thy brother becometh poor with thee, and he hath been sold to thee, thou dost not lay on him servile service;
as an hireling, as a settler, he is with thee, till the year of the jubilee he doth serve with thee, —
then he hath gone out from thee, he and his sons with him, and hath turned back unto his family; even unto the possession of his fathers he doth turn back.
'For they [are] My servants, whom I have brought out from the land of Egypt: they are not sold [with] the sale of a servant;
thou rulest not over him with rigour, and thou hast been afraid of thy God.
'And thy man-servant and thy handmaid whom thou hast [are] of the nations who [are] round about you; of them ye buy man-servant and handmaid,
and also of the sons of the settlers who are sojourning with you, of them ye buy, and of their families who [are] with you, which they have begotten in your land, and they have been to you for a possession;
and ye have taken them for inheritance to your sons after you, to occupy [for] a possession; to the age ye lay service upon them, but upon your brethren, the sons of Israel, one with another, thou dost not rule over him with rigour.
'And when the hand of a sojourner or settler with thee attaineth [riches], and thy brother with him hath become poor, and he hath been sold to a sojourner, a settler with thee, or to the root of the family of a sojourner,
after he hath been sold, there is a right of redemption to him; one of his brethren doth redeem him,
or his uncle, or a son of his uncle, doth redeem him, or any of the relations of his flesh, of his family, doth redeem him, or — his own hand hath attained — then he hath been redeemed.
'And he hath reckoned with his buyer from the year of his being sold to him till the year of jubilee, and the money of his sale hath been by the number of years; as the days of an hireling it is with him.
'If yet many years, according to them he giveth back his redemption [money], from the money of his purchase.
'And if few are left of the years till the year of jubilee, then he hath reckoned with him, according to his years he doth give back his redemption [money];
as an hireling, year by year, he is with him, and he doth not rule him with rigour before thine eyes.
'And if he is not redeemed in these [years], then he hath gone out in the year of jubilee, he and his sons with him.
For to Me [are] the sons of Israel servants; My servants they [are], whom I have brought out of the land of Egypt; I, Jehovah, [am] your God.
'Ye do not make to yourselves idols; and graven image or standing image ye do not set up to yourselves; and a stone of imagery ye do not put in your land, to bow yourselves to it; for I [am] Jehovah your God.
'My sabbaths ye do keep, and My sanctuary ye do reverence; I [am] Jehovah.
'If in My statutes ye walk, and My commands ye keep, and have done them,
then I have given your rains in their season, and the land hath given her produce, and the tree of the field doth give its fruit;
and reached to you hath the threshing, the gathering, and the gathering doth reach the sowing -[time]; and ye have eaten your bread to satiety, and have dwelt confidently in your land.
'And I have given peace in the land, and ye have lain down, and there is none causing trembling; and I have caused evil beasts to cease out of the land, and the sword doth not pass over into your land.
'And ye have pursued your enemies, and they have fallen before you by the sword;
and five of you have pursued a hundred, and a hundred of you do pursue a myriad; and your enemies have fallen before you by the sword.
'And I have turned unto you, and have made you fruitful, and have multiplied you, and have established My covenant with you;
and ye have eaten old [store], and the old because of the new ye bring out.
'And I have given My tabernacle in your midst, and My soul doth not loathe you;
and I have walked habitually in your midst, and have become your God, and ye — ye are become My people;
I [am] Jehovah your God, who have brought you out of the land of the Egyptians, from being their servants; and I break the bars of your yoke, and cause you to go erect.
'And if ye do not hearken to Me, and do not all these commands;
and if at My statutes ye kick, and if My judgments your soul loathe, so as not to do all My commands — to your breaking My covenant —
I also do this to you, and I have appointed over you trouble, the consumption, and the burning fever, consuming eyes, and causing pain of soul; and your seed in vain ye have sowed, and your enemies have eaten it;
and I have set My face against you, and ye have been smitten before your enemies; and those hating you have ruled over you, and ye have fled, and there is none pursuing you.
'And if unto these ye hearken not to Me, — then I have added to chastise you seven times for your sins;
and I have broken the pride of your strength, and have made your heavens as iron, and your earth as brass;
and consumed hath been your strength in vain, and your land doth not give her produce, and the tree of the land doth not give its fruit.
'And if ye walk with Me [in] opposition, and are not willing to hearken to Me, then I have added to you a plague seven times, according to your sins,
and sent against you the beast of the field, and it hath bereaved you; and I have cut off your cattle, and have made you few, and your ways have been desolate.
'And if by these ye are not instructed by Me, and have walked with Me [in] opposition,
then I have walked — I also — with you in opposition, and have smitten you, even I, seven times for your sins;
and I have brought in on you a sword, executing the vengeance of a covenant; and ye have been gathered unto your cities, and I have sent pestilence into your midst, and ye have been given into the hand of an enemy.
'In My breaking to you the staff of bread, then ten women have baked your bread in one oven, and have given back your bread by weight; and ye have eaten, and are not satisfied.
'And if for this ye hearken not to Me, and have walked with Me in opposition,
then I have walked with you in the fury of opposition, and have chastised you, even I, seven times for your sins.
'And ye have eaten the flesh of your sons; even flesh of your daughters ye do eat.
And I have destroyed your high places, and cut down your images, and have put your carcases on the carcases of your idols, and My soul hath loathed you;
and I have made your cities a waste, and have made desolate your sanctuaries, and I smell not at your sweet fragrances;
and I have made desolate the land, and your enemies, who are dwelling in it, have been astonished at it.
And you I scatter among nations, and have drawn out after you a sword, and your land hath been a desolation, and your cities are a waste.
'Then doth the land enjoy its sabbaths — all the days of the desolation, and ye in the land of your enemies — then doth the land rest, and hath enjoyed its sabbaths;
all the days of the desolation it resteth that which it hath not rested in your sabbaths in your dwelling on it.
'And those who are left of you — I have also brought a faintness into their heart in the lands of their enemies, and the sound of a leaf driven away hath pursued them, and they have fled — flight from a sword — and they have fallen, and there is none pursuing.
And they have stumbled one on another, as from the face of a sword, and there is none pursuing, and ye have no standing before your enemies,
and ye have perished among the nations, and the land of your enemies hath consumed you.
'And those who are left of you — they consume away in their iniquity, in the lands of your enemies; and also in the iniquities of their fathers, with them they consume away.
'And — they have confessed their iniquity, and the iniquity of their fathers, in their trespass which they have trespassed against Me, and also, that they have walked with Me, in opposition,
also I walk to them in opposition, and have brought them into the land of their enemies — or then their uncircumcised heart is humbled, and then they accept the punishment of their iniquity, —
then I have remembered My covenant [with] Jacob, and also My covenant [with] Isaac, and also My covenant [with] Abraham I remember, and the land I remember.
'And — the land is left of them, and doth enjoy its sabbaths, in the desolation without them, and they accept the punishment of their iniquity, because, even because, against My judgments they have kicked, and My statutes hath their soul loathed,
and also even this, in their being in the land of their enemies, I have not rejected them, nor have I loathed them, to consume them, to break My covenant with them; for I [am] Jehovah their God; —
then I have remembered for them the covenant of the ancestors, whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt before the eyes of the nations to become their God; I [am] Jehovah.'
These [are] the statutes, and the judgments, and the laws, which Jehovah hath given between Him and the sons of Israel, in mount Sinai, by the hand of Moses.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, and thou hast said unto them, When a man maketh a wonderful vow, by thy valuation the persons [are] Jehovah's.
When thy valuation hath been of the male from a son of twenty years even unto a son of sixty years, then hath been thy valuation fifty shekels of silver by the shekel of the sanctuary.
And if it [is] a female — then hath thy valuation been thirty shekels;
and if from a son of five years even unto a son of twenty years — then hath thy valuation been of the male twenty shekels, and for the female, ten shekels;
and if from a son of a month even unto a son of five years — then hath thy valuation been of the male five shekels of silver, and for the female thy valuation [is] three shekels of silver;
and if from a son of sixty years and above — if a male, then hath thy valuation been fifteen shekels, and for a female, ten shekels.
'And if he is poorer than thy valuation, then he hath presented himself before the priest, and the priest hath valued him; according to that which the hand of him who is vowing doth reach doth the priest value him.
'And if [it is] a beast of which they bring near an offering to Jehovah, all that [one] giveth of it to Jehovah is holy;
he doth not change it nor exchange it, a good for a bad, or a bad for a good; and if he really change beast for beast, — then it hath been — it and its exchange is holy.
'And if [it is] any unclean beast of which they do not bring near an offering to Jehovah, then he hath presented the beast before the priest,
and the priest hath valued it; whether good or bad, according to thy valuation, O priest, so it is;
and if he really redeem it, then he hath added its fifth to thy valuation.
'And when a man sanctifieth his house, a holy thing to Jehovah, then hath the priest valued it, whether good or bad; as the priest doth value it so it standeth;
and if he who is sanctifying doth redeem his house, then he hath added a fifth of the money of thy valuation to it, and it hath become his.
'And if of the field of his possession a man sanctify to Jehovah, then hath thy valuation been according to its seed; a homer of barley-seed at fifty shekels of silver;
if from the year of the jubilee he sanctify his field, according to thy valuation it standeth;
and if after the jubilee he sanctify his field, then hath the priest reckoned to him the money according to the years which are left, unto the year of the jubilee, and it hath been abated from thy valuation.
'And if he really redeem the field — he who is sanctifying it — then he hath added a fifth of the money of thy valuation to it, and it hath been established to him;
and if he do not redeem the field, or if he hath sold the field to another man, it is not redeemed any more;
and the field hath been, in its going out in the jubilee, holy to Jehovah as a field which is devoted; to the priest is its possession.
'And if the field of his purchase (which [is] not of the fields of his possession) [one] sanctify to Jehovah —
then hath the priest reckoned to him the amount of thy valuation unto the year of jubilee, and he hath given thy valuation in that day — a holy thing to Jehovah;
in the year of the jubilee the field returneth to him from whom he bought it, to him whose [is] the possession of the land.
And all thy valuation is by the shekel of the sanctuary: twenty gerahs is the shekel.
'Only, a firstling which is Jehovah's firstling among beasts — no man doth sanctify it, whether ox or sheep; it [is] Jehovah's.
And if among the unclean beasts, then he hath ransomed [it] at thy valuation, and he hath added its fifth to it; and if it is not redeemed, then it hath been sold at thy valuation.
'Only, no devoted thing which a man devoteth to Jehovah, of all that he hath, of man, and beast, and of the field of his possession, is sold or redeemed; every devoted thing is most holy to Jehovah.
'No devoted thing, which is devoted of man, is ransomed, it is surely put to death.
And all tithe of the land, of the seed of the land, of the fruit of the tree, is Jehovah's — holy to Jehovah.
'And if a man really redeem [any] of his tithe, its fifth he addeth to it.
'And all the tithe of the herd and of the flock — all that passeth by under the rod — the tenth is holy to Jehovah;
he enquireth not between good and bad, nor doth he change it; and if he really change it — then it hath been — it and its exchange is holy; it is not redeemed.'
These [are] the commands which Jehovah hath commanded Moses for the sons of Israel, in mount Sinai.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the tent of meeting, on the first of the second month, in the second year of their going out of the land of Egypt, saying:
'Take ye up the sum of all the company of the sons of Israel by their families, by the house of their fathers, in the number of names — every male by their polls;
from a son of twenty years and upward, every one going out to the host in Israel, ye do number them by their hosts, thou and Aaron;
and with you there is a man for a tribe, each is a head to the house of his fathers.
'And these [are] the names of the men who stand with you: 'For Reuben — Elizur son of Shedeur.
'For Simeon — Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai.
'For Judah — Nahshon son of Amminadab.
'For Issachar — Nathaneel son of Zuar.
'For Zebulun — Eliab son of Helon.
'For the sons of Joseph — for Ephraim: Elishama son of Ammihud: for Manasseh — Gamaliel son of Pedahzur.
'For Benjamin — Abidan son of Gideoni.
'For Dan — Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai.
'For Asher — Pagiel son of Ocran.
'For Gad — Eliasaph son of Deuel.
'For Naphtali — Ahira son of Enan.'
These [are] those called of the company, princes of the tribes of their fathers; they [are] heads of the thousands of Israel.
And Moses taketh — Aaron also — these men, who were defined by name,
and all the company they assembled on the first of the second month, and they declare their births, by their families, by the house of their fathers, in the number of names from a son of twenty years and upward, by their polls,
as Jehovah hath commanded Moses; and he numbereth them in the wilderness of Sinai.
And the sons of Reuben, Israel's first-born — their births, by their families, by the house of their fathers, in the number of names, by their polls, every male from a son of twenty years and upward, every one going out to the host —
their numbered ones, for the tribe of Reuben, are six and forty thousand and five hundred.
Of the sons of Simeon — their births, by their families, by the house of their fathers, its numbered ones in the number of names, by their polls, every male from a son of twenty years and upward, every one going out to the host —
their numbered ones, for the tribe of Simeon, [are] nine and fifty thousand and three hundred.
Of the sons of Gad — their births, by their families, by the house of their fathers, in the number of names, from a son of twenty years and upward, every one going out to the host —
their numbered ones, for the tribe of Gad, [are] five and forty thousand and six hundred and fifty.
Of the sons of Judah — their births, by their families, by the house of their fathers, in the number of names, from a son of twenty years and upward, every one going out to the host —
their numbered ones, for the tribe of Judah, [are] four and seventy thousand and six hundred.
Of the sons of Issachar — their births, by their families, by the house of their fathers, in the number of names, from a son of twenty years and upward, every one going out to the host —
their numbered ones, for the tribe of Issachar, [are] four and fifty thousand and four hundred.
Of the sons of Zebulun — their births, by their families, by the house of their fathers, in the number of names, from a son of twenty years and upward, every one going out to the host —
their numbered ones, for the tribe of Zebulun, [are] seven and fifty thousand and four hundred.
Of the sons of Joseph — of the sons of Ephraim — their births, by their families, by the house of their fathers, in the number of names, from a son of twenty years and upward, every one going out to the host —
their numbered ones, for the tribe of Ephraim, [are] forty thousand and five hundred.
Of the sons of Manasseh — their births, by their families, by the house of their fathers, in the number of names, from a son of twenty years and upward, every one going out to the host —
their numbered ones, for the tribe of Manasseh, [are] two and thirty thousand and two hundred.
Of the sons of Benjamin — their births, by their families, by the house of their fathers, in the number of names, from a son of twenty years and upward, every one going out to the host —
their numbered ones, for the tribe of Benjamin, [are] five and thirty thousand and four hundred.
Of the sons of Dan — their births, by their families, by the house of their fathers, in the number of names, from a son of twenty years and upward, every one going out to the host —
their numbered ones, for the tribe of Dan, [are] two and sixty thousand and seven hundred.
Of the sons of Asher — their births, by their families, by the house of their fathers, in the number of names, from a son of twenty years and upward, every one going out to the host —
their numbered ones, for the tribe of Asher, [are] one and forty thousand and five hundred.
[Of] the sons of Naphtali — their births, by their families, by the house of their fathers, in the number of names, from a son of twenty years and upward, every one going out to the host —
their numbered ones, for the tribe of Naphtali, [are] three and fifty thousand and four hundred.
These [are] those numbered, whom Moses numbered — Aaron also, and the princes of Israel, twelve men — each for the house of his fathers, they have been.
And they are, all those numbered of the sons of Israel, by the house of their fathers, from a son of twenty years and upward, every one going out to the host in Israel,
yea, all those numbered are six hundred thousand, and three thousand, and five hundred and fifty.
And the Levites, for the tribe of their fathers, have not numbered themselves in their midst,
seeing Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Only, the tribe of Levi thou dost not number, and their sum thou dost not take up in the midst of the sons of Israel;
and thou, appoint the Levites over the tabernacle of the testimony, and over all its vessels, and over all that it hath; they bear the tabernacle, and all its vessels, and they serve it; and round about the tabernacle they encamp.
'And in the journeying of the tabernacle, the Levites take it down, and in the encamping of the tabernacle, the Levites raise it up; and the stranger who is coming near is put to death.'
And the sons of Israel have encamped, each by his camp, and each by his standard, by their hosts;
and the Levites encamp round about the tabernacle of the testimony; and there is no wrath on the company of the sons of Israel, and the Levites have kept the charge of the tabernacle of the testimony.
And the sons of Israel do according to all that Jehovah hath commanded Moses; so they have done.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, and unto Aaron, saying,
'Each by his standard, with ensigns of the house of their fathers, do the sons of Israel encamp; over-against round about the tent of meeting they encamp.'
And those encamping eastward towards the sun-rising, [are of] the standard of the camp of Judah, by their hosts; and the prince of the sons of Judah [is] Nahshon, son of Amminadab;
and his host, and their numbered ones, [are] four and seventy thousand and six hundred.
And those encamping by him [are of] the tribe of Issachar; and the prince of the sons of Issachar [is] Nethaneel son of Zuar;
and his host, and its numbered ones, [are] four and fifty thousand and four hundred.
The tribe of Zebulun; and the prince of the sons of Zebulun [is] Eliab son of Helon;
and his host, and its numbered ones, [are] seven and fifty thousand and four hundred;
all those numbered of the camp of Judah [are] a hundred thousand, and eighty thousand, and six thousand, and four hundred, by their hosts; they journey first.
The standard of the camp of Reuben [is] southward, by their hosts; and the prince of the sons of Reuben [is] Elizur son of Shedeur;
and his host, and its numbered ones, [are] six and forty thousand and five hundred.
And those encamping by him [are of] the tribe of Simeon; and the prince of the sons of Simeon [is] Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai;
and his host, and their numbered ones, [are] nine and fifty thousand and three hundred.
And the tribe of Gad; and the prince of the sons of Gad [is] Eliasaph son of Reuel;
and his host, and their numbered ones, [are] five and forty thousand and six hundred and fifty.
All those numbered of the camp of Reuben [are] a hundred thousand, and one and fifty thousand, and four hundred and fifty, by their hosts; and they journey second.
And the tent of meeting — the camp of the Levites — hath journeyed in the midst of the camps; as they encamp so they journey, each at his station by their standards.
The standard of the camp of Ephraim, by their hosts, [is] westward; and the prince of the sons of Ephraim [is] Elishama son of Ammihud;
and his host, and their numbered ones, [are] forty thousand and five hundred.
And by him [is] the tribe of Manasseh; and the prince of the sons of Manasseh [is] Gamaliel son of Pedahzur;
and his host, and their numbered ones, [are] two and thirty thousand, and two hundred.
And the tribe of Benjamin; and the prince of the sons of Benjamin [is] Abidan son of Gideoni;
and his host, and their numbered ones, [are] five and thirty thousand and four hundred.
All those numbered of the camp of Ephraim [are] a hundred thousand, and eight thousand, and a hundred, by their hosts; and they journey third.
The standard of the camp of Dan [is] northward, by their hosts; and the prince of the sons of Dan [is] Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai;
and his host, and their numbered ones, [are] two and sixty thousand and seven hundred.
And those encamping by him [are of] the tribe of Asher; and the prince of the sons of Asher [is] Pagiel son of Ocran;
and his host, and their numbered ones, [are] one and forty thousand and five hundred.
And the tribe of Naphtali; and the prince of the sons of Naphtali [is] Ahira son of Enan;
and his host, and their numbered ones, [are] three and fifty thousand and four hundred.
All those numbered of the camp of Dan [are] a hundred thousand, and seven and fifty thousand, and six hundred; at the rear they journey, by their standards.
These [are] those numbered of the sons of Israel by the house of their fathers; all those numbered of the camps by their hosts [are] six hundred thousand, and three thousand, and five hundred and fifty.
And the Levites have not numbered themselves in the midst of the sons of Israel, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And the sons of Israel do according to all that Jehovah hath commanded Moses; so they have encamped by their standards, and so they have journeyed; each by his families, by the house of his fathers.
And these [are] births of Aaron and Moses, in the day of Jehovah's speaking with Moses in mount Sinai.
And these [are] the names of the sons of Aaron: the first-born Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar;
these [are] the names of the sons of Aaron, the anointed priests, whose hand he hath consecrated for acting as priest.
And Nadab dieth — Abihu also — before Jehovah, in their bringing near strange fire before Jehovah, in the wilderness of Sinai, and sons they had not; and Eleazar — Ithamar also — acteth as priest in the presence of Aaron their father.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Bring near the tribe of Levi, and thou hast caused it to stand before Aaron the priest, and they have served him,
and kept his charge, and the charge of all the company before the tent of meeting, to do the service of the tabernacle;
and they have kept all the vessels of the tent of meeting, and the charge of the sons of Israel, to do the service of the tabernacle;
and thou hast given the Levites to Aaron and to his sons; they are surely given to him out of the sons of Israel.
'And Aaron and his sons thou dost appoint, and they have kept their priesthood, and the stranger who cometh near is put to death.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'And I, lo, I have taken the Levites from the midst of the sons of Israel instead of every first-born opening a womb among the sons of Israel, and the Levites have been Mine;
for Mine [is] every first-born, in the day of My smiting every first-born in the land of Egypt I have sanctified to Myself every first-born in Israel, from man unto beast; Mine they are; I [am] Jehovah.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, saying,
'Number the sons of Levi by the house of their fathers, by their families; every male from a son of a month and upward thou dost number them.'
And Moses numbereth them according to the command of Jehovah, as he hath been commanded.
And these are sons of Levi by their names: Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari.
And these [are] the names of the sons of Gershon by their families: Libni and Shimei.
And the sons of Kohath, by their families, [are] Amram and Izhar, Hebron and Uzziel.
And the sons of Merari by their families [are] Mahli and Mushi; these are the families of the Levites, by the house of their fathers.
Of Gershon [is] the family of the Libnite, and the family of the Shimite; these are the families of the Gershonite.
Their numbered ones, in number, every male from a son of a month and upward, their numbered ones [are] seven thousand and five hundred.
The families of the Gershonite, behind the tabernacle, do encamp westward.
And the prince of a father's house for the Gershonite [is] Eliasaph son of Lael.
And the charge of the sons of Gershon in the tent of meeting [is] the tabernacle, and the tent, its covering, and the vail at the opening of the tent of meeting,
and the hangings of the court, and the vail at the opening of the court, which [is] by the tabernacle and by the altar round about, and its cords, to all its service.
And of Kohath [is] the family of the Amramite, and the family of the Izharite, and the family of the Hebronite, and the family of the Uzzielite; these are families of the Kohathite.
In number, all the males, from a son of a month and upward, [are] eight thousand and six hundred, keeping the charge of the sanctuary.
The families of the sons of Kohath encamp by the side of the tabernacle southward.
And the prince of a father's house for the families of the Kohathite [is] Elizaphan son of Uzziel.
And their charge [is] the ark, and the table, and the candlestick, and the altars, and the vessels of the sanctuary with which they serve, and the vail, and all its service.
And [to] the prince of the princes of the Levites, Eleazar son of Aaron the priest, [is] the oversight of the keepers of the charge of the sanctuary.
Of Merari [is] the family of the Mahlite, and the family of the Mushite; these [are] the families of Merari.
And their numbered ones, in number, all the males from a son of a month and upward, [are] six thousand and two hundred.
And the prince of a father's house for the families of Merari [is] Zuriel son of Abihail; by the side of the tabernacle they encamp northward.
And the oversight — the charge of the sons of Merari — [is] the boards of the tabernacle, and its bars, and its pillars, and its sockets, and all its vessels, and all its service,
and the pillars of the court round about, and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords.
And those encamping before the tabernacle eastward, before the tent of meeting, at the east, [are] Moses and Aaron, and his sons, keeping the charge of the sanctuary for the charge of the sons of Israel, and the stranger who cometh near is put to death.
All those numbered of the Levites whom Moses numbered — Aaron also — by the command of Jehovah, by their families, every male from a son of a month and upward, [are] two and twenty thousand.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Number every first-born male of the sons of Israel from a son of a month and upward, and take up the number of their names;
and thou hast taken the Levites for Me (I [am] Jehovah), instead of every first-born among the sons of Israel, and the cattle of the Levites instead of every firstling among the cattle of the sons of Israel.'
And Moses numbereth, as Jehovah hath commanded him, all the first-born among the sons of Israel.
And all the first-born — male — by the number of names, from a son of a month and upward, of their numbered ones, are two and twenty thousand two hundred and seventy and three.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Take the Levites instead of every first-born among the sons of Israel, and the cattle of the Levites instead of their cattle; and the Levites have been Mine; I [am] Jehovah.
'And [from] those ransomed of the two hundred and seventy and three (who are more than the Levites) of the first-born of the sons of Israel,
thou hast even taken five shekels a-piece by the poll — by the shekel of the sanctuary thou takest; twenty gerahs the shekel [is];
and thou hast given the money to Aaron, and to his sons, whereby those over and above are ransomed.'
And Moses taketh the ransom money from those over and above those ransomed by the Levites;
from the first-born of the sons of Israel he hath taken the money, a thousand and three hundred and sixty and five — by the shekel of the sanctuary;
and Moses giveth the money of those ransomed to Aaron, and to his sons, according to the command of Jehovah, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, and unto Aaron, saying,
'Take up the sum of the sons of Kohath from the midst of the sons of Levi, by their families, by the house of their fathers;
from a son of thirty years and upward, even till a son of fifty years, every one going in to the host, to do work in the tent of meeting.
'This [is] the service of the sons of Kohath in the tent of meeting, the holy of holies:
that Aaron and his sons have come in, in the journeying of the camp, and have taken down the vail of the hanging, and have covered with it the ark of the testimony;
and have put on it a covering of badger skin, and have spread a garment completely of blue above, and have placed its staves.
'And on the table of the presence they spread a garment of blue, and have put on it the dishes, and the spoons, and the bowls, and the cups of the libation, and the bread of continuity is on it,
and they have spread over them a garment of scarlet, and have covered it with a covering of badger skin, and have placed its staves,
and have taken a garment of blue, and have covered the candlestick of the lamp, and its lights, and its snuffers, and its snuff-dishes, and all its oil vessels wherewith they minister to it;
and they have put it and all its vessels unto a covering of badger skin, and have put [it] on the bar.
'And on the golden altar they spread a garment of blue, and have covered it with a covering of badger skin, and have placed its staves;
and have taken all the vessels of ministry wherewith they minister in the sanctuary, and have put [them] unto a garment of blue, and have covered them with a covering of badger skin, and have put [them] on the bar,
and have removed the ashes of the altar, and have spread over it a garment of purple;
and have put on it all its vessels wherewith they minister about it, the censers, the hooks, and the shovels, and the bowls, all the vessels of the altar, and have spread on it a covering of badger skin, and have placed its staves:
'And Aaron hath finished — his sons also — covering the sanctuary, and all the vessels of the sanctuary, in the journeying of the camp, and afterwards do the sons of Kohath come in to bear [it], and they do not come unto the holy thing, that they have died; these [things are] the burden of the sons of Kohath in the tent of meeting.
'And the oversight of Eleazar, son of Aaron the priest, [is] the oil of the lamp, and the spice-perfume, and the present of continuity, and the anointing oil, the oversight of all the tabernacle, and of all that [is] in it, in the sanctuary, and in its vessels.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
'Ye do not cut off the tribe of the families of the Kohathite from the midst of the Levites;
but this do to them, and they have lived, and do not die in their drawing nigh the holy of holies: — Aaron and his sons go in, and have set them, each man to his service, and unto his burden,
and they go not in to see when the holy thing is swallowed, that they have died.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Take up the sum of the sons of Gershon also by the house of their fathers, by their families;
from a son of thirty years and upward, till a son of fifty years thou dost number them, every one who is going in to serve the host, to do the service in the tent of meeting.
'This [is] the service of the families of the Gershonite, to serve — and for burden,
and they have borne the curtains of the tabernacle, and the tent of meeting, its covering, and the covering of the badger [skin] which [is] on it above, and the vail at the opening of the tent of meeting,
and the hangings of the court, and the vail at the opening of the gate of the court which [is] by the tabernacle, and by the altar round about, and their cords, and all the vessels of their service, and all that is made for them — and they have served.
'By the command of Aaron and his sons is all the service of the sons of the Gershonite in all their burden, and in all their service; and ye have laid a charge on them concerning the charge of all their burden.
This [is] the service of the families of the sons of the Gershonite in the tent of meeting; and their charge [is] under the hand of Ithamar son of Aaron the priest.
'The sons of Merari, by their families, by the house of their fathers, thou dost number them;
from a son of thirty years and upward even unto a son of fifty years thou dost number them, every one who is going in to the host, to do the service of the tent of meeting.
'And this [is] the charge of their burden, of all their service in the tent of meeting; the boards of the tabernacle, and its bars, and its pillars, and its sockets,
and the pillars of the court round about, and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords, of all their vessels, and of all their service; and by name ye do number the vessels of the charge of their burden.
'This [is] the service of the families of the sons of Merari, for all their service, in the tent of meeting, by the hand of Ithamar son of Aaron the priest.'
And Moses numbereth — Aaron also, and the princes of the company — the sons of the Kohathite, by their families, and by the house of their fathers,
from a son of thirty years and upward even unto a son of fifty years, every one who is going in to the host, for service in the tent of meeting,
and their numbered ones, by their families, are two thousand seven hundred and fifty.
These [are] those numbered of the families of the Kohathite, every one who is serving in the tent of meeting, whom Moses and Aaron numbered, by the command of Jehovah, by the hand of Moses.
And those numbered of the sons of Gershon, by their families, and by the house of their fathers,
from a son of thirty years and upward even unto a son of fifty years, every one who is going in to the host, for service in the tent of meeting,
even their numbered ones, by their families, by the house of their fathers, are two thousand and six hundred and thirty.
These [are] those numbered of the families of the sons of Gershon, every one who is serving in the tent of meeting, whom Moses and Aaron numbered by the command of Jehovah.
And those numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, by their families, by the house of their fathers,
from a son of thirty years and upward even unto a son of fifty years, every one who is going in to the host, for service in the tent of meeting,
even their numbered ones, by their families, are three thousand and two hundred.
These [are] those numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, whom Moses and Aaron numbered, by the command of Jehovah, by the hand of Moses.
All those numbered, whom Moses numbered — Aaron also, and the princes of Israel — of the Levites, by their families, and by the house of their fathers,
from a son of thirty years and upward even unto a son of fifty years, every one who is going in to do the work of the service, even the service of burden in the tent of meeting,
even their numbered ones are eight thousand and five hundred and eighty;
by the command of Jehovah hath [one] numbered them, by the hand of Moses, each man by his service, and by his burden, with his numbered ones, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Command the sons of Israel, and they send out of the camp every leper, and every one with an issue, and every one defiled by a body;
from male unto female ye do send out; unto the outside of the camp ye do send them; and they defile not their camps in the midst of which I do tabernacle.'
And the sons of Israel do so, and they send them out unto the outside of the camp; as Jehovah hath spoken unto Moses so have the sons of Israel done.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, Man or woman, when they do any of the sins of man, by committing a trespass against Jehovah, and that person [is] guilty,
and they have confessed their sin which they have done, then he hath restored his guilt in its principal, and its fifth is adding to it, and hath given [it] to him in reference to whom he hath been guilty.
'And if the man have no redeemer to restore the guilt to, the guilt which is restored [is] Jehovah's, the priest's, apart from the ram of the atonements, whereby he maketh atonement for him.
'And every heave-offering of all the holy things of the sons of Israel, which they bring near to the priest, becometh his;
and any man's hallowed things become his; that which any man giveth to the priest becometh his.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, and thou hast said unto them, When any man's wife turneth aside, and hath committed against him a trespass,
and a man hath lain with her [with] the seed of copulation, and it hath been hid from the eyes of her husband, and concealed, and she hath been defiled, and there is no witness against her, and she hath not been caught,
and a spirit of jealousy hath passed over him, and he hath been jealous of his wife, and she hath been defiled; — or, a spirit of jealousy hath passed over him, and he hath been jealous of his wife, and she hath not been defiled —
'Then hath the man brought in his wife unto the priest, and he hath brought in her offering for her, a tenth of the ephah of barley meal, he doth not pour on it oil, nor doth he put on it frankincense, for it [is] a present of jealousy, a present of memorial, causing remembrance of iniquity.
'And the priest hath brought her near, and hath caused her to stand before Jehovah,
and the priest hath taken holy water in an earthen vessel, and of the dust which is on the floor of the tabernacle doth the priest take, and hath put [it] into the water,
and the priest hath caused the woman to stand before Jehovah, and hath uncovered the woman's head, and hath given into her hands the present of the memorial, it [is] a present of jealousy, and in the hand of the priest are the bitter waters which cause the curse.
'And the priest hath caused her to swear, and hath said unto the woman, If no man hath lain with thee, and if thou hast not turned aside [to] uncleanness under thy husband, be free from these bitter waters which cause the curse;
and thou, if thou hast turned aside under thy husband, and if thou hast been defiled, and any man doth give his copulation to thee besides thy husband —
(then the priest hath caused the woman to swear with an oath of execration, and the priest hath said to the woman) — Jehovah doth give thee for an execration, and for a curse, in the midst of thy people, in Jehovah's giving thy thigh to fall, and thy belly to swell,
and these waters which cause the curse have gone into thy bowels, to cause the belly to swell, and the thigh to fall; and the woman hath said, Amen, Amen.
'And the priest hath written these execrations in a book, and hath blotted [them] out with the bitter waters,
and hath caused the woman to drink the bitter waters which cause the curse, and the waters which cause the curse have entered into her for bitter things.
'And the priest hath taken out of the hand of the woman the present of jealousy, and hath waved the present before Jehovah, and hath brought it near unto the altar;
and the priest hath taken a handful of the present, its memorial, and hath made perfume on the altar, and afterwards doth cause the woman to drink the water:
yea, he hath caused her to drink the water, and it hath come to pass, if she hath been defiled, and doth commit a trespass against her husband, that the waters which cause the curse have gone into her for bitter things, and her belly hath swelled, and her thigh hath fallen, and the woman hath become an execration in the midst of her people.
'And if the woman hath not been defiled, and is clean, then she hath been acquitted, and hath been sown [with] seed.
'This [is] the law of jealousies, when a wife turneth aside under her husband, and hath been defiled,
or when a spirit of jealousy passeth over a man, and he hath been jealous of his wife, then he hath caused the woman to stand before Jehovah, and the priest hath done to her all this law,
and the man hath been acquitted from iniquity, and that woman doth bear her iniquity.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, and thou hast said unto them, When a man or woman doeth singularly, by vowing a vow of a Nazarite, to be separate to Jehovah;
from wine and strong drink he doth keep separate; vinegar of wine, and vinegar of strong drink he doth not drink, and any juice of grapes he doth not drink, and grapes moist or dry he doth not eat;
all days of his separation, of anything which is made of the wine-vine, from kernels even unto husk, he doth not eat.
'All days of the vow of his separation a razor doth not pass over his head; till the fulness of the days which he doth separate to Jehovah he is holy; grown up hath the upper part of the hair of his head.
'All days of his keeping separate to Jehovah, near a dead person he doth not go;
for his father, or for his mother, for his brother, or for his sister — he is not unclean for them at their death, for the separation of his God [is] on his head;
all days of his separation he [is] holy to Jehovah.
'And when the dead dieth beside him in an instant, suddenly, and he hath defiled the head of his separation, then he hath shaved his head in the day of his cleansing; on the seventh day he doth shave it,
and on the eighth day he bringeth in two turtle-doves or two young pigeons unto the priest, unto the opening of the tent of meeting,
and the priest hath prepared one for a sin-offering, and one for a burnt-offering, and hath made atonement for him, because of that which he hath sinned by the body, and he hath hallowed his head on that day;
and he hath separated to Jehovah the days of his separation, and he hath brought in a lamb, a son of a year, for a guilt-offering, and the former days are fallen, for his separation hath been defiled.
'And this [is] the law of the Nazarite; in the day of the fulness of the days of his separation doth [one] bring him in unto the opening of the tent of meeting,
and he hath brought near his offering to Jehovah, one he-lamb, a son of a year, a perfect one, for a burnt-offering, and one she-lamb, a daughter of a year, a perfect one, for a sin-offering, and one ram, a perfect one, for peace-offerings,
and a basket of unleavened things of flour, cakes mixed with oil, and thin cakes of unleavened things anointed with oil, and their present, and their libations.
'And the priest hath brought [them] near before Jehovah, and hath made his sin-offering and his burnt-offering;
and the ram he maketh a sacrifice of peace-offerings to Jehovah, besides the basket of unleavened things; and the priest hath made its present and its libation.
'And the Nazarite hath shaved (at the opening of the tent of meeting) the head of his separation, and hath taken the hair of the head of his separation, and hath put [it] on the fire which [is] under the sacrifice of the peace-offerings.
'And the priest hath taken the boiled shoulder from the ram, and one unleavened cake out of the basket, and one thin unleavened cake, and hath put on the palms of the Nazarite after his shaving his separation;
and the priest hath waved them, a wave-offering before Jehovah; it [is] holy to the priest, besides the breast of the wave-offering, and besides the leg of the heave-offering; and afterwards doth the Nazarite drink wine.
'This [is] the law of the Nazarite, who voweth his offering to Jehovah for his separation, apart from that which his hand attaineth; according to his vow which he voweth so he doth by the law of his separation.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto Aaron, and unto his sons, saying, Thus ye do bless the sons of Israel, saying to them,
'Jehovah bless thee and keep thee;
'Jehovah cause His face to shine upon thee, and favour thee;
'Jehovah lift up His countenance upon thee, and appoint for thee — peace.
'And they have put My name upon the sons of Israel, and I — I do bless them.'
And it cometh to pass on the day of Moses' finishing setting up the tabernacle, that he anointeth it, and sanctifieth it, and all its vessels, and the altar, and all its vessels, and he anointeth them, and sanctifieth them,
and the princes of Israel (heads of the house of their fathers, they [are] princes of the tribes, they who are standing over those numbered) bring near,
yea, they bring their offering before Jehovah, six waggons covered, and twelve oxen — a waggon for two of the princes, and an ox for one — and they bring them near before the tabernacle.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Receive from them, and they have been to do the service of the tent of meeting, and thou hast given them unto the Levites, each according to his service.'
And Moses taketh the waggons and the oxen, and giveth them unto the Levites.
The two of the waggons and the four of the oxen he hath given to the sons of Gershon, according to their service,
and the four of the waggons and the eight of the oxen he hath given to the sons of Merari, according to their service, by the hand of Ithamar son of Aaron the priest;
and to the sons of Kohath he hath not given, for the service of the sanctuary [is] on them: on the shoulder they bear.
And the princes bring near the dedication of the altar in the day of its being anointed; yea, the princes bring near their offering before the altar.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'One prince a day — one prince a day — do they bring near their offering for the dedication of the altar.'
And he who is bringing near on the first day his offering is Nahshon son of Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah.
And his offering [is] one silver dish, its weight a hundred and thirty [shekels]; one silver bowl of seventy shekels, by the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of flour mixed with oil, for a present;
one golden spoon of ten [shekels], full of perfume;
one bullock, a son of the herd, one ram, one lamb, a son of a year, for a burnt-offering;
one kid of the goats for a sin-offering;
and for a sacrifice of the peace-offerings two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs, sons of a year; this [is] the offering of Nahshon son of Amminadab.
On the second day hath Nethaneel son of Zuar, prince of Issachar, brought near.
He hath brought near his offering, one silver dish, its weight a hundred and thirty [shekels]; one silver bowl of seventy shekels, by the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of flour mixed with oil, for a present;
one golden spoon of ten [shekels], full of perfume;
one bullock, a son of the herd, one ram, one lamb, a son of a year, for a burnt-offering;
one kid of the goats for a sin-offering;
and for a sacrifice of the peace-offerings two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs, sons of a year; this [is] the offering of Nethaneel son of Zuar.
On the third day, the prince of the sons of Zebulun, Eliab son of Helon; —
his offering [is] one silver dish, its weight a hundred and thirty [shekels]; one silver bowl of seventy shekels, by the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of flour mixed with oil, for a present;
one golden spoon of ten [shekels], full of perfume;
one bullock, a son of the herd, one ram, one lamb, a son of a year, for a burnt-offering;
one kid of the goats for a sin-offering;
and for a sacrifice of the peace-offerings two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs, sons of a year; this [is] the offering of Eliab son of Helon.
On the fourth day, Elizur, son of Shedeur, prince of the sons of Reuben; —
his offering is one silver dish, its weight a hundred and thirty [shekels]; one silver bowl of seventy shekels, by the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of flour mixed with oil, for a present;
one golden spoon of ten [shekels], full of perfume;
one bullock, a son of the herd, one ram, one lamb, a son of a year, for a burnt-offering;
one kid of the goats for a sin-offering;
and for a sacrifice of the peace-offerings two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs, sons of a year; this [is] the offering of Elizur son of Shedeur.
On the fifth day, the prince of the sons of Simeon, Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai; —
his offering [is] one silver dish, its weight a hundred and thirty [shekels]; one silver bowl of seventy shekels, by the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of flour mixed with oil, for a present;
one golden spoon of ten [shekels], full of perfume;
one bullock, a son of the herd, one ram, one lamb, a son of a year, for a burnt-offering;
one kid of the goats for a sin-offering;
and for a sacrifice of the peace-offerings two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs, sons of a year; this [is] the offering of Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai.
On the sixth day, the prince of the sons of Gad, Eliasaph son of Deuel; —
his offering [is] one silver dish, its weight a hundred and thirty [shekels]; one silver bowl of seventy shekels, by the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of flour mixed with oil, for a present;
one golden spoon of ten [shekels], full of perfume;
one bullock, a son of the herd, one ram, one lamb, a son of a year, for a burnt-offering;
one kid of the goats for a sin-offering;
and for a sacrifice of the peace-offerings two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs, sons of a year; this [is] the offering of Eliasaph son of Deuel.
On the seventh day, the prince of the sons of Ephraim, Elishama son of Ammihud; —
his offering [is] one silver dish, its weight a hundred and thirty [shekels]; one silver bowl of seventy shekels, by the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of flour mixed with oil, for a present;
one golden spoon of ten [shekels], full of perfume;
one bullock, a son of the herd, one ram, one lamb, a son of a year, for a burnt-offering;
one kid of the goats for a sin-offering;
and for a sacrifice of the peace-offerings two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs, sons of a year; this [is] the offering of Elishama son of Ammihud.
On the eighth day, the prince of the sons of Manasseh, Gamaliel son of Pedahzur; —
his offering [is] one silver dish, its weight a hundred and thirty [shekels]; one silver bowl of seventy shekels, by the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of flour mixed with oil, for a present;
one golden spoon of ten [shekels], full of perfume;
one bullock, a son of the herd, one ram, one lamb, a son of a year, for a burnt-offering;
one kid of the goats for a sin-offering;
and for a sacrifice of the peace-offerings two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs, sons of a year; this [is] the offering of Gamaliel son of Pedahzur.
On the ninth day, the prince of the sons of Benjamin, Abidan son of Gideoni; —
his offering [is] one silver dish, its weight a hundred and thirty [shekels]; one silver bowl of seventy shekels, by the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of flour mixed with oil, for a present;
one golden spoon of ten [shekels], full of perfume;
one bullock, a son of the herd, one ram, one lamb, a son of a year, for a burnt-offering;
one kid of the goats for a sin-offering:
and for a sacrifice of the peace-offerings two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs, sons of a year; this [is] the offering of Abidan son of Gideoni.
On the tenth day, the prince of the sons of Dan, Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai; —
his offering [is] one silver dish, its weight a hundred and thirty [shekels]; one silver bowl of seventy shekels, by the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of flour mixed with oil, for a present;
one golden spoon of ten [shekels], full of perfume;
one bullock, a son of the herd, one ram, one lamb, a son of a year, for a burnt-offering;
one kid of the goats for a sin-offering;
and for a sacrifice of the peace-offerings two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs, sons of a year; this [is] the offering of Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai.
On the eleventh day, the prince of the sons of Asher, Pagiel son of Ocran; —
his offering [is] one silver dish, its weight a hundred and thirty [shekels]; one silver bowl of seventy shekels, by the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of flour mixed with oil, for a present;
one golden spoon of ten [shekels], full of perfume;
one bullock, a son of the herd, one ram, one lamb, a son of a year, for a burnt-offering;
one kid of the goats for a sin-offering;
and for a sacrifice of the peace-offerings two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs, sons of a year; this [is] the offering of Pagiel son of Ocran.
On the twelfth day, the prince of the sons of Naphtali, Ahira son of Enan; —
his offering [is] one silver dish, its weight a hundred and thirty [shekels]; one silver bowl of seventy shekels, by the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of flour mixed with oil, for a present;
one golden spoon of ten [shekels], full of perfume;
one bullock, a son of the herd, one ram, one lamb, a son of a year, for a burnt-offering;
one kid of the goats for a sin-offering;
and for a sacrifice of the peace-offerings two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five lambs, sons of a year; this [is] the offering of Ahira son of Enan.
This [is] the dedication of the altar, in the day of its being anointed, by the princes of Israel: twelve silver dishes, twelve silver bowls, twelve golden spoons;
a hundred and thirty [shekels] each silver dish, and each bowl seventy; all the silver of the vessels [is] two thousand and four hundred [shekels], by the shekel of the sanctuary.
Golden spoons [are] twelve, full of perfume; ten [shekels] each spoon, by the shekel of the sanctuary; all the gold of the spoons [is] a hundred and twenty [shekels];
all the oxen for burnt-offering [are] twelve bullocks, rams twelve, lambs, sons of a year twelve, and their present; and kids of the goats twelve, for sin-offering;
and all the oxen for the sacrifice of the peace-offerings [are] twenty and four bullocks, rams sixty, he-goats sixty, lambs, sons of a year, sixty; this is the dedication of the altar, in the day of its being anointed.
And in the going in of Moses unto the tent of meeting to speak with Him — he doth even hear the voice speaking unto him from off the mercy-seat which [is] upon the ark of the testimony, from between the two cherubs; and He speaketh unto him.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto Aaron, and thou hast said unto him, In thy causing the lights to go up, over-against the face of the candlestick do the seven lights give light.'
And Aaron doth so; over-against the face of the candlestick he hath caused its lights to go up, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And this [is] the work of the candlestick: beaten work of gold; unto its thigh, unto its flower it [is] beaten work; as the appearance which Jehovah shewed Moses, so he hath made the candlestick.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Take the Levites from the midst of the sons of Israel, and thou hast cleansed them.
'And thus thou dost to them to cleanse them: sprinkle upon them waters of atonement, and they have caused a razor to pass over all their flesh, and have washed their garments, and cleansed themselves,
and have taken a bullock, a son of the herd, and its present, flour mixed with oil, — and a second bullock a son of the herd thou dost take for a sin-offering,
and thou hast brought near the Levites before the tent of meeting, and thou hast assembled the whole company of the sons of Israel,
and thou hast brought near the Levites before Jehovah, and the sons of Israel have laid their hands on the Levites,
and Aaron hath waved the Levites — a wave-offering before Jehovah, from the sons of Israel, and they have been — for doing the service of Jehovah.
'And the Levites lay their hands on the head of the bullocks, and make thou the one a sin-offering, and the one a burnt-offering to Jehovah, to atone for the Levites,
and thou hast caused the Levites to stand before Aaron, and before his sons, and hast waved them — a wave-offering to Jehovah;
and thou hast separated the Levites from the midst of the sons of Israel, and the Levites have become Mine;
and afterwards do the Levites come in to serve the tent of meeting, and thou hast cleansed them, and hast waved them — a wave-offering.
'For they are certainly given to Me out of the midst of the sons of Israel, instead of him who openeth any womb — the first-born of all — from the sons of Israel I have taken them to Myself;
for Mine [is] every first-born among the sons of Israel, among man and among beast; in the day of my smiting every first-born in the land of Egypt I sanctified them for Myself;
and I take the Levites instead of every first-born among the sons of Israel:
'And I give the Levites gifts to Aaron and to his sons, from the midst of the sons of Israel, to do the service of the sons of Israel in the tent of meeting, and to make atonement for the sons of Israel, and there is no plague among the sons of Israel in the sons of Israel's drawing nigh unto the sanctuary.'
And Moses doth — Aaron also, and all the company of the sons of Israel — to the Levites according to all that Jehovah hath commanded Moses concerning the Levites; so have the sons of Israel done to them.
And the Levites cleanse themselves, and wash their garments, and Aaron waveth them a wave-offering before Jehovah, and Aaron maketh atonement for them to cleanse them,
and afterwards have the Levites gone in to do their service in the tent of meeting, before Aaron and before his sons; as Jehovah hath commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so they have done to them.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'This [is] that which [is] the Levites': from a son of five and twenty years and upward he doth go in to serve the host in the service of the tent of meeting,
and from a son of fifty years he doth return from the host of the service, and doth not serve any more,
and he hath ministered with his brethren in the tent of meeting, to keep the charge, and doth not do service; thus thou dost to the Levites concerning their charge.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, in the wilderness of Sinai, in the second year of their going out of the land of Egypt, in the first month, saying,
'Also, the sons of Israel prepare the passover in its appointed season;
in the fourteenth day of this month between the evenings ye prepare it in its appointed season; according to all its statutes, and according to all its ordinances ye prepare it.'
And Moses speaketh unto the sons of Israel to prepare the passover,
and they prepare the passover in the first [month], on the fourteenth day of the month, between the evenings, in the wilderness of Sinai; according to all that Jehovah hath commanded Moses, so have the sons of Israel done.
And there are men who have been defiled by the body of a man, and they have not been able to prepare the passover on that day, and they come near before Moses, and before Aaron, on that day,
and those men say unto him, 'We are defiled by the body of a man; why are we withheld so as not to bring near the offering of Jehovah in its appointed season, in the midst of the sons of Israel?'
And Moses saith unto them, 'Stand ye, and I hear what Jehovah hath commanded concerning you.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, saying, Though any man is unclean by a body or in a distant journey (of you or of your generations), yet he hath prepared a passover to Jehovah;
in the second month, on the fourteenth day, between the evenings they prepare it; with unleavened and bitter things they eat it;
they do not leave of till morning; and a bone they do not break in it: according to all the statute of the passover they prepare it.
'And the man who is clean, and hath not been on a journey, and hath ceased to prepare the passover, even that person hath been cut off from his people; because the offering of Jehovah he hath not brought near, in its appointed season, that man doth bear his sin.
'And when a sojourner sojourneth with you, then he hath prepared a passover to Jehovah, according to the statute of the passover, and according to its ordinance, so he doth; one statute is to you, even to a sojourner, and to a native of the land.'
And in the day of the raising up of the tabernacle hath the cloud covered the tabernacle, even the tent of the testimony; and in the evening there is on the tabernacle as an appearance of fire till morning;
so it is continually; the cloud covereth it, also the appearance of fire by night.
And according to the going up of the cloud from off the tent and afterwards do the sons of Israel journey; and in the place where the cloud doth tabernacle, there do the sons of Israel encamp;
by the command of Jehovah the sons of Israel journey, and by the command of Jehovah they encamp; all the days that the cloud doth tabernacle over the tabernacle they encamp.
And in the cloud prolonging itself over the tabernacle many days, then have the sons of Israel kept the charge of Jehovah, and journey not,
and so when the cloud is a number of days over the tabernacle; by the command of Jehovah they encamp, and by the command of Jehovah they journey.
And so when the cloud is from evening till morning, when the cloud hath gone up in the morning, then they have journeyed; whether by day or by night, when the cloud hath gone up, then they have journeyed.
Whether two days, or a month, or days, in the cloud prolonging itself over the tabernacle, to tabernacle over it, the sons of Israel encamp, and journey not; and in its being lifted up they journey;
by the command of Jehovah they encamp, and by the command of Jehovah they journey; the charge of Jehovah they have kept, by the command of Jehovah in the hand of Moses.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Make to thee two trumpets of silver; beaten work thou dost make them, and they have been to thee for the convocation of the company, and for the journeying of the camps;
and they have blown with them, and all the company have met together unto thee, unto the opening of the tent of meeting.
And if with one they blow, then have the princes, heads of the thousands of Israel, met together unto thee;
'And ye have blown — a shout, and the camps which are encamping eastward have journeyed.
'And ye have blown — a second shout, and the camps which are encamping southward have journeyed; a shout they blow for their journeys.
'And in the assembling of the assembly ye blow, and do not shout;
and sons of Aaron, the priests, blow with the trumpets; and they have been to you for a statute age-during to your generations.
'And when ye go into battle in your land against the adversary who is distressing you, then ye have shouted with the trumpets, and ye have been remembered before Jehovah your God, and ye have been saved from your enemies.
'And in the day of your gladness, and in your appointed seasons, and in the beginnings of your months, ye have blown also with the trumpets over your burnt-offerings, and over the sacrifices of your peace-offerings, and they have been to you for a memorial before your God; I, Jehovah, [am] your God.'
And it cometh to pass — in the second year, in the second month, in the twentieth of the month — the cloud hath gone up from off the tabernacle of the testimony,
and the sons of Israel journey in their journeyings from the wilderness of Sinai, and the cloud doth tabernacle in the wilderness of Paran;
and they journey at first, by the command of Jehovah, in the hand of Moses.
And the standard of the camp of the sons of Judah journeyeth in the first [place], by their hosts, and over its host [is] Nahshon son of Amminadab.
And over the host of the tribe of the sons of Issachar [is] Nathaneel son of Zuar.
And over the host of the tribe of the sons of Zebulun [is] Eliab son of Helon;
And the tabernacle hath been taken down, and the sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari have journeyed, bearing the tabernacle.
And the standard of the camp of Reuben hath journeyed, by their hosts, and over its host [is] Elizur son of Shedeur.
And over the host of the tribe of the sons of Simeon [is] Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai.
And over the host of the tribe of the sons of Gad [is] Eliasaph son of Deuel;
And the Kohathites have journeyed, bearing the tabernacle, and the [others] have raised up the tabernacle until their coming in.
And the standard of the camp of the sons of Ephraim hath journeyed, by their hosts, and over its host [is] Elishama son of Ammihud.
And over the host of the tribe of the sons of Manasseh [is] Gamalial son of Pedahzur.
And over the host of the tribe of the sons of Benjamin [is] Abidan son of Gideoni.
And the standard of the camp of the sons of Dan hath journeyed (rearward to all the camps), by their hosts, and over its host [is] Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai.
And over the host of the tribe of the sons of Asher [is] Pagiel son of Ocran.
And over the host of the tribe of the sons of Naphtali [is] Ahira son of Enan.
These [are] journeyings of the sons of Israel by their hosts — and they journey.
And Moses saith to Hobab son of Raguel the Midianite, father-in-law of Moses, 'We are journeying unto the place of which Jehovah hath said, I give it to you; go with us, and we have done good to thee; for Jehovah hath spoken good concerning Israel.'
And he saith unto him, 'I do not go; but unto my land and unto my kindred do I go.'
And he saith, 'I pray thee, forsake us not, because thou hast known our encamping in the wilderness, and thou hast been to us for eyes;
and it hath come to pass when thou goest with us, yea, it hath come to pass — that good which Jehovah doth kindly with us — it we have done kindly to thee.'
And they journey from the mount of Jehovah a journey of three days; and the ark of the covenant of Jehovah is journeying before them the journey of three days, to spy out for them a resting-place;
and the cloud of Jehovah [is] on them by day, in their journeying from the camp.
And it cometh to pass in the journeying of the ark, that Moses saith, 'Rise, O Jehovah, and Thine enemies are scattered, and those hating Thee flee from Thy presence.'
And in its resting he saith, 'Return, O Jehovah, [to] the myriads, the thousands of Israel.'
And the people is evil, as those sighing habitually in the ears of Jehovah, and Jehovah heareth, and His anger burneth, and the fire of Jehovah burneth among them, and consumeth in the extremity of the camp.
And the people cry unto Moses, and Moses prayeth unto Jehovah, and the fire is quenched;
and he calleth the name of that place Taberah, for the fire of Jehovah hath 'burned' among them.
And the rabble who [are] in its midst have lusted greatly, and the sons of Israel also turn back and weep, and say, 'Who doth give us flesh?
We have remembered the fish which we do eat in Egypt for nought, the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and the onions, and the garlick;
and now our soul [is] dry, there is not anything, save the manna, before our eyes.'
And the manna is as coriander seed, and its aspect as the aspect of bdolach;
the people have turned aside and gathered [it], and ground [it] with millstones, or beat [it] in a mortar, and boiled [it] in a pan, and made it cakes, and its taste hath been as the taste of the moisture of oil.
And in the descending of the dew on the camp by night, the manna descendeth upon it.
And Moses heareth the people weeping by its families, each at the opening of his tent, and the anger of Jehovah burneth exceedingly, and in the eyes of Moses [it is] evil.
And Moses saith unto Jehovah, 'Why hast Thou done evil to Thy servant? and why have I not found grace in Thine eyes — to put the burden of all this people upon me?
I — have I conceived all this people? I — have I begotten it, that Thou sayest unto me, Carry it in thy bosom as the nursing father beareth the suckling, unto the ground which Thou hast sworn to its fathers?
Whence have I flesh to give to all this people? for they weep unto me, saying, Give to us flesh, and we eat.
I am not able — I alone — to bear all this people, for [it is] too heavy for me;
and if thus Thou art doing to me — slay me, I pray Thee; slay, if I have found grace in thine eyes, and let me not look on mine affliction.'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Gather to Me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou hast known that they are elders of the people, and its authorities; and thou hast taken them unto the tent of meeting, and they have stationed themselves there with thee,
and I have come down and spoken with thee there, and have kept back of the Spirit which [is] upon thee, and have put on them, and they have borne with thee some of the burden of the people, and thou dost not bear [it] thyself alone.
'And unto the people thou dost say, Sanctify yourselves for to-morrow, and ye have eaten flesh (for ye have wept in the ears of Jehovah, saying, Who doth give us flesh? for we [had] good in Egypt) — and Jehovah hath given to you flesh, and ye have eaten.
Ye do not eat one day, nor two days, nor five days, nor ten days, nor twenty days; —
unto a month of days, till that it come out from your nostrils, and it hath become to you an abomination; because that ye have loathed Jehovah, who [is] in your midst, and weep before Him, saying, Why is this? — we have come out of Egypt!'
And Moses saith, 'Six hundred thousand footmen [are] the people in whose midst I [am]; and Thou, Thou hast said, Flesh I give to them, and they have eaten, a month of days!
Is flock and herd slaughtered for them, that one hath found for them? — are all the fishes of the sea gathered for them — that one hath found for them?'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Is the hand of Jehovah become short? now thou dost see whether My word meeteth thee or not.'
And Moses goeth out, and speaketh unto the people the words of Jehovah, and gathereth seventy men of the elders of the people, and causeth them to stand round about the tent,
and Jehovah cometh down in the cloud, and speaketh unto him, and keepeth back of the Spirit which [is] on him, and putteth on the seventy men of the elders; and it cometh to pass at the resting of the Spirit on them, that they prophesy, and do not cease.
And two of the men are left in the camp, the name of the one [is] Eldad, and the name of the second Medad, and the spirit resteth upon them, (and they are among those written, and have not gone out to the tent), and they prophesy in the camp;
and the young man runneth, and declareth to Moses, and saith, 'Eldad and Medad are prophesying in the camp.'
And Joshua son of Nun, minister of Moses, [one] of his young men, answereth and saith, 'My lord Moses, restrain them.'
And Moses saith to him, 'Art thou zealous for me? O that all Jehovah's people were prophets! that Jehovah would put His Spirit upon them!'
And Moses is gathered unto the camp, he and the elders of Israel.
And a spirit hath journeyed from Jehovah, and cutteth off quails from the sea, and leaveth by the camp, as a day's journey here, and as a day's journey there, round about the camp, and about two cubits, on the face of the land.
And the people rise all that day, and all the night, and all the day after, and gather the quails — he who hath least hath gathered ten homers — and they spread them out for themselves round about the camp.
The flesh is yet between their teeth — it is not yet cut off — and the anger of Jehovah hath burned among the people, and Jehovah smiteth among the people — a very great smiting;
and [one] calleth the name of that place Kibroth-Hattaavah, for there they have buried the people who lust.
From Kibroth-Hattaavah have the people journeyed to Hazeroth, and they are in Hazeroth.
And Miriam speaketh — Aaron also — against Moses concerning the circumstance of the Cushite woman whom he had taken: for a Cushite woman he had taken;
and they say, 'Only by Moses hath Jehovah spoken? also by us hath he not spoken?' and Jehovah heareth.
And the man Moses [is] very humble, more than any of the men who [are] on the face of the ground.
And Jehovah saith suddenly unto Moses, and unto Aaron, and unto Miriam, 'Come out ye three unto the tent of meeting;' and they three come out.
And Jehovah cometh down in the pillar of the cloud, and standeth at the opening of the tent, and calleth Aaron and Miriam, and they come out both of them.
And He saith, 'Hear, I pray you, My words: If your prophet is of Jehovah — in an appearance unto him I make Myself known; in a dream I speak with him;
not so My servant Moses; in all My house he [is] stedfast;
mouth unto mouth I speak with him, and [by] an appearance, and not in riddles; and the form of Jehovah he beholdeth attentively; and wherefore have ye not been afraid to speak against My servant — against Moses?'
And the anger of Jehovah burneth against them, and He goeth on,
and the cloud hath turned aside from off the tent, and lo, Miriam [is] leprous as snow; and Aaron turneth unto Miriam, and lo, leprous!
And Aaron saith unto Moses, 'O, my lord, I pray thee, lay not upon us sin [in] which we have been foolish, and [in] which we have sinned;
let her not, I pray thee, be as [one] dead, when in his coming out from the womb of his mother — the half of his flesh is consumed.'
And Moses crieth unto Jehovah, saying, 'O God, I pray Thee, give, I pray Thee, healing to her.'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'And her father had but spat in her face — is she not ashamed seven days? she is shut out seven days at the outside of the camp, and afterwards she is gathered.'
And Miriam is shut out at the outside of the camp seven days, and the people hath not journeyed till Miriam is gathered;
and afterwards have the people journeyed from Hazeroth, and they encamp in the wilderness of Paran.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Send for thee men, and they spy the land of Canaan, which I am giving to the sons of Israel; one man, one man for the tribe of his fathers ye do send, every one a prince among them.'
And Moses sendeth them from the wilderness of Paran by the command of Jehovah; all of them [are] men, heads of the sons of Israel they are,
and these their names: For the tribe of Reuben, Shammua son of Zaccur.
For the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat son of Hori.
For the tribe of Judah, Caleb son of Jephunneh.
For the tribe of Issachar, Igal son of Joseph.
For the tribe of Ephraim, Oshea, son of Nun.
For the tribe of Benjamin, Palti son of Raphu.
For the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel son of Sodi.
For the tribe of Joseph, (for the tribe of Manasseh,) Gaddi son of Susi.
For the tribe of Dan, Ammiel son of Gemalli.
For the tribe of Asher, Sethur son of Michael.
For the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi son of Vopshi.
For the tribe of Gad, Geuel son of Machi.
These [are] the names of the men whom Moses hath sent to spy the land; and Moses calleth Hoshea son of Nun, Jehoshua.
And Moses sendeth them to spy the land of Canaan, and saith unto them, 'Go ye up this [way] into the south, and ye have gone up the mountain,
and have seen the land what it [is], and the people which is dwelling on it, whether it [is] strong or feeble; whether it [is] few or many;
and what the land [is] in which it is dwelling, whether it [is] good or bad; and what [are] the cities in which it is dwelling, whether in camps or in fortresses;
And what the land [is], whether it [is] fat or lean; whether there is wood in it or not; and ye have strengthened yourselves, and have taken of the fruit of the land;' and the days [are] days of the first-fruits of grapes.
And they go up and spy the land, from the wilderness of Zin unto Rehob at the going in to Hamath;
and they go up by the south, and come in unto Hebron, and there [are] Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai, children of Anak (and Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt),
and they come in unto the brook of Eshcol, and cut down thence a branch and one cluster of grapes, and they bear it on a staff by two, also [some] of the pomegranates, and of the figs.
That place hath [one] called Brook of Eshcol, because of the cluster which the sons of Israel cut from thence.
And they turn back from spying the land at the end of forty days.
And they go and come in unto Moses, and unto Aaron, and unto all the company of the sons of Israel, unto the wilderness of Paran, to Kadesh; and they bring them and all the company back word, and shew them the fruit of the land.
And they recount to him, and say, 'We came in unto the land whither thou hast sent us, and also it [is] flowing with milk and honey — and this [is] its fruit;
only, surely the people which is dwelling in the land [is] strong; and the cities are fenced, very great; and also children of Anak we have seen there.
Amalek is dwelling in the land of the south, and the Hittite, and the Jebusite, and the Amorite is dwelling in the hill country, and the Canaanite is dwelling by the sea, and by the side of the Jordan.'
And Caleb stilleth the people concerning Moses, and saith, 'Let us certainly go up — and we have possessed it; for we are thoroughly able for it.'
And the men who have gone up with him said, 'We are not able to go up against the people, for it [is] stronger than we;'
and they bring out an evil account of the land which they have spied unto the sons of Israel, saying, 'The land into which we passed over to spy it, is a land eating up its inhabitants; and all the people whom we saw in its midst [are] men of stature;
and there we saw the Nephilim, sons of Anak, of the Nephilim; and we are in our own eyes as grasshoppers; and so we were in their eyes.'
And all the company lifteth up and give forth their voice, and the people weep during that night;
and all the sons of Israel murmur against Moses, and against Aaron, and all the company say unto them, 'O that we had died in the land of Egypt, or in this wilderness, O that we had died!
and why is Jehovah bringing us in unto this land to fall by the sword? our wives and our infants are become a prey; is it not good for us to turn back to Egypt?'
And they say one unto another, 'Let us appoint a head, and turn back to Egypt.'
And Moses falleth — Aaron also — on their faces, before all the assembly of the company of the sons of Israel.
And Joshua son of Nun, and Caleb son of Jephunneh, of those spying the land, have rent their garments,
and they speak unto all the company of the sons of Israel, saying, 'The land into which we have passed over to spy it, [is] a very very good land;
if Jehovah hath delighted in us, then He hath brought us in unto this land, and hath given it to us, a land which is flowing with milk and honey;
only, against Jehovah rebel not ye: and ye, fear not ye the people of the land, for our bread they [are]; their defence hath turned aside from off them, and Jehovah [is] with us; fear them not.'
And all the company say to stone them with stones, and the honour of Jehovah hath appeared in the tent of meeting unto all the sons of Israel.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Until when doth this people despise Me? and until when do they not believe in Me, for all the signs which I have done in its midst?
I smite it with pestilence, and dispossess it, and make thee become a nation greater and mightier than it.'
And Moses saith unto Jehovah, 'Then have the Egyptians heard! for Thou hast brought up with Thy power this people out of their midst,
and they have said [it] unto the inhabitant of this land, they have heard that Thou, Jehovah, [art] in the midst of this people, that eye to eye Thou art seen — O Jehovah, and Thy cloud is standing over them, — and in a pillar of cloud Thou art going before them by day, and in a pillar of fire by night.
'And Thou hast put to death this people as one man, and the nations who have heard Thy fame have spoken, saying,
From Jehovah's want of ability to bring in this people unto the land which He hath sworn to them — He doth slaughter them in the wilderness.
'And now, let, I pray Thee, the power of my Lord be great, as Thou hast spoken, saying:
Jehovah [is] slow to anger, and of great kindness; bearing away iniquity and transgression, and not entirely acquitting, charging iniquity of fathers on sons, on a third [generation], and on a fourth; —
forgive, I pray Thee, the iniquity of this people, according to the greatness of Thy kindness, and as Thou hast borne with this people from Egypt, even until now.'
And Jehovah saith, 'I have forgiven, according to thy word;
and yet, I live — and it is filled — the whole earth — [with] the honour of Jehovah;
for all the men who are seeing My honour, and My signs, which I have done in Egypt, and in the wilderness, and try Me these ten times, and have not hearkened to My voice —
they see not the land which I have sworn to their fathers, yea, none of those despising Me see it;
and My servant Caleb, because there hath been another spirit with him, and he is fully after Me — I have brought him in unto the land whither he hath entered, and his seed doth possess it.
'And the Amalekite and the Canaanite are dwelling in the valley; to-morrow turn ye and journey for yourselves into the wilderness — the way of the Red Sea.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, and unto Aaron, saying,
'Until when hath this evil company that which they are murmuring against Me? the murmurings of the sons of Israel, which they are murmuring against Me, I have heard;
say unto them, I live — an affirmation of Jehovah — if, as ye have spoken in Mine ears — so I do not to you;
in this wilderness do your carcases fall, even all your numbered ones, to all your number, from a son of twenty years and upward, who have murmured against Me;
ye — ye come not in unto the land which I have lifted up My hand to cause you to tabernacle in it, except Caleb son of Jephunneh, and Joshua son of Nun.
'As to your infants — of whom ye have said, A spoil they are become — I have even brought them in, and they have known the land which ye have kicked against;
as to you — your carcases do fall in this wilderness,
and your sons are evil in the wilderness forty years, and have borne your whoredoms till your carcases are consumed in the wilderness;
by the number of the days [in] which ye spied the land, forty days, — a day for a year, a day for a year — ye do bear your iniquities, forty years, and ye have known my breaking off;
I [am] Jehovah, I have spoken; if I do not this to all this evil company who are meeting against me; — in this wilderness they are consumed, and there they die.'
And the men whom Moses hath sent to spy the land, and they turn back and cause all the company to murmur against him, by bringing out an evil account concerning the land,
even the men bringing out an evil account of the land die by the plague before Jehovah;
and Joshua son of Nun, and Caleb son of Jephunneh, have lived of those men who go to spy out the land.
And Moses speaketh these words unto all the sons of Israel, and the people mourn exceedingly,
and they rise early in the morning, and go up unto the top of the mountain, saying, 'Here we [are], and we have come up unto the place which Jehovah hath spoken of, for we have sinned.'
And Moses saith, 'Why [is] this? — ye are transgressing the command of Jehovah, and it doth not prosper;
go not up, for Jehovah is not in your midst, and ye are not smitten before your enemies;
for the Amalekite and the Canaanite [are] there before you, and ye have fallen by the sword, because that ye have turned back from after Jehovah, and Jehovah is not with you.'
And they presume to go up unto the top of the mountain, and the ark of the covenant of Jehovah and Moses have not departed out of the midst of the camp.
And the Amalekite and the Canaanite who are dwelling in that mountain come down and smite them, and beat them down — unto Hormah.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, and thou hast said unto them, When ye come in unto the land of your dwellings, which I am giving to you,
then ye have prepared a fire-offering to Jehovah, a burnt-offering, or a sacrifice, at separating a vow or free-will-offering, or in your appointed things, to make a sweet fragrance to Jehovah, out of the herd, or out of the flock.
'And he who is bringing near his offering to Jehovah hath brought near a present of flour, a tenth deal, mixed with a fourth of the hin of oil;
and wine for a libation, a fourth of the hin thou dost prepare for the burnt-offering or for a sacrifice, for the one lamb;
or for a ram thou dost prepare a present of flour, two-tenth deals, mixed with oil, a third of the hin;
and wine for a libation, a third part of the hin, thou dost bring near — a sweet fragrance to Jehovah.
'And when thou makest a son of the herd a burnt-offering or a sacrifice, at separating a vow or peace-offerings to Jehovah,
then he hath brought near for the son of the herd a present of flour, three-tenth deals, mixed with oil, a half of the hin;
and wine thou bringest near for a libation, a half of the hin — a fire-offering of sweet fragrance to Jehovah;
thus it is done for the one ox, or for the one ram, or for a lamb of the sheep or of the goats.
'According to the number that ye prepare, so ye do to each, according to their number;
every native doth thus with these, at bringing near a fire-offering of sweet fragrance to Jehovah;
and when a sojourner sojourneth with you, or whoso [is] in your midst to your generations, and he hath made a fire-offering of sweet fragrance to Jehovah, as ye do so he doth.
'One statute is for you of the congregation and for the sojourner who is sojourning, a statute age-during to your generations: as ye [are] so is the sojourner before Jehovah;
one law and one ordinance is to you and to the sojourner who is sojourning with you.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, and thou hast said unto them, In your coming in unto the land whither I am bringing you in,
then it hath been, in your eating of the bread of the land, ye heave up a heave-offering to Jehovah;
the beginning of your dough a cake ye heave up — a heave-offering; as the heave-offering of a threshing-floor, so ye do heave it.
Of the beginning of your dough ye do give to Jehovah a heave-offering — to your generations.
'And when ye err, and do not all these commands which Jehovah hath spoken unto Moses,
the whole that Jehovah hath charged upon you by the hand of Moses, from the day that Jehovah hath commanded, and henceforth, to your generations,
then it hath been, if from the eyes of the company it hath been done in ignorance, that all the company have prepared one bullock, a son of the herd, for a burnt-offering, for sweet fragrance to Jehovah, and its present, and its libation, according to the ordinance, and one kid of the goats for a sin-offering.
'And the priest hath made atonement for all the company of the sons of Israel, and it hath been forgiven them, for it [is] ignorance, and they — they have brought in their offering, a fire-offering to Jehovah, even their sin-offering before Jehovah for their ignorance;
and it hath been forgiven to all the company of the sons of Israel, and to the sojourner who is sojourning in their midst; for to all the company [it is done] in ignorance.
'And if one person sin in ignorance, then he hath brought near a she-goat, daughter of a year, for a sin-offering;
and the priest hath made atonement for the person who is erring, in his sinning in ignorance before Jehovah, by making atonement for him, and it hath been forgiven him;
for the native among the sons of Israel, and for the sojourner who is sojourning in their midst — one law is to you, for him who is doing [anything] through ignorance.
'And the person who doth [aught] with a high hand — of the native or of the sojourner — Jehovah he is reviling, and that person hath been cut off from the midst of his people;
because the word of Jehovah he despised, and His command hath broken — that person is certainly cut off; his iniquity [is] on him.'
And the sons of Israel are in the wilderness, and they find a man gathering wood on the sabbath-day,
and those finding him gathering wood bring him near unto Moses, and unto Aaron, and unto all the company,
and they place him in ward, for it [is] not explained what is [to be] done to him.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'The man is certainly put to death, all the company stoning him with stones, at the outside of the camp.'
And all the company bring him out unto the outside of the camp, and stone him with stones, and he dieth, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, and thou hast said unto them, and they have made for themselves fringes on the skirts of their garments, to their generations, and they have put on the fringe of the skirt a ribbon of blue,
and it hath been to you for a fringe, and ye have seen it, and have remembered all the commands of Jehovah, and have done them, and ye search not after your heart, and after your eyes, after which ye are going a-whoring;
so that ye remember and have done all My commands, and ye have been holy to your God;
I [am] Jehovah your God, who hath brought you out from the land of Egypt to become your God; I, Jehovah, [am] your God.'
And Korah, son of Izhar, son of Kohath, son of Levi, taketh both Dathan and Abiram sons of Eliab, and On son of Peleth, sons of Reuben,
and they rise up before Moses, with men of the sons of Israel, two hundred and fifty, princes of the company, called of the convention, men of name,
and they are assembled against Moses and against Aaron, and say unto them, 'Enough of you! for all the company — all of them [are] holy, and in their midst [is] Jehovah; and wherefore do ye lift yourselves up above the assembly of Jehovah?'
And Moses heareth, and falleth on his face,
and he speaketh unto Korah, and unto all his company, saying, 'Morning! — and Jehovah is knowing those who are his, and him who is holy, and hath brought near unto Him; even him whom He doth fix on He bringeth near unto Him.
This do: take to yourselves censers, Korah, and all his company,
and put in them fire, and put on them perfume, before Jehovah to-morrow, and it hath been, the man whom Jehovah chooseth, he [is] the holy one; — enough of you, sons of Levi.'
And Moses saith unto Korah, 'Hear ye, I pray you, sons of Levi;
is it little to you that the God of Israel hath separated you from the company of Israel to bring you near unto Himself, to do the service of the tabernacle of Jehovah, and to stand before the company to serve them? —
yea, He doth bring thee near, and all thy brethren the sons of Levi with thee — and ye have sought also the priesthood!
Therefore, thou and all thy company who are met [are] against Jehovah; and Aaron, what [is] he, that ye murmur against him?'
And Moses sendeth to call for Dathan and for Abiram sons of Eliab, and they say, 'We do not come up;
is it little that thou hast brought us up out of a land flowing with milk and honey to put us to death in a wilderness that thou also certainly makest thyself prince over us?
Yea, unto a land flowing with milk and honey thou hast not brought us in, nor dost thou give to us an inheritance of field and vineyard; the eyes of these men dost thou pick out? we do not come up.'
And it is very displeasing to Moses, and he saith unto Jehovah, 'Turn not Thou unto their present; not one ass from them have I taken, nor have I afflicted one of them.'
And Moses saith unto Korah, 'Thou and all thy company, be ye before Jehovah, thou, and they, and Aaron, to-morrow;
and take ye each his censer, and ye have put on them perfume, and brought near before Jehovah, each his censer, two hundred and fifty censers; and thou and Aaron, each his censer.'
And they take each his censer, and put on them fire, and lay on them perfume, and they stand at the opening of the tent of meeting, with Moses and Aaron.
And Korah assembleth against them all the company unto the opening of the tent of meeting, and the honour of Jehovah is seen by all the company.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
'Be ye separated from the midst of this company, and I consume them in a moment;'
and they fall on their faces, and say, 'God, God of the spirits of all flesh — the one man sinneth, and against all the company Thou art wroth!'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the company, saying, Go ye up from round about the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.'
And Moses riseth, and goeth unto Dathan and Abiram, and the elders of Israel go after him,
and he speaketh unto the company, saying, 'Turn aside, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men, and come not against anything that they have, lest ye be consumed in all their sins.'
And they go up from the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, from round about, and Dathan, and Abiram have come out, standing at the opening of their tents, and their wives, and their sons, and their infants.
And Moses saith, 'By this ye do know that Jehovah hath sent me to do all these works, that [they are] not from my own heart;
if according to the death of all men these die — or the charge of all men is charged upon them — Jehovah hath not sent me;
and if a strange thing Jehovah do, and the ground hath opened her mouth and swallowed them, and all that they have, and they have gone down alive to Sheol — then ye have known that these men have despised Jehovah.'
And it cometh to pass at his finishing speaking all these words, that the ground which [is] under them cleaveth,
and the earth openeth her mouth, and swalloweth them, and their houses, and all the men who [are] for Korah, and all the goods,
and they go down, they, and all that they have, alive to Sheol, and the earth closeth over them, and they perish from the midst of the assembly;
and all Israel who [are] round about them have fled at their voice, for they said, 'Lest the earth swallow us;'
and fire hath come out from Jehovah, and consumeth the two hundred and fifty men bringing near the perfume.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Say unto Eleazar son of Aaron the priest, and he lifteth up the censers from the midst of the burning, and the fire scatter thou yonder, for they have been hallowed,
[even] the censers of these sinners against their own souls; and they have made them spread-out plates, a covering for the altar, for they have brought them near before Jehovah, and they are hallowed; and they are become a sign to the sons of Israel.'
And Eleazar the priest taketh the brazen censers which they who are burnt had brought near, and they spread them out, a covering for the altar —
a memorial to the sons of Israel, so that a stranger who is not of the seed of Aaron doth not draw near to make a perfume before Jehovah, and is not as Korah, and as his company, — as Jehovah hath spoken by the hand of Moses to him.
And all the company of the sons of Israel murmur, on the morrow, against Moses and against Aaron, saying, 'Ye — ye have put to death the people of Jehovah.'
And it cometh to pass, in the company being assembled against Moses and against Aaron, that they turn towards the tent of meeting, and lo, the cloud hath covered it, and the honour of Jehovah is seen;
and Moses cometh — Aaron also — unto the front of the tent of meeting.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Get you up from the midst of this company, and I consume them in a moment;' and they fall on their faces,
and Moses saith unto Aaron, 'Take the censer, and put on it fire from off the altar, and place perfume, and go, hasten unto the company, and make atonement for them, for the wrath hath gone out from the presence of Jehovah — the plague hath begun.'
And Aaron taketh as Moses hath spoken, and runneth unto the midst of the assembly, and lo, the plague hath begun among the people; and he giveth the perfume, and maketh atonement for the people,
and standeth between the dead and the living, and the plague is restrained;
and those who die by the plague are fourteen thousand and seven hundred, apart from those who die for the matter of Korah;
and Aaron turneth back unto Moses, unto the opening of the tent of meeting, and the plague hath been restrained.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, and take from them each a rod, for a father's house, from all their princes, for the house of their fathers, twelve rods; the name of each thou dost write on his rod,
and Aaron's name thou dost write on the tribe of Levi; for one rod [is] for the head of their fathers' house:
and thou hast placed them in the tent of meeting, before the testimony, where I meet with you.
'And it hath come to pass, the man's rod on whom I fix doth flourish, and I have caused to cease from off me the murmurings of the sons of Israel, which they are murmuring against you.'
And Moses speaketh unto the sons of Israel, and all their princes give unto him one rod for a prince, one rod for a prince, for their fathers' house, twelve rods, and the rod of Aaron [is] in the midst of their rods;
and Moses placeth the rods before Jehovah, in the tent of the testimony.
And it cometh to pass, on the morrow, that Moses goeth in unto the tent of the testimony, and lo, the rod of Aaron hath flourished for the house of Levi, and is bringing out flourishing, and doth blossom blossoms, and doth produce almonds;
and Moses bringeth out all the rods from before Jehovah, unto all the sons of Israel, and they look, and take each his rod.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Put back the rod of Aaron, before the testimony, for a charge, for a sign to the sons of rebellion, and thou dost remove their murmurings from off me, and they do not die;'
and Moses doth as Jehovah hath commanded him; so he hath done.
And the sons of Israel speak unto Moses, saying, 'Lo, we have expired; we have perished; we have all of us perished;
any who is at all drawing near unto the tabernacle of Jehovah dieth; have we not been consumed — to expire?'
And Jehovah saith unto Aaron, 'Thou, and thy sons, and the house of thy father with thee, do bear the iniquity of the sanctuary; and thou, and thy sons with thee, do bear the iniquity of your priesthood;
and also thy brethren, the tribe of Levi, the tribe of thy father, bring near with thee, and they are joined unto thee, and serve thee, even thou and thy sons with thee, before the tent of the testimony.
'And they have kept thy charge, and the charge of all the tent; only, unto the vessels of the sanctuary and unto the altar they do not come near, and they die not, either they or you;
and they have been joined unto thee, and have kept the charge of the tent of meeting, for all the service of the tent; and a stranger doth not come near unto you;
and ye have kept the charge of the sanctuary, and the charge of the altar, and there is no more wrath against the sons of Israel.
'And I, lo, I have taken your brethren the Levites from the midst of the sons of Israel; to you a gift they are given by Jehovah, to do the service of the tent of meeting;
and thou, and thy sons with thee, do keep your priesthood, for everything of the altar, and within the vail, and ye have served; a service of gift I make your priesthood; and the stranger who is coming near is put to death.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Aaron: 'And I, lo, I have given to thee the charge of My heave-offerings, of all the hallowed things of the sons of Israel — to thee I have given them for the anointing, and to thy sons, by a statute age-during.
This is thine of the most holy things, from the fire: all their offering, to all their present, and to all their sin-offering, and to all their guilt-offering, which they give back to Me, is most holy to thee, and to thy sons;
in the holy of holies thou dost eat it; every male doth eat it; holy it is to thee.
'And this [is] thine: the heave-offering of their gift, to all the wave-offerings of the sons of Israel, to thee I have given them, and to thy sons, and to thy daughters with thee, by a statute age-during; every clean one in thy house doth eat it;
all the best of the oil, and all the best of the new wine, and wheat — their first -[fruits] which they give to Jehovah — to thee I have given them.
'The first-fruits of all that [is] in their land, which they bring in to Jehovah, are thine; every clean one in thy house doth eat it;
every devoted thing in Israel is thine,
every one opening a womb of all flesh which they bring near to Jehovah, among man and among beast, is thine; only, thou dost certainly ransom the first-born of man, and the firstling of the unclean beast thou dost ransom.
'And their ransomed ones from a son of a month, thou dost ransom with thy valuation, of silver, five shekels, by the shekel of the sanctuary, twenty gerahs it [is].
'Only, the firstling of a cow, or the firstling of a sheep, or the firstling of a goat, thou dost not ransom, holy they [are]: their blood thou dost sprinkle on the altar, and of their fat thou makest perfume, a fire-offering of sweet fragrance to Jehovah,
and their flesh is thine, as the breast of the wave-offering, and as the right leg, it is thine;
all the heave-offerings of the holy things which the sons of Israel lift up to Jehovah I have given to thee and to thy sons, and to thy daughters with thee, by a statute age-during, a covenant of salt, age-during it [is] before Jehovah, to thee and to thy seed with thee.'
And Jehovah saith unto Aaron, 'In their land thou dost not inherit, and a portion thou hast not in their midst: I [am] thy portion, and thine inheritance in the midst of the sons of Israel;
and to the sons of Levi, lo, I have given all the tenth in Israel for inheritance in exchange for their service which they are serving — the service of the tent of meeting.
'And the sons of Israel come no more near unto the tent of meeting, to bear sin, to die,
and the Levites have done the service of the tent of meeting, and they — they bear their iniquity; a statute age-during to your generations, that in the midst of the sons of Israel they have no inheritance;
but the tithe of the sons of Israel which they lift up to Jehovah, a heave-offering, I have given to the Levites for inheritance; therefore I have said of them, In the midst of the sons of Israel they have no inheritance.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'And unto the Levites thou dost speak; and thou hast said unto them, When ye take from the sons of Israel the tithe which I have given to you from them, for your inheritance, then ye have lifted up from it the heave-offering of Jehovah, a tithe of the tithe;
and your heave-offering hath been reckoned to you as corn from the threshing-floor, and as fulness from the wine-vat;
so ye do lift up — ye also — the heave-offering of Jehovah from all your tithes which ye receive from the sons of Israel; and ye have given from it the heave-offering of Jehovah to Aaron the priest;
out of all your gifts ye do lift up the whole heave-offering of Jehovah; out of all its fat, — its hallowed part — out of it.
'And thou hast said unto them, In your lifting up its fat out of it, then it hath been reckoned to the Levites, as increase of a threshing-floor, and as increase of a wine-vat;
and ye have eaten it in every place, ye and your households, for it [is] your hire in exchange for your service in the tent of meeting;
and ye bear no sin for it, in your lifting up its fat out of it, and the holy things of the sons of Israel ye do not pollute, and ye die not.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, and unto Aaron, saying,
'This [is] a statute of the law which Jehovah hath commanded, saying, Speak unto the sons of Israel, and they bring unto thee a red cow, a perfect one, in which there is no blemish, on which no yoke hath gone up;
and ye have given it unto Eleazar the priest, and he hath brought it out unto the outside of the camp, and hath slaughtered it before him.
'And Eleazar the priest hath taken of its blood with his finger, and hath sprinkled over-against the front of the tent of meeting of her blood seven times;
and [one] hath burnt the cow before his eyes; her skin, and her flesh, and her blood, besides her dung, he doth burn;
and the priest hath taken cedar wood, and hyssop, and scarlet, and hath cast unto the midst of the burning of the cow;
and the priest hath washed his garments, and hath bathed his flesh with water, and afterwards doth come in unto the camp, and the priest is unclean till the evening;
and he who is burning it doth wash his garments with water, and hath bathed his flesh with water, and is unclean till the evening.
'And a clean man hath gathered the ashes of the cow, and hath placed at the outside of the camp, in a clean place, and it hath become to the company of the sons of Israel a charge for waters of separation — it [is] a [cleansing];
and he who is gathering the ashes of the heifer hath washed his garments, and is unclean till the evening; and it hath been to the sons of Israel, and to the sojourner who is sojourning in their midst, for a statute age-during.
'He who is coming against the dead body of any man — is unclean seven days;
he doth cleanse himself for it on the third day, and on the seventh day he is clean; and if he cleanse not himself on the third day, then on the seventh day he is not clean.
Any one who is coming against the dead, against the body of man who dieth, and cleanseth not himself — the tabernacle of Jehovah he hath defiled, and that person hath been cut off from Israel, for water of separation is not sprinkled upon him; he is unclean; his uncleanness [is] still upon him.
'This [is] the law, when a man dieth in a tent: every one who is coming in unto the tent, and all that [is] in the tent, is unclean seven days;
and every open vessel which hath no covering of thread upon it is unclean.
'And every one who cometh, on the face of the field, against the pierced of a sword, or against the dead, or against a bone of man, or against a grave, is unclean seven days;
and they have taken for the unclean person of the ashes of the burning of the [cleansing], and he hath put upon it running water unto a vessel;
and a clean person hath taken hyssop, and hath dipped [it] in water, and hath sprinkled on the tent, and on all the vessels, and on the persons who have been there, and on him who is coming against a bone, or against one pierced, or against the dead, or against a grave.
'And the clean hath sprinkled [it] on the unclean on the third day, and on the seventh day, and hath cleansed him on the seventh day, and he hath washed his garments, and hath bathed with water, and hath been clean in the evening.
'And the man who is unclean, and doth not cleanse himself, even that person hath been cut off from the midst of the assembly; for the sanctuary of Jehovah he hath defiled; water of separation is not sprinkled upon him; he [is] unclean.
'And it hath been to them for a statute age-during, that he who is sprinkling the water of separation doth wash his garments, and he who is coming against the water of separation is unclean till the evening,
and all against which the unclean person cometh is unclean, and the person who is coming against [it] is unclean till the evening.'
And the sons of Israel come in, — all the company — to the wilderness of Zin, in the first month, and the people abide in Kadesh, and Miriam dieth there, and is buried there.
And there hath been no water for the company, and they are assembled against Moses, and against Aaron,
and the people strive with Moses, and speak, saying, 'And oh that we had expired when our brethren expired before Jehovah!
and why have ye brought in the assembly of Jehovah unto this wilderness to die there, we and our beasts?
and why hast thou brought us up out of Egypt to bring us in unto this evil place? no place of seed, and fig, and vine, and pomegranate; and water there is none to drink.
And Moses and Aaron go in from the presence of the assembly unto the opening of the tent of meeting, and fall on their faces, and the honour of Jehovah is seen by them.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Take the rod, and assemble the company, thou and Aaron thy brother; and ye have spoken unto the rock before their eyes, and it hath given its water, and thou hast brought out to them water from the rock, and hast watered the company, and their beasts.'
And Moses taketh the rod from before Jehovah, as He hath commanded him,
and Moses and Aaron assemble the assembly unto the front of the rock, and he saith to them, 'Hear, I pray you, O rebels, from this rock do we bring out to you water?'
and Moses lifteth up his hand, and smiteth the rock with his rod twice; and much water cometh out, and the company drink, also their beasts.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, and unto Aaron, 'Because ye have not believed in Me to sanctify Me before the eyes of the sons of Israel, therefore ye do not bring in this assembly unto the land which I have given to them.'
These [are] waters of Meribah, because the sons of Israel have 'striven' with Jehovah, and He is sanctified upon them.
And Moses sendeth messengers from Kadesh unto the king of Edom, 'Thus said thy brother Israel, Thou — thou hast known all the travail which hath found us;
that our fathers go down to Egypt, and we dwell in Egypt many days, and the Egyptians do evil to us and to our fathers;
and we cry unto Jehovah, and He heareth our voice, and sendeth a messenger, and is bringing us out of Egypt; and lo, we [are] in Kadesh, a city [in] the extremity of thy border.
Let us pass over, we pray thee, through thy land; we pass not over through a field, or through a vineyard, nor do we drink waters of a well; the way of the king we go, we turn not aside — right or left — till that we pass over thy border.'
And Edom saith unto him, 'Thou dost not pass over through me, lest with sword I come out to meet thee.'
And the sons of Israel say unto him, 'In the highway we go, and if of thy waters we drink — I and my cattle — then I have given their price; only (it is nothing) on my feet I pass over.'
And he saith, 'Thou dost not pass over;' and Edom cometh out to meet him with much people, and with a strong hand;
and Edom refuseth to suffer Israel to pass over through his border, and Israel turneth aside from off him.
And the sons of Israel, the whole company, journey from Kadesh, and come in unto mount Hor,
and Jehovah speaketh unto Moses and unto Aaron in mount Hor, on the border of the land of Edom, saying,
'Aaron is gathered unto his people, for he doth not go in unto the land which I have given to the sons of Israel, because that ye provoked My mouth at the waters of Meribah.
'Take Aaron and Eleazar his son, and cause them to go up mount Hor,
and strip Aaron of his garments, and thou hast clothed [with] them Eleazar his son, and Aaron is gathered, and doth die there.'
And Moses doth as Jehovah hath commanded, and they go up unto mount Hor before the eyes of all the company,
and Moses strippeth Aaron of his garments, and clotheth with them Eleazar his son, and Aaron dieth there on the top of the mount; and Moses cometh down — Eleazar also — from the mount,
and all the company see that Aaron hath expired, and they bewail Aaron thirty days — all the house of Israel.
And the Canaanite — king Arad — dwelling in the south, heareth that Israel hath come the way of the Atharim, and he fighteth against Israel, and taketh [some] of them captive.
And Israel voweth a vow to Jehovah, and saith, 'If Thou dost certainly give this people into my hand, then I have devoted their cities;'
and Jehovah hearkeneth to the voice of Israel, and giveth up the Canaanite, and he devoteth them and their cities, and calleth the name of the place Hormah.
And they journey from mount Hor, the way of the Red Sea, to compass the land of Edom, and the soul of the people is short in the way,
and the people speak against God, and against Moses, 'Why hast thou brought us up out of Egypt to die in a wilderness? for there is no bread, and there is no water, and our soul hath been weary of this light bread.'
And Jehovah sendeth among the people the burning serpents, and they bite the people, and much people of Israel die;
and the people come in unto Moses and say, 'We have sinned, for we have spoken against Jehovah, and against thee; pray unto Jehovah, and He doth turn aside from us the serpent;' and Moses prayeth in behalf of the people.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Make for thee a burning [serpent], and set it on an ensign; and it hath been, every one who is bitten and hath seen it — he hath lived.
And Moses maketh a serpent of brass, and setteth it on the ensign, and it hath been, if the serpent hath bitten any man, and he hath looked expectingly unto the serpent of brass — he hath lived.
And the sons of Israel journey, and encamp in Oboth.
And they journey from Oboth, and encamp in Ije-Abarim, in the wilderness that [is] on the front of Moab, at the rising of the sun.
From thence they have journeyed, and encamp in the valley of Zared.
From thence they have journeyed, and encamp beyond Arnon, which [is] in the wilderness which is coming out of the border of the Amorite, for Arnon [is] the border of Moab, between Moab and the Amorite;
therefore it is said in a book, 'The wars of Jehovah,' — 'Waheb in Suphah, And the brooks of Arnon;
And the spring of the brooks, Which turned aside to the dwelling of Ar, And hath leaned to the border of Moab.'
And from thence [they journeyed] to Beer; it [is] the well [concerning] which Jehovah said to Moses, 'Gather the people, and I give to them — water.'
Then singeth Israel this song, concerning the well — they have answered to it:
'A well — digged it have princes, Prepared it have nobles of the people, With the lawgiver, with their staves.' And from the wilderness [they journeyed] to Mattanah,
and from Mattanah to Nahaliel, and from Nahaliel to Bamoth,
and from Bamoth in the valley which [is] in the field of Moab [to] the top of Pisgah, which hath looked on the front of the wilderness.
And Israel sendeth messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorite, saying,
'Let me pass through thy land, we do not turn aside into a field, or into a vineyard, we do not drink waters of a well; in the king's way we go, till that we pass over thy border.'
And Sihon hath not suffered Israel to pass through his border, and Sihon gathereth all his people, and cometh out to meet Israel into the wilderness, and cometh in to Jahaz, and fighteth against Israel.
And Israel smiteth him by the mouth of the sword, and possesseth his land from Arnon unto Jabbok — unto the sons of Ammon; for the border of the sons of Ammon [is] strong.
And Israel taketh all these cities, and Israel dwelleth in all the cities of the Amorite, in Heshbon, and in all its villages;
for Heshbon is a city of Sihon king of the Amorite, and he hath fought against the former king of Moab, and taketh all his land out of his hand, unto Arnon;
therefore those using similes say — 'Enter ye Heshbon, Let the city of Sihon be built and ready,
For fire hath gone out from Heshbon, A flame from the city of Sihon, It hath consumed Ar of Moab, Owners of the high places of Arnon.
Woe to thee, O Moab, Thou hast perished, O people of Chemosh, He hath given his sons who escape — Also his daughters — Into captivity, to a king of the Amorite — Sihon!
And we shoot them, Perished hath Heshbon unto Dibon, And we make desolate unto Nophah, Which [is] unto Medeba.'
And Israel dwelleth in the land of the Amorite,
and Moses sendeth to spy out Jaazer, and they capture its villages, and dispossess the Amorite who [is] there,
and turn and go up the way of Bashan, and Og king of Bashan cometh out to meet them, he and all his people, to battle, [at] Edrei.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Fear him not, for into thy hand I have given him, and all his people, and his land, and thou hast done to him as thou hast done to Sihon king of the Amorite, who is dwelling in Heshbon.'
And they smite him, and his sons, and all his people, until he hath not left to him a remnant, and they possess his land.
And the sons of Israel journey and encamp in the plains of Moab, beyond the Jordan, [by] Jericho.
And Balak son of Zippor seeth all that Israel hath done to the Amorite,
and Moab is exceedingly afraid of the presence of the people, for it [is] numerous; and Moab is vexed by the presence of the sons of Israel,
and Moab saith unto the elders of Midian, 'Now doth the assembly lick up all that is round about us, as the ox licketh up the green thing of the field.' And Balak son of Zippor [is] king of Moab at that time,
and he sendeth messengers unto Balaam son of Beor, to Pethor, which [is] by the River of the land of the sons of his people, to call for him, saying, 'Lo, a people hath come out of Egypt; lo, it hath covered the eye of the land, and it is abiding over-against me;
and now, come, I pray thee, curse for me this people, for it [is] mightier than I; it may be I prevail — we smite it — and I cast it out from the land; for I have known — that which thou blessest is blessed, and that which thou cursest is cursed.'
And the elders of Moab and the elders of Midian go, and divinations in their hand, and they come in unto Balaam, and speak unto him the words of Balak,
and he saith unto them, 'Lodge here to-night, and I have brought you back word, as Jehovah speaketh unto me;' and the princes of Moab abide with Balaam.
And God cometh in unto Balaam, and saith, 'Who [are] these men with thee?'
And Balaam saith unto God, 'Balak, son of Zippor, king of Moab, hath sent unto me:
Lo, the people that is coming out from Egypt and covereth the eye of the land, — now come, pierce it for me; it may be I am able to fight against it, and have cast it out;'
and God saith unto Balaam, 'Thou dost not go with them; thou dost not curse the people; for it [is] blessed.'
And Balaam riseth in the morning, and saith unto the princes of Balak, 'Go unto your land, for Jehovah is refusing to suffer me to go with you;'
and the princes of Moab rise, and come in unto Balak, and say, 'Balaam is refusing to come with us.'
And Balak addeth yet to send princes, more numerous and honoured than these,
and they come in unto Balaam, and say to him, 'Thus said Balak son of Zippor, Be not, I pray thee, withheld from coming unto me,
for very greatly I honour thee, and all that thou sayest unto me I do; and come, I pray thee, pierce for me this people.'
And Balaam answereth and saith unto the servants of Balak, 'If Balak doth give to me the fulness of his house of silver and gold, I am not able to pass over the command of Jehovah my God, to do a little or a great thing;
and, now, abide, I pray you, in this [place], you also, to-night; and I know what Jehovah is adding to speak with me.'
And God cometh in unto Balaam, by night, and saith to him, 'If to call for thee the men have come, rise, go with them, and only the thing which I speak unto thee — it thou dost do.'
And Balaam riseth in the morning, and saddleth his ass, and goeth with the princes of Moab,
and the anger of God burneth because he is going, and a messenger of Jehovah stationeth himself in the way for an adversary to him, and he is riding on his ass, and two of his servants [are] with him,
and the ass seeth the messenger of Jehovah standing in the way, and his drawn sword in his hand, and the ass turneth aside out of the way, and goeth into a field, and Balaam smiteth the ass to turn it aside into the way.
And the messenger of Jehovah standeth in a narrow path of the vineyards — a wall on this [side] and a wall on that —
and the ass seeth the messenger of Jehovah, and is pressed unto the wall, and presseth Balaam's foot unto the wall, and he addeth to smite her;
and the messenger of Jehovah addeth to pass over, and standeth in a strait place where there is no way to turn aside — right or left —
and the ass seeth the messenger of Jehovah, and croucheth under Balaam, and the anger of Balaam burneth, and he smiteth the ass with a staff.
And Jehovah openeth the mouth of the ass, and she saith to Balaam, 'What have I done to thee that thou hast smitten me these three times?'
and Balaam saith to the ass, 'Because thou hast rolled thyself against me; oh that there were a sword in my hand, for now I had slain thee;'
and the ass saith unto Balaam, 'Am not I thine ass, upon which thou hast ridden since [I was] thine unto this day? have I at all been accustomed to do to thee thus?' and he saith, 'No.'
And Jehovah uncovereth the eyes of Balaam, and he seeth the messenger of Jehovah standing in the way, and his drawn sword in his hand, and he boweth and doth obeisance, to his face;
and the messenger of Jehovah saith unto him, 'Wherefore hast thou smitten thine ass these three times? lo, I — I have come out for an adversary, for [thy] way hath been perverse before me,
and the ass seeth me, and turneth aside at my presence these three times; unless she had turned aside from my presence, surely now also, thee I had slain, and her kept alive.'
And Balaam saith unto the messenger of Jehovah, 'I have sinned, for I did not know that thou [art] standing to meet me in the way; and now, if evil in thine eyes — I turn back by myself.'
And the messenger of Jehovah saith unto Balaam, 'Go with the men; and only the word which I speak unto thee — it thou dost speak;' and Balaam goeth with the princes of Balak.
And Balak heareth that Balaam hath come, and goeth out to meet him, unto a city of Moab, which [is] on the border of Arnon, which [is] in the extremity of the border;
and Balak saith unto Balaam, 'Did I not diligently sent unto thee to call for thee? why didst thou not come unto me? am I not truly able to honour thee?'
And Balaam saith unto Balak, 'Lo, I have come unto thee; now — am I at all able to speak anything? the word which God setteth in my mouth — it I do speak.'
And Balaam goeth with Balak, and they come to Kirjath-Huzoth,
and Balak sacrificeth oxen and sheep, and sendeth to Balaam, and to the princes who [are] with him;
and it cometh to pass in the morning, that Balak taketh Balaam, and causeth him to go up the high places of Baal, and he seeth from thence the extremity of the people.
And Balaam saith unto Balak, 'Build for me in this [place] seven altars, and make ready for me in this [place] seven bullocks and seven rams.'
And Balak doth as Balaam hath spoken, and Balak — Balaam also — offereth a bullock and a ram on the altar,
and Balaam saith to Balak, 'Station thyself by thy burnt-offering and I go on, it may be Jehovah doth come to meet me, and the thing which He sheweth me — I have declared to thee;' and he goeth [to] a high place.
And God cometh unto Balaam, and he saith unto Him, 'The seven altars I have arranged, and I offer a bullock and a ram on the altar;'
and Jehovah putteth a word in the mouth of Balaam, and saith, 'Turn back unto Balak, and thus thou dost speak.'
And he turneth back unto him, and lo, he is standing by his burnt-offering, he and all the princes of Moab.
And he taketh up his simile, and saith: 'From Aram he doth lead me — Balak king of Moab; From mountains of the east: Come — curse for me Jacob, And come — be indignant [with] Israel.
What — do I pierce? — God hath not pierced! And what — am I indignant? — Jehovah hath not been indignant!
For from the top of rocks I see it, And from heights I behold it; Lo a people! alone it doth tabernacle, And among nations doth not reckon itself.
Who hath counted the dust of Jacob, And the number of the fourth of Israel? Let me die the death of upright ones, And let my last end be like his!'
And Balak saith unto Balaam, 'What hast thou done to me? to pierce mine enemies I have taken thee — and lo, thou hast certainly blessed;'
and he answereth and saith, 'That which Jehovah doth put in my mouth — it do I not take heed to speak?'
And Balak saith unto him, 'Come, I pray thee, with me unto another place, whence thou dost see it, only its extremity thou dost see, and all of it thou dost not see, and pierce it for me thence;'
and he taketh him [to] the field of Zophim, unto the top of Pisgah, and buildeth seven altars, and offereth a bullock and a ram on the altar.
And he saith unto Balak, 'Station thyself here by thy burnt-offering, and I — I meet [Him] there;'
and Jehovah cometh unto Balaam, and setteth a word in his mouth, and saith, 'Turn back unto Balak, and thus thou dost speak.'
And he cometh unto him, and lo, he is standing by his burnt-offering, and the princes of Moab with him, and Balak saith to him: 'What hath Jehovah spoken?'
And he taketh up his simile, and saith: 'Rise, Balak, and hear; Give ear unto me, son of Zippor!
God [is] not a man — and lieth, And a son of man — and repenteth! Hath He said — and doth He not do [it]? And spoken — and doth He not confirm it?
Lo, to bless I have received: Yea, He blesseth, and I [can] not reverse it.
He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, Nor hath He seen perverseness in Israel; Jehovah his God [is] with him, And a shout of a king [is] in him.
God is bringing them out from Egypt, As the swiftness of a Reem is to him;
For no enchantment [is] against Jacob, Nor divination against Israel, At the time it is said of Jacob and Israel, What hath God wrought!
Lo, the people as a lioness riseth, And as a lion he lifteth himself up, He lieth not down till he eateth prey, And blood of pierced ones doth drink.'
And Balak saith unto Balaam, 'Neither pierce it at all, nor bless it at all;'
and Balaam answereth and saith unto Balak, 'Have I not spoken unto thee, saying, All that Jehovah speaketh — it I do?'
And Balak saith unto Balaam, 'Come, I pray thee, I take thee unto another place; it may be it is right in the eyes of God — to pierce it for me from thence.'
And Balak taketh Balaam to the top of Peor, which is looking on the front of the wilderness,
and Balaam saith unto Balak, 'Build for me in this [place] seven altars, and make ready for me in this [place] seven bullocks and seven rams;'
and Balak doth as Balaam said, and he offereth a bullock and a ram on an altar.
And Balaam seeth that [it is] good in the eyes of Jehovah to bless Israel, and he hath not gone as time by time to meet enchantments, and he setteth towards the wilderness his face;
and Balaam lifteth up his eyes, and seeth Israel tabernacling, by its tribes, and the Spirit of God is upon him,
and he taketh up his simile, and saith: 'An affirmation of Balaam son of Beor — And an affirmation of the man whose eyes are shut —
An affirmation of him who is hearing sayings of God — Who a vision of the Almighty seeth, Falling — and eyes uncovered:
How good have been thy tents, O Jacob, Thy tabernacles, O Israel;
As valleys they have been stretched out, As gardens by a river; As aloes Jehovah hath planted, As cedars by waters;
He maketh water flow from his buckets, And his seed [is] in many waters; And higher than Agag [is] his king, And exalted is his kingdom.
God is bringing him out of Egypt; As the swiftness of a Reem is to him, He eateth up nations his adversaries, And their bones he breaketh, And [with] his arrows he smiteth,
He hath bent, he hath lain down as a lion, And as a lioness: who doth raise him up? He who is blessing thee [is] blessed, And he who is cursing thee [is] cursed.'
And the anger of Balak burneth against Balaam, and he striketh his hands; and Balak saith unto Balaam, 'To pierce mine enemies I called thee, and lo, thou hast certainly blessed — these three times;
and now, flee for thyself unto thy place; I have said, I do greatly honour thee, and lo, Jehovah hath kept thee back from honour.'
And Balaam saith unto Balak, 'Did I not also unto thy messengers whom thou hast sent unto me, speak, saying,
If Balak doth give to me the fulness of his house of silver and gold, I am not able to pass over the command of Jehovah, to do good or evil of mine own heart — that which Jehovah speaketh — it I speak?
and, now, lo, I am going to my people; come, I counsel thee [concerning] that which this people doth to thy people, in the latter end of the days.'
And he taketh up his simile, and saith: 'An affirmation of Balaam son of Beor — And an affirmation of the man whose eyes [are] shut —
An affirmation of him who is hearing sayings of God — And knowing knowledge of the Most High; A vision of the Almighty he seeth, Falling — and eyes uncovered:
I see it, but not now; I behold it, but not near; A star hath proceeded from Jacob, And a sceptre hath risen from Israel, And hath smitten corners of Moab, And hath destroyed all sons of Sheth.
And Edom hath been a possession, And Seir hath been a possession, [for] its enemies, And Israel is doing valiantly;
And [one] doth rule out of Jacob, And hath destroyed a remnant from Ar.'
And he seeth Amalek, and taketh up his simile, and saith: 'A beginning of the Goyim [is] Amalek; And his latter end — for ever he perisheth.'
And he seeth the Kenite, and taketh up his simile, and saith: 'Enduring [is] thy dwelling, And setting in a rock thy nest,
But the Kenite is for a burning; Till when doth Asshur keep thee captive?'
And he taketh up his simile, and saith: 'Alas! who doth live when God doth this?
And — ships [are] from the side of Chittim, And they have humbled Asshur, And they have humbled Eber, And it also for ever is perishing.'
And Balaam riseth, and goeth, and turneth back to his place, and Balak also hath gone on his way.
And Israel dwelleth in Shittim, and the people begin to go a-whoring unto daughters of Moab,
and they call for the people to the sacrifices of their gods, and the people eat, and bow themselves to their gods,
and Israel is joined to Baal-Peor, and the anger of Jehovah burneth against Israel.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Take all the chiefs of the people, and hang them before Jehovah — over-against the sun; and the fierceness of the anger of Jehovah doth turn back from Israel.'
And Moses saith unto the judges of Israel, 'Slay ye each his men who are joined to Baal-Peor.'
And lo, a man of the sons of Israel hath come, and bringeth in unto his brethren the Midianitess, before the eyes of Moses, and before the eyes of all the company of the sons of Israel, who are weeping at the opening of the tent of meeting;
and Phinehas, son of Eleazar, son of Aaron, the priest, seeth, and riseth from the midst of the company, and taketh a javelin in his hand,
and goeth in after the man of Israel unto the hollow place, and pierceth them both, the man of Israel and the woman — unto her belly, and the plague is restrained from the sons of Israel;
and the dead by the plague are four and twenty thousand.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Phinehas, son of Eleazar, son of Aaron the priest, hath turned back My fury from the sons of Israel, by his being zealous with My zeal in their midst, and I have not consumed the sons of Israel in My zeal.
'Therefore say, Lo, I am giving to him My covenant of peace,
and it hath been to him and to his seed after him a covenant of a priesthood age-during, because that he hath been zealous for his God, and doth make atonement for the sons of Israel.'
And the name of the man of Israel who is smitten, who hath been smitten with the Midianitess, [is] Zimri son of Salu, prince of the house of a father of the Simeonite;
and the name of the woman who is smitten, the Midianitess, [is] Cozbi daughter of Zur, head of a people — of the house of a father in Midian [is] he.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Distress the Midianites, and ye have smitten them,
for they are adversaries to you with their frauds, [with] which they have acted fraudulently to you, concerning the matter of Peor, and concerning the matter of Cozbi, daughter of a prince of Midian, their sister, who is smitten in the day of the plague for the matter of Peor.'

And it cometh to pass, after the plague, that Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, and unto Eleazar son of Aaron the priest, saying,
'Take up the sum of all the company of the sons of Israel, from a son of twenty years and upward, by the house of their fathers, every one going out to the host in Israel.'
And Moses speaketh — Eleazar the priest also — with them, in the plains of Moab, by Jordan, [near] Jericho, saying,
'From a son of twenty years and upward,' as Jehovah hath commanded Moses and the sons of Israel who are coming out from the land of Egypt.
Reuben, first-born of Israel — sons of Reuben: [of] Hanoch [is] the family of the Hanochite; of Pallu the family of the Palluite;
of Hezron the family of the Hezronite; of Carmi the family of the Carmite.
These [are] families of the Reubenite, and their numbered ones are three and forty thousand and seven hundred and thirty.
And the son of Pallu [is] Eliab;
and the sons of Eliab [are] Nemuel and Dathan and Abiram; this [is that] Dathan and Abiram, called ones of the company, who have striven against Moses and against Aaron in the company of Korah, in their striving against Jehovah,
and the earth openeth her mouth, and swalloweth them and Korah, in the death of the company, in the fire consuming the two hundred and fifty men, and they become a sign;
and the sons of Korah died not.
Sons of Simeon by their families: of Nemuel [is] the family of the Nemuelite; of Jamin the family of the Jaminite; of Jachin the family of the Jachinite;
of Zerah the family of the Zarhite; of Shaul the family of the Shaulite.
These [are] families of the Simeonite, two and twenty thousand and two hundred.
Sons of Gad by their families: of Zephon [is] the family of the Zephonite; of Haggi the family of the Haggite; of Shuni the family of the Shunite;
of Ozni the family of the Oznite; of Eri the family of the Erite:
of Arod the family of the Arodite; of Areli the family of the Arelite.
These [are] families of the sons of Gad, by their numbered ones, forty thousand and five hundred.
Sons of Judah [are] Er and Onan; and Er dieth — Onan also — in the land of Canaan.
And sons of Judah, by their families, are: of Shelah the family of the Shelanite; of Pharez the family of the Pharzite; of Zerah the family of the Zarhite;
and sons of Pharez are: of Hezron the family of the Hezronite; of Hamul the family of the Hamulite.
These [are] families of Judah, by their numbered ones, six and seventy thousand and five hundred.
Sons of Issachar by their families; [of] Tola [is] the family of the Tolaite; of Pua the family of the Punite;
of Jashub the family of the Jashubite; of Shimron the family of the Shimronite.
These [are] families of Issachar, by their numbered ones, four and sixty thousand and three hundred.
Sons of Zebulun by their families: of Sered [is] the family of the Sardite; of Elon the family of the Elonite; of Jahleel the family of the Jahleelite.
These [are] families of the Zebulunite by their numbered ones, sixty thousand and five hundred.
Sons of Joseph by their families [are] Manasseh and Ephraim.
Sons of Manasseh: of Machir [is] the family of the Machirite; and Machir hath begotten Gilead; of Gilead [is] the family of the Gileadite.
These [are] sons of Gilead: [of] Jeezer [is] the family of the Jeezerite; of Helek the family of the Helekite;
and [of] Asriel the family of the Asrielite; and [of] Shechem the family of the Shechemite;
and [of] Shemida the family of the Shemidaite; and [of] Hepher the family of the Hepherite.
And Zelophehad son of Hepher had no sons but daughters, and the names of the daughters of Zelophehad [are] Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.
These [are] families of Manasseh, and their numbered ones [are] two and fifty thousand and seven hundred.
These [are] sons of Ephraim by their families: of Shuthelah [is] the family of the Shuthelhite; of Becher the family of the Bachrite; of Tahan the family of the Tahanite.
And these [are] sons of Shuthelah: of Eran the family of the Eranite.
These [are] families of the sons of Ephraim, by their numbered ones, two and thirty thousand and five hundred. These [are] sons of Joseph by their families.
Sons of Benjamin by their families: of Bela [is] the family of the Belaite; of Ashbel the family of the Ashbelite; of Ahiram the family of the Ahiramite;
of Shupham the family of the Shuphamite; of Hupham the family of the Huphamite.
And sons of Bela are Ard and Naaman: [of Ard is] the family of the Ardite: of Naaman the family of the Naamite.
These [are] sons of Benjamin by their families, and their numbered ones [are] five and forty thousand and six hundred.
These [are] sons of Dan by their families: of Shuham [is] the family of the Shuhamite; these [are] families of Dan by their families;
all the families of the Shuhamite, by their numbered ones, [are] four and sixty thousand and four hundred.
Sons of Asher by their families: of Jimna [is] the family of the Jimnite; of Jesui the family of the Jesuite; of Beriah the family of the Beriite.
Of sons of Beriah: of Heber [is] the family of the Heberite; of Malchiel the family of the Malchielite.
And the name of the daughter of Asher [is] Sarah.
These [are] families of the sons of Asher, by their numbered ones, three and fifty thousand and four hundred.
Sons of Naphtali by their families: of Jahzeel [is] the family of the Jahzeelite; of Guni the family of the Gunite;
of Jezer the family of the Jezerite; of Shillem the family of the Shillemite.
These [are] families of Naphtali by their families, and their numbered ones [are] five and forty thousand and four hundred.
These [are] numbered ones of the sons of Israel, six hundred thousand, and a thousand, seven hundred and thirty.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'To these is the land apportioned by inheritance, by the number of names;
to the many thou dost increase their inheritance, and to the few thou dost diminish their inheritance; [to] each according to his numbered ones is given his inheritance.
'Only by lot is the land apportioned, by the names of the tribes of their fathers they inherit;
according to the lot is their inheritance apportioned between many and few.'
And these [are] numbered ones of the Levite by their families: of Gershon [is] the family of the Gershonite; of Kohath the family of the Kohathite; of Merari the family of the Merarite.
These [are] families of the Levite: the family of the Libnite, the family of the Hebronite, the family of the Mahlite, the family of the Mushite, the family of the Korathite. And Kohath hath begotten Amram,
and the name of Amram's wife is Jochebed, daughter of Levi, whom [one] hath born to Levi in Egypt; and she beareth to Amram Aaron, and Moses, and Miriam their sister.
And born to Aaron Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar;
and Nadab dieth — Abihu also — in their bringing near strange fire before Jehovah.
And their numbered ones are three and twenty thousand, every male from a son of a month and upwards, for they have not numbered themselves in the midst of the sons of Israel; for an inheritance hath not been given to them in the midst of the sons of Israel.
These [are] those numbered by Moses and Eleazar the priest, who have numbered the sons of Israel in the plains of Moab, by Jordan, [near] Jericho;
and among these there hath not been a man of those numbered by Moses, and Aaron the priest, who numbered the sons of Israel in the wilderness of Sinai,
for Jehovah said of them, 'They do certainly die in the wilderness;' and there hath not been left of them a man save Caleb son of Jephunneh, and Joshua son of Nun.
And daughters of Zelophehad son of Hepher, son of Gilead, son of Machir, son of Manasseh, of the families of Manasseh son of Joseph, draw near — and these [are] the names of his daughters, Mahlah, Noah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Tirzah —
and stand before Moses, and before Eleazar the priest, and before the princes, and all the company, at the opening of the tent of meeting, saying:
'Our father died in the wilderness, and he — he was not in the midst of the company who were met together against Jehovah in the company of Korah, but for his own sin he died, and had no sons;
why is the name of our father withdrawn from the midst of his family because he hath no son? give to us a possession in the midst of the brethren of our father;'
and Moses bringeth near their cause before Jehovah.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Rightly are the daughters of Zelophehad speaking; thou dost certainly give to them a possession of an inheritance in the midst of their father's brethren, and hast caused to pass over the inheritance of their father to them.
'And unto the sons of Israel thou dost speak, saying, When a man dieth, and hath no son, then ye have caused his inheritance to pass over to his daughter;
and if he have no daughter, then ye have given his inheritance to his brethren;
and if he have no brethren, then ye have given his inheritance to his father's brethren;
and if his father have no brethren, then ye have given his inheritance to his relation who is near unto him of his family, and he hath possessed it;' and it hath been to the sons of Israel for a statute of judgment, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Go up unto this mount Abarim, and see the land which I have given to the sons of Israel;
and thou hast seen it, and thou hast been gathered unto thy people, also thou, as Aaron thy brother hath been gathered,
because ye provoked My mouth in the wilderness of Zin, in the strife of the company — to sanctify Me at the waters before their eyes;' they [are] waters of Meribah, in Kadesh, in the wilderness of Zin.
And Moses speaketh unto Jehovah, saying,
'Jehovah — God of the spirits of all flesh — appoint a man over the company,
who goeth out before them, and who cometh in before them, and who taketh them out, and who bringeth them in, and the company of Jehovah is not as sheep which have no shepherd.'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Take to thee Joshua son of Nun, a man in whom [is] the Spirit, and thou hast laid thine hand upon him,
and hast caused him to stand before Eleazar the priest, and before all the company, and hast charged him before their eyes,
and hast put of thine honour upon him, so that all the company of the sons of Israel do hearken.
'And before Eleazar the priest he standeth, and he hath asked for him by the judgment of the Lights before Jehovah; at His word they go out, and at His word they come in; he, and all the sons of Israel with him, even all the company.'
And Moses doth as Jehovah hath commanded him, and taketh Joshua, and causeth him to stand before Eleazar the priest, and before all the company,
and layeth his hands upon him, and chargeth him, as Jehovah hath spoken by the hand of Moses.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Command the sons of Israel, and thou hast said unto them, My offering, My bread for My fire-offerings, My sweet fragrance, ye take heed to bring near to Me in its appointed season.
'And thou hast said to them, This [is] the fire-offering which ye bring near to Jehovah: two lambs, sons of a year, perfect ones, daily, a continual burnt-offering;
the one lamb thou preparest in the morning, and the second lamb thou preparest between the evenings;
and a tenth of the ephah of flour for a present, mixed with beaten oil, a fourth of the hin;
a continual burnt-offering, which was made in mount Sinai, for sweet fragrance, a fire-offering to Jehovah;
and its libation, a fourth of the hin for the one lamb; in the sanctuary cause thou a libation of strong drink to be poured out to Jehovah.
'And the second lamb thou dost prepare between the evenings; as the present of the morning, and as its libation thou preparest — a fire-offering, a sweet fragrance to Jehovah.
'And on the sabbath-day, two lambs, sons of a year, perfect ones, and two-tenth deals of flour, a present, mixed with oil, and its libation;
the burnt-offering of the sabbath in its sabbath, besides the continual burnt-offering and its libation.
'And in the beginnings of your months ye bring near a burnt-offering to Jehovah: two bullocks, sons of the herd, and one ram, seven lambs, sons of a year, perfect ones;
and three-tenth deals of flour, a present, mixed with oil, for the one bullock, and two-tenth deals of flour, a present, mixed with oil, for the one ram;
and a several tenth deal of flour, a present, mixed with oil, for the one lamb; a burnt-offering, a sweet fragrance, a fire-offering to Jehovah;
and their libations are a half of the hin to a bullock, and a third of the hin to a ram, and a fourth of the hin to a lamb, of wine; this [is] the burnt-offering of every month for the months of the year;
and one kid of the goats for a sin-offering to Jehovah; besides the continual burnt-offering it is prepared, and its libation.
'And in the first month, in the fourteenth day of the month, [is] the passover to Jehovah;
and in the fifteenth day of this month [is] a festival, seven days unleavened food is eaten;
in the first day [is] an holy convocation, ye do no servile work,
and ye have brought near a fire-offering, a burnt-offering to Jehovah: two bullocks, sons of the herd, and one ram, and seven lambs, sons of a year, perfect ones they are for you;
and their present, flour mixed with oil, three-tenth deals for a bullock, and two-tenth deals for a ram ye do prepare;
a several tenth deal thou preparest for the one lamb, for the seven lambs,
and one goat, a sin-offering, to make atonement for you.
'Apart from the burnt-offering of the morning, which [is] for the continual burnt-offering, ye prepare these;
according to these ye prepare daily, seven days, bread of a fire-offering, a sweet fragrance, to Jehovah; besides the continual burnt-offering it is prepared, and its libation;
and on the seventh day a holy convocation ye have, ye do no servile work.
'And in the day of the first-fruits, in your bringing near a new present to Jehovah, in your weeks, a holy convocation ye have; ye do no servile work;
and ye have brought near a burnt-offering for sweet fragrance to Jehovah: two bullocks, sons of the herd, one ram, seven lambs, sons of a year,
and their present, flour mixed with oil, three-tenth deals to the one bullock, two-tenth deals to the one ram,
a several tenth deal to the one lamb, for the seven lambs;
one kid of the goats to make atonement for you;
apart from the continual burnt-offering and its present ye prepare [them] (perfect ones they are for you) and their libations.
'And in the seventh month, in the first of the month, a holy convocation ye have, ye do no servile work; a day of shouting it is to you;
and ye have prepared a burnt-offering, for sweet fragrance to Jehovah: one bullock, a son of the herd, one ram, seven lambs, sons of a year, perfect ones;
and their present, flour mixed with oil, three-tenth deals for the bullock, two-tenth deals for the ram,
and one-tenth deal for the one lamb, for the seven lambs;
and one kid of the goats, a sin-offering, to make atonement for you;
apart from the burnt-offering of the month, and its present, and the continual burnt-offering, and its present, and their libations, according to their ordinance, for sweet fragrance, a fire-offering to Jehovah.
'And on the tenth of this seventh month a holy convocation ye have, and ye have humbled your souls; ye do no work;
and ye have brought near a burnt-offering to Jehovah, a sweet fragrance, one bullock, a son of the herd, one ram, seven lambs, sons of a year, perfect ones they are for you,
and their present, flour mixed with oil, three-tenth deals for the bullock, two-tenth deals for the one ram,
a several tenth deal for the one lamb, for the seven lambs,
one kid of the goats, a sin-offering; apart from the sin-offering of the atonements, and the continual burnt-offering, and its present, and their libations.
'And on the fifteenth day of the seventh month a holy convocation ye have; ye do no servile work; and ye have celebrated a festival to Jehovah seven days,
and have brought near a burnt-offering, a fire-offering, a sweet fragrance, to Jehovah; thirteen bullocks, sons of the herd, two rams, fourteen lambs, sons of a year; perfect ones they are;
and their present, flour mixed with oil, three-tenth deals to the one bullock, for the thirteen bullocks, two-tenth deals to the one ram, for the two rams,
and a several tenth deal to the one lamb, for the fourteen lambs,
and one kid of the goats, a sin-offering; apart from the continual burnt-offering, its present, and its libation.
'And on the second day twelve bullocks, sons of the herd, two rams, fourteen lambs, sons of a year, perfect ones;
and their present, and their libations, for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the sheep, in their number, according to the ordinance;
and one kid of the goats, a sin-offering; apart from the continual burnt-offering, and its present, and their libations.
'And on the third day eleven bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs, sons of a year, perfect ones;
and their present, and their libations, for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, in their number, according to the ordinance;
and one goat, a sin-offering; apart from the continual burnt-offering, and its present, and its libation.
'And on the fourth day ten bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs, sons of a year, perfect ones;
their present, and their libations, for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, in their number, according to the ordinance;
and one kid of the goats, a sin-offering, apart from the continual burnt-offering, its present, and its libation.
'And on the fifth day nine bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs, sons of a year, perfect ones;
and their present, and their libations, for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, in their number, according to the ordinance;
and one goat, a sin-offering; apart from the continual burnt-offering, and its present, and its libation.
'And on the sixth day eight bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs, sons of a year, perfect ones;
and their present, and their libations, for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, in their number, according to the ordinance;
and one goat, a sin-offering; apart from the continual burnt-offering, its present, and its libation.
'And on the seventh day seven bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs, sons of a year, perfect ones;
and their present, and their libations, for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, in their number, according to the ordinance;
and one goat, a sin-offering; apart from the continual burnt-offering, its present, and its libation.
'On the eighth day a restraint ye have, ye do no servile work;
and ye have brought near a burnt-offering, a fire-offering, a sweet fragrance, to Jehovah; one bullock, one ram, seven lambs, sons of a year, perfect ones;
their present, and their libations, for the bullock, for the ram, and for the lambs, in their number, according to the ordinance;
and one goat, a sin-offering; apart from the continual burnt-offering, and its present, and its libation.
'These ye prepare to Jehovah in your appointed seasons, apart from your vows, and your free-will offerings, for your burnt-offerings, and for your presents, and for your libations, and for your peace-offerings.'
And Moses saith unto the sons of Israel according to all that Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And Moses speaketh unto the heads of the tribes of the sons of Israel, saying, 'This [is] the thing which Jehovah hath commanded:
'When a man voweth a vow to Jehovah, or hath sworn an oath to bind a bond on his soul, he doth not pollute his word; according to all that is going out from his mouth he doth.
'And when a woman voweth a vow to Jehovah, and hath bound a bond in the house of her father in her youth,
and her father hath heard her vow, and her bond which she hath bound on her soul, and her father hath kept silent at her, then have all her vows been established, and every bond which she hath bound on her soul is established.
'And if her father hath disallowed her in the day of his hearing, none of her vows and her bonds which she hath bound on her soul is established, and Jehovah is propitious to her, for her father hath disallowed her.
'And if she be at all to a husband, and her vows [are] on her, or a wrongful utterance [on] her lips, which she hath bound on her soul,
and her husband hath heard, and in the day of his hearing, he hath kept silent at her, then have her vows been established, and her bonds which she hath bound on her soul are established.
'And if in the day of her husband's hearing he disalloweth her, then he hath broken her vow which [is] on her, and the wrongful utterance of her lips which she hath bound on her soul, and Jehovah is propitious to her.
'As to the vow of a widow or cast-out woman, all that she hath bound on her soul is established on her.
'And if [in] the house of her husband she hath vowed, or hath bound a bond on her soul with an oath,
and her husband hath heard, and hath kept silent at her — he hath not disallowed her — then have all her vows been established, and every bond which she hath bound on her soul is established.
'And if her husband doth certainly break them in the day of his hearing, none of the outgoing of her lips concerning her vows, or concerning the bond of her soul, is established — her husband hath broken them — and Jehovah is propitious to her.
'Every vow and every oath — a bond to humble a soul — her husband doth establish it, or her husband doth break it;
and if her husband certainly keep silent at her, from day unto day, then he hath established all her vows, or all her bonds which [are] upon her; he hath established them, for he hath kept silent at her in the day of his hearing;
and if he doth at all break them after his hearing, then he hath borne her iniquity.'
These [are] the statutes which Jehovah hath commanded Moses between a man and his wife, between a father and his daughter, in her youth, [in] the house of her father.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Execute the vengeance of the sons of Israel against the Midianites — afterwards thou art gathered unto thy people.'
And Moses speaketh unto the people, saying, 'Be ye armed some of you for the host, and they are against Midian, to put the vengeance of Jehovah on Midian;
a thousand for a tribe — a thousand for a tribe, to all the tribes of Israel — ye do send to the host.'
And there are given out of the thousands of Israel a thousand for a tribe, twelve thousand armed ones of the host;
and Moses sendeth them, a thousand for a tribe, to the host, them and Phinehas son of Eleazar the priest, to the host; and the holy vessels, and the trumpets of the shouting, in his hand.
And they war against Midian, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses, and slay every male;
and the kings of Midian they have slain, besides their pierced ones, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, five kings of Midian; and Balaam son of Beor, they have slain with the sword.
And the sons of Israel take captive the women of Midian, and their infants; and all their cattle, and all their substance, and all their wealth they have plundered;
and all their cities, with their habitations, and all their towers, they have burnt with fire.
And they take all the spoil, and all the prey, among man and among beast;
and they bring in, unto Moses, and unto Eleazar the priest, and unto the company of the sons of Israel, the captives, and the prey, and the spoil, unto the camp, unto the plains of Moab, which [are] by Jordan, [near] Jericho.
And Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and all the princes of the company, go out to meet them, unto the outside of the camp,
and Moses is wroth against the inspectors of the force, chiefs of the thousands, and chiefs of the hundreds, who are coming in from the host of the battle.
And Moses saith unto them, 'Have ye kept alive every female?
lo, they — they have been to the sons of Israel, through the word of Balaam, to cause a trespass against Jehovah in the matter of Peor, and the plague is in the company of Jehovah.
'And now, slay ye every male among the infants, yea, every woman known of man by the lying of a male ye have slain;
and all the infants among the women, who have not known the lying of a male, ye have kept alive for yourselves.
'And ye, encamp ye at the outside of the camp seven days — any who hath slain a person, and any who hath come against a pierced one, ye cleanse yourselves on the third day, and on the seventh day — ye and your captives;
and every garment, and every skin vessel, and every work of goats' [hair], and every wooden vessel, ye yourselves cleanse.'
And Eleazar the priest saith unto the men of the host who go in to battle, 'This [is] the statute of the law which Jehovah hath commanded Moses:
only, the gold, and the silver, the brass, the iron, the tin, and the lead,
every thing which may go into fire, ye cause to pass over through fire, and it hath been clean; only, with the water of separation it is cleansed, and all that may not go into fire, ye cause to pass over through water;
and ye have washed your garments on the seventh day, and have been clean, and afterwards ye come in unto the camp.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Take up the sum of the prey of the captives, among man and among beast, thou, and Eleazar the priest, and the heads of the fathers of the company;
and thou hast halved the prey between those handling the battle who go out to the host and all the company;
and thou hast raised a tribute to Jehovah from the men of war, who go out to the host, one body out of five hundred, of man, and of the herd, and of the asses, and of the flock;
from their half ye do take, and thou hast given to Eleazar the priest — the heave-offering of Jehovah.
'And from the sons of Israel's half thou dost take one possession out of fifty, of man, of the herd, of the asses, and of the flock, of all the cattle, and thou hast given them to the Levites keeping the charge of the tabernacle of Jehovah.'
And Moses doth — Eleazar the priest also — as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And the prey, the residue of the spoil which the people of the host have spoiled, is of the flock six hundred thousand, and seventy thousand, and five thousand;
and of the herd two and seventy thousand;
and of asses one and sixty thousand;
and of human beings — of the women who have not known the lying of a male — all the persons [are] two and thirty thousand.
And the half — the portion of those who go out into the host — the number of the flock is three hundred thousand, and thirty thousand, and seven thousand and five hundred.
And the tribute to Jehovah of the sheep is six hundred five and seventy;
and the herd [is] six and thirty thousand, and their tribute to Jehovah [is] two and seventy;
and the asses [are] thirty thousand and five hundred, and their tribute to Jehovah [is] one and sixty;
and the human beings [are] sixteen thousand, and their tribute to Jehovah [is] two and thirty persons.
And Moses giveth the tribute — Jehovah's heave-offering — to Eleazar the priest, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And of the sons of Israel's half, which Moses halved from the men who war —
and the company's half is, of the flock three hundred thousand, and thirty thousand, seven thousand and five hundred;
and of the herd six and thirty thousand;
and of asses thirty thousand and five hundred;
and of human beings sixteen thousand —
Moses taketh from the sons of Israel's half the one possession from the fifty, of man and of beast, and giveth them to the Levites keeping the charge of the tabernacle of Jehovah, as Jehovah hath commanded Moses.
And the inspectors whom the thousands of the host hath, (heads of the thousands and heads of the hundreds), draw near unto Moses,
and they say unto Moses, 'Thy servants have taken up the sum of the men of war who [are] with us, and not a man of us hath been missed;
and we bring near Jehovah's offering, each that which he hath found, vessels of gold — chain, and bracelet, seal-ring, [ear] -ring, and bead — to make atonement for ourselves before Jehovah.'
And Moses receiveth — Eleazar the priest also — the gold from them, every made vessel,
and all the gold of the heave-offering which they have lifted up to Jehovah is sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty shekels, from heads of the thousands, and from heads of the hundreds;
(the men of the host have spoiled each for himself);
and Moses taketh — Eleazar the priest also — the gold from the heads of the thousands and of the hundreds, and they bring it in unto the tent of meeting — a memorial for the sons of Israel before Jehovah.
And much cattle hath been to the sons of Reuben and to the sons of Gad, very many; and they see the land of Jazer, and the land of Gilead, and lo, the place [is] a place [for] cattle;
and the sons of Gad, and the sons of Reuben, come in and speak unto Moses, and unto Eleazar the priest, and unto the princes of the company, saying:
'Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and Nimrah, and Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Shebam, and Nebo, and Beon —
the land which Jehovah hath smitten before the company of Israel, is a land for cattle, and thy servants have cattle.'
And they say, 'If we have found grace in thine eyes, let this land be given to thy servants for a possession; cause us not to pass over the Jordan.'
And Moses saith to the sons of Gad and to the sons of Reuben, 'Do your brethren go in to the battle, and ye — do ye sit here?
and why discourage ye the heart of the sons of Israel from passing over unto the land which Jehovah hath given to them?
'Thus did your fathers in my sending them from Kadesh-Barnea to see the land;
and they go up unto the valley of Eshcol, and see the land, and discourage the heart of the sons of Israel so as not to go in unto the land which Jehovah hath given to them;
and the anger of Jehovah burneth in that day, and He sweareth, saying,
They do not see — the men who are coming up out of Egypt from a son of twenty years and upward — the ground which I have sworn to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, for they have not been fully after Me;
save Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenezite, and Joshua son of Nun, for they have been fully after Jehovah;
and the anger of Jehovah burneth against Israel, and He causeth them to wander in the wilderness forty years, until the consumption of all the generation which is doing the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah.
'And lo, ye have risen in the stead of your fathers, an increase of men — sinners, to add yet to the fury of the anger of Jehovah toward Israel;
when ye turn back from after Him, then He hath added yet to leave him in the wilderness, and ye have done corruptly to all this people.'
And they come nigh unto him, and say, 'Folds for the flock we build for our cattle here, and cities for our infants;
and we — we are armed hasting before the sons of Israel till that we have brought them in unto their place; and our infants have dwelt in the cities of defence because of the inhabitants of the land;
we do not turn back unto our houses till the sons of Israel have inherited each his inheritance,
for we do not inherit with them beyond the Jordan and yonder, for our inheritance hath come unto us beyond the Jordan at the [sun] -rising.'
And Moses saith unto them, 'If ye do this thing: if ye are armed before Jehovah for battle,
and every armed one of you hath passed over the Jordan before Jehovah, till his dispossessing His enemies from before Him,
and the land hath been subdued before Jehovah — then afterwards ye do turn back, and have been acquitted by Jehovah, and by Israel; and this land hath been to you for a possession before Jehovah.
'And if ye do not so, lo, ye have sinned against Jehovah, and know ye your sin, that it doth find you;
build for yourselves cities for your infants, and folds for your flock, and that which is going out from your mouth do ye.'
And the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben speak unto Moses, saying, 'Thy servants do as my lord is commanding;
our infants, our wives, our cattle, and all our beasts, are there in cities of Gilead,
and thy servants pass over, every armed one of the host, before Jehovah, to battle, as my lord is saying.'
And Moses commandeth concerning them Eleazar the priest, and Joshua son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the sons of Israel;
and Moses saith unto them, 'If the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben pass over with you the Jordan, every one armed for battle, before Jehovah, and the land hath been subdued before you, then ye have given to them the land of Gilead for a possession;
and if they do not pass over armed with you, then they have possessions in your midst in the land of Canaan.'
And the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben answer, saying, 'That which Jehovah hath spoken unto thy servants — so we do;
we — we pass over armed before Jehovah [to] the land of Canaan, and with us [is] the possession of our inheritance beyond the Jordan.'
And Moses giveth to them, to the sons of Gad, and to the sons of Reuben, and to the half of the tribe of Manasseh son of Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorite, and the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, the land by its cities, in the borders, the cities of the land round about.
And the sons of Gad build Dihon, and Ataroth, and Aroer,
and Atroth, Shophan, and Jaazer, and Jogbehah,
and Beth-Nimrah, and Beth-Haran, cities of defence, and sheepfolds.
And the sons of Reuben have build Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Kirjathaim,
and Nebo, and Baal-Meon (changed in name), and Shibmah, and they call by [these] names the names of the cities which they have built.
And sons of Machir son of Manasseh go to Gilead, and capture it, and dispossess the Amorite, who [is] in it;
and Moses giveth Gilead to Machir son of Manasseh, and he dwelleth in it.
And Jair son of Manasseh hath gone and captureth their towns, and calleth them 'Towns of Jair;'
and Nobah hath gone and captureth Kenath, and its villages, and calleth it Nobah, by his own name.
These [are] journeys of the sons of Israel who have come out of the land of Egypt, by their hosts, by the hand of Moses and Aaron;
and Moses writeth their outgoings, by their journeys, by the command of Jehovah; and these [are] their journeys, by their outgoings:
And they journey from Rameses in the first month, on the fifteenth day of the first month, on the morrow of the passover have the sons of Israel gone out with a high hand, before the eyes of all the Egyptians —
and the Egyptians are burying those whom Jehovah hath smitten among them, every first-born, and on their gods hath Jehovah done judgments —
and the sons of Israel journey from Rameses, and encamp in Succoth.
And they journey from Succoth, and encamp in Etham, which [is] in the extremity of the wilderness;
and they journey from Etham, and turn back on Pi-Hahiroth, which [is] on the front of Baal-Zephon, and they encamp before Migdol.
And they journey from Pi-Hahiroth, and pass over through the midst of the sea, into the wilderness, and go a journey of three days in the wilderness of Etham, and encamp in Marah.
And they journey from Marah, and come in to Elim, and in Elim [are] twelve fountains of waters, and seventy palm trees, and they encamp there;
and they journey from Elim, and encamp by the Red Sea.
And they journey from the Red Sea, and encamp in the wilderness of Sin;
and they journey from the wilderness of Sin, and encamp in Dophkah.
And they journey from Dophkah, and encamp in Alush;
and they journey from Alush, and encamp in Rephidim; and there was there no water for the people to drink.
And they journey from Rephidim, and encamp in the wilderness of Sinai;
and they journey from the wilderness of Sinai, and encamp in Kibroth-Hattaavah.
And they journey from Kibroth-Hattaavah, and encamp in Hazeroth;
and they journey from Hazeroth, and encamp in Rithmah.
And they journey from Rithmah, and encamp in Rimmon-Parez;
and they journey from Rimmon-Parez, and encamp in Libnah.
And they journey from Libnah, and encamp in Rissah;
and they journey from Rissah, and encamp in Kehelathah.
And they journey from Kehelathah, and encamp in mount Shapher;
and they journey from mount Shapher, and encamp in Haradah.
And they journey from Haradah, and encamp in Makheloth;
and they journey from Makheloth, and encamp in Tahath.
And they journey from Tahath, and encamp in Tarah;
and they journey from Tarah, and encamp in Mithcah.
And they journey from Mithcah, and encamp in Hashmonah;
and they journey from Hashmonah, and encamp in Moseroth.
And they journey from Moseroth, and encamp in Bene-Jaakan;
and they journey from Bene-Jaakan, and encamp at Hor-Hagidgad.
And they journey from Hor-Hagidgad, and encamp in Jotbathah;
and they journey from Jotbathah, and encamp in Ebronah.
And they journey from Ebronah, and encamp in Ezion-Gaber;
and they journey from Ezion-Gaber, and encamp in the wilderness of Zin, which [is] Kadesh.
And they journey from Kadesh, and encamp in mount Hor, in the extremity of the land of Edom.
And Aaron the priest goeth up unto mount Hor, by the command of Jehovah, and dieth there, in the fortieth year of the going out of the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt, in the fifth month, on the first of the month;
and Aaron [is] a son of a hundred and twenty and three years in his dying in mount Hor.
And the Canaanite — king Arad — who is dwelling in the south, in the land of Canaan, heareth of the coming of the sons of Israel.
And they journey from mount Hor, and encamp in Zalmonah;
and they journey from Zalmonah, and encamp in Punon.
And they journey from Punon, and encamp in Oboth;
and they journey from Oboth, and encamp in Ije-Abarim, in the border of Moab.
And they journey from Iim, and encamp in Dibon-Gad;
and they journey from Dibon-Gad, and encamp in Almon-Diblathaim.
And they journey from Almon-Diblathaim, and encamp in the mountains of Abarim, before Nebo;
and they journey from the mountains of Abarim, and encamp in the plains of Moab, by Jordan, [near] Jericho.
And they encamp by the Jordan from Beth-Jeshimoth, unto Abel-Shittim, in the plains of Moab.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, in the plains of Moab, by Jordan, [near] Jericho, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, and thou hast said unto them, When ye are passing over the Jordan unto the land of Canaan,
then ye have dispossessed all the inhabitants of the land from before you, and have destroyed all their imagery, yea, all their molten images ye destroy, and all their high places ye lay waste,
and ye have possessed the land, and dwelt in it, for to you I have given the land — to possess it.
'And ye have inherited the land by lot, by your families; to the many ye increase their inheritance, and to the few ye diminish their inheritance; whither the lot goeth out to him, it is his; by the tribes of your fathers ye inherit.
'And if ye do not dispossess the inhabitants of the land from before you, then it hath been, those whom ye let remain of them, [are] for pricks in your eyes, and for thorns in your sides, and they have distressed you on the land in which ye are dwelling,
and it hath come to pass, as I thought to do to them — I do to you.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Command the sons of Israel, and thou hast said unto them, When ye are coming in unto the land of Canaan — this [is] the land which falleth to you by inheritance, the land of Canaan, by its borders —
then hath the south quarter been to you from the wilderness of Zin, by the sides of Edom, yea, the south border hath been to you from the extremity of the Salt Sea, eastward;
and the border hath turned round to you from the south to the ascent of Akrabbim, and hath passed on to Zin, and its outgoings have been from the south to Kadesh-Barnea, and it hath gone out at Hazar-Addar, and hath passed on to Azmon;
and the border hath turned round from Azmon to the brook of Egypt, and its outgoings have been at the sea.
'As to the west border, even the great sea hath been to you a border; this is to you the west border.
'And this is to you the north border: from the great sea ye mark out for yourselves mount Hor;
from mount Hor ye mark out to go in to Hamath, and the outgoings of the border have been to Zedad;
and the border hath gone out to Ziphron, and its outgoings have been at Hazar-Enan; this is to you the north border.
'And ye have marked out for yourselves for the border eastward, from Hazar-Enan to Shepham;
and the border hath gone down from Shepham to Riblah, on the east of Ain, and the border hath gone down, and hath smitten against the shoulder of the sea of Chinnereth eastward;
and the border hath gone down to the Jordan, and its outgoings have been at the Salt Sea; this is for you the land by its borders round about.'
And Moses commandeth the sons of Israel, saying, 'This [is] the land which ye inherit by lot, which Jehovah hath commanded to give to the nine tribes and the half of the tribe;
for the tribe of the sons of Reuben have received, by the house of their fathers; and the tribe of the children of Gad, by the house of their fathers; and the half of the tribe of Manasseh have received their inheritance;
the two tribes and the half of the tribe have received their inheritance beyond the Jordan, [near] Jericho, eastward, at the [sun] -rising.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'These [are] the names of the men who give to you the inheritance of the land: Eleazar the priest, and Joshua son of Nun,
and one prince — one prince — for a tribe ye do take to give the land by inheritance.
'And these [are] the names of the men: of the tribe of Judah, Caleb son of Jephunneh;
and of the tribe of the sons of Simeon, Shemuel son of Aminihud;
of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad son of Chislon;
and of the tribe of the sons of Dan, the prince Bukki son of Jogli;
of the sons of Joseph, of the tribe of the sons of Manasseh, the prince Hanniel son of Ephod;
and of the tribe of the sons of Ephraim, the prince Kemuel son of Shiphtan;
and of the tribe of the sons of Zebulun, the prince Elizaphan son of Parnach;
and of the tribe of the sons of Issachar, the prince Paltiel son of Azzan;
and of the tribe of the sons of Asher, the prince Ahihud son of Shelomi;
and of the tribe of the sons of Naphtali, the prince Pedahel son of Ammihud.'
These [are] those whom Jehovah hath commanded to give the sons of Israel inheritance in the land of Canaan.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, in the plains of Moab, by Jordan, [near] Jericho, saying,
'Command the sons of Israel, and they have given to the Levites of the inheritance of their possession cities to inhabit; also a suburb for the cities round about them ye do give to the Levites.
And the cities have been to them to inhabit, and their suburbs are for their cattle, and for their goods, and for all their beasts.
'And the suburbs of the cities which ye give to the Levites [are], from the wall of the city and without, a thousand cubits round about.
And ye have measured from the outside of the city, the east quarter, two thousand by the cubit, and the south quarter, two thousand by the cubit, and the west quarter, two thousand by the cubit, and the north quarter, two thousand by the cubit; and the city [is] in the midst; this is to them the suburbs of the cities.
'And the cities which ye give to the Levites [are] the six cities of refuge, which ye give for the fleeing thither of the man-slayer, and besides them ye give forty and two cities;
all the cities which ye give to the Levites [are] forty and eight cities, them and their suburbs.
And the cities which ye give [are] of the possession of the sons of Israel, from the many ye multiply, and from the few ye diminish; each, according to his inheritance which they inherit, doth give of his cities to the Levites.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, and thou hast said unto them, When ye are passing over the Jordan to the land of Canaan,
and have prepared to yourselves cities — cities of refuge they are to you — then fled thither hath a man-slayer, smiting a person unawares,
and the cities have been to you for a refuge from the redeemer, and the man-slayer doth not die till his standing before the company for judgment.
'As to the cities which ye give — six [are] cities of refuge to you;
the three of the cities ye give beyond the Jordan, and the three of the cities ye give in the land of Canaan; cities of refuge they are.
To sons of Israel, and to a sojourner, and to a settler in their midst, are these six cities for a refuge, for the fleeing thither of any one smiting a person unawares.
'And if with an instrument of iron he hath smitten him, and he dieth, he [is] a murderer: the murderer is certainly put to death.
'And if with a stone [in] the hand, wherewith he dieth, he hath smitten him, and he dieth, he [is] a murderer: the murderer is certainly put to death.
'Or with a wooden instrument [in] the hand, wherewith he dieth, he hath smitten him, and he dieth, he [is] a murderer: the murderer is certainly put to death.
'The redeemer of blood himself doth put the murderer to death; in his coming against him he doth put him to death.
'And if in hatred he thrust him through, or hath cast [anything] at him by lying in wait, and he dieth;
or in enmity he hath smitten him with his hand, and he dieth; the smiter is certainly put to death; he [is] a murderer; the redeemer of blood doth put the murderer to death in his coming against him.
'And if, in an instant, without enmity, he hath thrust him through, or hath cast at him any instrument, without lying in wait;
or with any stone wherewith he dieth, without seeing, and causeth [it] to fall upon him, and he dieth, and he [is] not his enemy, nor seeking his evil;
then have the company judged between the smiter and the redeemer of blood, by these judgments.
'And the company have delivered the man-slayer out of the hand of the redeemer of blood, and the company have caused him to turn back unto the city of his refuge, whither he hath fled, and he hath dwelt in it till the death of the chief priest, who hath been anointed with the holy oil.
'And if the man-slayer at all go out [from] the border of the city of his refuge whither he fleeth,
and the redeemer of blood hath found him at the outside of the border of the city of his refuge, and the redeemer of blood hath slain the man-slayer, blood is not for him;
for in the city of his refuge he doth dwell till the death of the chief priest; and after the death of the chief priest doth the man-slayer turn back unto the city of his possession.
'And these things have been to you for a statute of judgment to your generations, in all your dwellings:
whoso smiteth a person, by the mouth of witnesses doth [one] slay the murderer; and one witness doth not testify against a person — to die.
'And ye take no atonement for the life of a murderer who [is] condemned — to die, for he is certainly put to death;
and ye take no atonement for him to flee unto the city of his refuge, to turn back to dwell in the land, until the death of the priest.
'And ye profane not the land which ye [are] in, for blood profaneth the land; as to the land, it is not pardoned for blood which is shed in it except by the blood of him who sheddeth it;
and ye defile not the land in which ye are dwelling, in the midst of which I do tabernacle, for I Jehovah do tabernacle in the midst of the sons of Israel.'
And the heads of the fathers of the families of the sons of Gilead, son of Machir, son of Manasseh, of the families of the sons of Joseph, come near, and speak before Moses, and before the princes, heads of the fathers of the sons of Israel,
and say, Jehovah commanded my lord to give the land for inheritance by lot to the sons of Israel, and my lord hath been commanded by Jehovah to give the inheritance of Zelophehad our brother to his daughters.
'And — they have been to one of the sons of the [other] tribes of the sons of Israel for wives, and their inheritance hath been withdrawn from the inheritance of our fathers, and hath been added to the inheritance of the tribe which is theirs, and from the lot of our inheritance it is withdrawn,
and if it is the jubilee of the sons of Israel, then hath their inheritance been added to the inheritance of the tribe which is theirs, and from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers is their inheritance withdrawn.'
And Moses commandeth the sons of Israel, by the command of Jehovah, saying, 'Rightly are the tribe of the sons of Joseph speaking;
this [is] the thing which Jehovah hath commanded concerning the daughters of Zelophehad, saying, To those good in their eyes let them be for wives; only, to a family of the tribe of their fathers let them be for wives;
and the inheritance of the sons of Israel doth not turn round from tribe unto tribe; for each to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers, do the sons of Israel cleave.
'And every daughter possessing an inheritance, of the tribes of the sons of Israel, is to one of the family of the tribe of her father for a wife, so that the sons of Israel possess each the inheritance of his fathers,
and the inheritance doth not turn round from [one] tribe to another tribe; for each to his inheritance do they cleave, the tribes of the sons of Israel.'
As Jehovah hath commanded Moses, so have the daughters of Zelophehad done,
and Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Noah, daughters of Zelophehad, are to the sons of their fathers' brethren for wives;
[to men] of the families of the sons of Manasseh, son of Joseph, they have been for wives, and their inheritance is with the tribe of the family of their father.
These [are] the commands and the judgments which Jehovah hath commanded, by the hand of Moses, concerning the sons of Israel, in the plains of Moab, by Jordan, [near] Jericho.
These [are] the words which Moses hath spoken unto all Israel, beyond the Jordan, in the wilderness, in the plain over-against Suph, between Paran and Tophel, and Laban, and Hazeroth, and Di-Zahab;
eleven days' from Horeb, the way of mount Seir, unto Kadesh-Barnea.
And it cometh to pass in the fortieth year, in the eleventh month, on the first of the month hath Moses spoken unto the sons of Israel according to all that Jehovah hath commanded him concerning them;
after his smiting Sihon king of the Amorite who is dwelling in Heshbon, and Og king of Bashan who is dwelling in Ashtaroth in Edrei,
beyond the Jordan, in the land of Moab, hath Moses begun to explain this law, saying:
'Jehovah our God hath spoken unto us in Horeb, saying, Enough to you — of dwelling in this mount;
turn ye and journey for you, and enter the mount of the Amorite, and unto all its neighbouring places, in the plain, in the hill-country, and in the low country, and in the south, and in the haven of the sea, the land of the Canaanite, and of Lebanon, unto the great river, the river Phrat;
see, I have set before you the land; go in and possess the land which Jehovah hath sworn to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give to them, and to their seed after them.
'And I speak unto you at that time, saying, I am not able by myself to bear you;
Jehovah your God hath multiplied you, and lo, ye [are] to-day as the stars of the heavens for multitude;
Jehovah, God of your fathers, is adding to you, as ye [are], a thousand times, and doth bless you as He hath spoken to you.
'How do I bear by myself your pressure, and your burden, and your strife?
Give for yourselves men, wise and intelligent, and known to your tribes, and I set them for your heads;
and ye answer me and say, Good [is] the thing which thou hast spoken — to do.
'And I take the heads of your tribes, men, wise and known, and I appoint them heads over you, princes of thousands, and princes of hundreds, and princes of fifties, and princes of tens, and authorities, for your tribes.
And I command your judges at that time, saying, Hearkening between your brethren — then ye have judged righteousness between a man, and his brother, and his sojourner;
ye do not discern faces in judgment; as the little so the great ye do hear; ye are not afraid of the face of any, for the judgment is God's, and the thing which is too hard for you, ye bring near unto me, and I have heard it;
and I command you, at that time, all the things which ye do.
'And we journey from Horeb, and go [through] all that great and fearful wilderness which ye have seen — the way of the hill-country of the Amorite, as Jehovah our God hath commanded us, and we come in unto Kadesh-Barnea.
'And I say unto you, Ye have come in unto the hill-country of the Amorite, which Jehovah our God is giving to us;
see, Jehovah thy God hath set before thee the land; go up, possess, as Jehovah, God of thy fathers, hath spoken to thee; fear not, nor be affrighted.
'And ye come near unto me, all of you, and say, Let us send men before us, and they search for us the land, and they bring us back word [concerning] the way in which we go up into it, and the cities unto which we come in;
and the thing is good in mine eyes, and I take of you twelve men, one man for a tribe.
'And they turn and go up to the hill-country, and come in unto the valley of Eshcol, and spy it,
and they take with their hand of the fruit of the land, and bring down unto us, and bring us back word, and say, Good is the land which Jehovah our God is giving to us.
'And ye have not been willing to go up, and ye provoke the mouth of Jehovah your God,
and murmur in your tents, and say, In Jehovah's hating us He hath brought us out of the land of Egypt, to give us into the hand of the Amorite — to destroy us;
whither are we going up? our brethren have melted our heart, saying, A people greater and taller than we, cities great and fenced to heaven, and also sons of Anakim — we have seen there.
'And I say unto you, Be not terrified, nor be afraid of them;
Jehovah your God, who is going before you — He doth fight for you, according to all that He hath done with you in Egypt before your eyes,
and in the wilderness, where thou hast seen that Jehovah thy God hath borne thee as a man beareth his son, in all the way which ye have gone, till your coming in unto this place.
'And in this thing ye are not stedfast in Jehovah your God,
who is going before you in the way to search out to you a place for your encamping, in fire by night, to shew you in the way in which ye go, and in a cloud by day.
'And Jehovah heareth the voice of your words, and is wroth, and sweareth, saying,
Not one of these men of this evil generation doth see the good land which I have sworn to give to your fathers,
save Caleb son of Jephunneh — he doth see it, and to him I give the land on which he hath trodden, and to his sons, because that he hath been fully after Jehovah.
'Also with me hath Jehovah been angry for your sake, saying, Also, thou dost not go in thither;
Joshua son of Nun, who is standing before thee, he goeth in thither; him strengthen thou; for he doth cause Israel to inherit.
'And your infants, of whom ye have said, For a prey they are, and your sons who have not known to-day good and evil, they go in thither, and to them I give it, and they possess it;
and ye, turn for yourselves, and journey toward the wilderness, the way of the Red Sea.
'And ye answer and say unto me, We have sinned against Jehovah; we — we go up, and we have fought, according to all that which Jehovah our God hath commanded us; and ye gird on each his weapons of war, and ye are ready to go up into the hill-country;
and Jehovah saith unto me, Say to them, Ye do not go up, nor fight, for I am not in your midst, and ye are not smitten before your enemies.
'And I speak unto you, and ye have not hearkened, and provoke the mouth of Jehovah, and act proudly, and go up into the hill-country;
and the Amorite who is dwelling in that hill-country cometh out to meet you, and they pursue you as the bees do, and smite you in Seir — unto Hormah.
'And ye turn back and weep before Jehovah, and Jehovah hath not hearkened to your voice, nor hath he given ear unto you;
and ye dwell in Kadesh many days, according to the days which ye had dwelt.
'And we turn, and journey into the wilderness, the way of the Red Sea, as Jehovah hath spoken unto me, and we go round the mount of Seir many days.
'And Jehovah speaketh unto me, saying,
Enough to you — is the going round of this mount; turn for yourselves northward.
'And the people command thou, saying, Ye are passing over into the border of your brethren, sons of Esau, who are dwelling in Seir, and they are afraid of you; and ye have been very watchful,
ye do not strive with them, for I do not give to you of their land even the treading of the sole of a foot; for a possession to Esau I have given mount Seir.
'Food ye buy from them with money, and have eaten; and also water ye buy from them with money, and have drunk,
for Jehovah thy God hath blessed thee in all the work of thy hands; He hath known thy walking in this great wilderness these forty years; Jehovah thy God [is] with thee; thou hast not lacked anything.
'And we pass by from our brethren, sons of Esau, who are dwelling in Seir, by the way of the plain, by Elath, and by Ezion-Gaber; and we turn, and pass over the way of the wilderness of Moab;
and Jehovah saith unto me, Do not distress Moab, nor stir thyself up against them [in] battle, for I do not give to thee of their land [for] a possession; for to the sons of Lot I have given Ar [for] a possession.'
'The Emim formerly have dwelt in it, a people great, and numerous, and tall, as the Anakim;
Rephaim they are reckoned, they also, as the Anakim; and the Moabites call them Emim.
And in Seir have the Horim dwelt formerly; and the sons of Esau dispossess them, and destroy them from before them, and dwell in their stead, as Israel hath done to the land of his possession, which Jehovah hath given to them;
now, rise ye, and pass over for yourselves the brook Zered; and we pass over the brook Zered.
'And the days which we have walked from Kadesh-Barnea until that we have passed over the brook Zered, [are] thirty and eight years, till the consumption of all the generation of the men of battle from the midst of the camp, as Jehovah hath sworn to them;
and also the hand of Jehovah hath been against them, to destroy them from the midst of the camp, till they are consumed.
'And it cometh to pass, when all the men of battle have finished dying from the midst of the people,
that Jehovah speaketh unto me, saying,
Thou art passing over to-day the border of Moab, even Ar,
and thou hast come near over-against the sons of Ammon, thou dost not distress them, nor stir up thyself against them, for I do not give [any] of the land of the sons of Ammon to thee [for] a possession; for to the sons of Lot I have given it [for] a possession.
'A land of Rephaim it is reckoned, even it; Rephaim dwelt in it formerly, and the Ammonites call them Zamzummim;
a people great, and numerous, and tall, as the Anakim, and Jehovah destroyeth them before them, and they dispossess them, and dwell in their stead,
as He hath done for the sons of Esau, who are dwelling in Seir, when He destroyed the Horim from before them, and they dispossess them, and dwell in their stead, unto this day.
'As to the Avim who are dwelling in Hazerim unto Azzah, the Caphtorim — who are coming out from Caphtor — have destroyed them, and dwell in their stead.
'Rise ye, journey and pass over the brook Arnon; see, I have given into thy hand Sihon king of Heshbon, the Amorite, and his land; begin to possess, and stir up thyself against him [in] battle.
This day I begin to put thy dread and thy fear on the face of the peoples under the whole heavens, who hear thy fame, and have trembled and been pained because of thee.
'And I send messengers from the wilderness of Kedemoth, unto Sihon king of Heshbon, — words of peace — saying,
Let me pass over through thy land; in the several ways I go; I turn not aside — right or left —
food for money thou dost sell me, and I have eaten; and water for money thou dost give to me, and I have drunk; only, let me pass over on my feet, —
as the sons of Esau who are dwelling in Seir, and the Moabites who are dwelling in Ar, have done to me — till that I pass over the Jordan, unto the land which Jehovah our God is giving to us.
'And Sihon king of Heshbon hath not been willing to let us pass over by him, for Jehovah thy God hath hardened his spirit, and strengthened his heart, so as to give him into thy hand as at this day.
'And Jehovah saith unto me, See, I have begun to give before thee Sihon and his land; begin to possess — to possess his land.
'And Sihon cometh out to meet us, he and all his people, to battle to Jahaz;
and Jehovah our God giveth him before us, and we smite him, and his sons, and all his people;
and we capture all his cities at that time, and devote the whole city, men, and the women, and the infants — we have not left a remnant;
only, the cattle we have spoiled for ourselves, and the spoil of the cities which we have captured.
'From Aroer, which [is] by the edge of the brook Arnon, and the city which [is] by the brook, even unto Gilead there hath not been a city which [is] too high for us; the whole hath Jehovah our God given before us.
'Only, unto the land of the sons of Ammon thou hast not drawn near, any part of the brook Jabbok, and cities of the hill-country, and anything which Jehovah our God hath [not] commanded.
'And we turn, and go up the way to Bashan, and Og king of Bashan cometh out to meet us, he and all his people, to battle, [to] Edrei.
'And Jehovah saith unto me, Fear him not, for into thy hand I have given him, and all his people, and his land, and thou hast done to him as thou hast done to Sihon king of the Amorite who is dwelling in Heshbon.
'And Jehovah our God giveth into our hands also Og king of Bashan, and all his people, and we smite him till there hath not been left to him a remnant;
and we capture all his cities at that time, there hath not been a city which we have not taken from them, sixty cities, all the region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
All these [are] cities fenced with high walls, two-leaved doors and bar, apart from cities of villages very many;
and we devote them, as we have done to Sihon king of Heshbon, devoting every city, men, the women, and the infants;
and all the cattle, and the spoil of the cities, we have spoiled for ourselves.
'And we take, at that time, the land out of the hand of the two kings of the Amorite, which is beyond the Jordan, from the brook Arnon unto mount Hermon;
(Sidonians call Hermon, Sirion; and the Amorites call it Senir,)
all the cities of the plain, and all Gilead, and all Bashan, unto Salchah and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan,
for only Og king of Bashan had been left of the remnant of the Rephaim; lo, his bedstead [is] a bedstead of iron; is it not in Rabbath of the sons of Ammon? nine cubits its length, and four cubits its breadth, by the cubit of a man.
'And this land we have possessed, at that time; from Aroer, which [is] by the brook Arnon, and the half of mount Gilead, and its cities, I have given to the Reubenite, and to the Gadite;
and the rest of Gilead and all Bashan, the kingdom of Og, I have given to the half tribe of Manasseh; all the region of Argob, to all that Bashan, called the land of Rephaim.
'Jair son of Manasseh hath taken all the region of Argob, unto the border of Geshuri, and Maachathi, and calleth them by his own name, Bashan-Havoth-Jair, unto this day.
And to Machir I have given Gilead.
'And to the Reubenite and to the Gadite I have given from Gilead even unto the brook Arnon, the middle of the valley and the border, even unto Jabbok the brook, the border of the sons of Ammon,
and the plain, and the Jordan, and the border, from Chinnereth even unto the sea of the plain, the salt sea, under the springs of Pisgah, at the [sun] -rising.
'And I command you, at that time, saying, Jehovah your God hath given to you this land to possess it; armed ye pass over before your brethren the sons of Israel, all the sons of might.
Only, your wives, and your infants, and your cattle — I have known that ye have much cattle — do dwell in your cities which I have given to you,
till that Jehovah give rest to your brethren like yourselves, and they also have possessed the land which Jehovah your God is giving to them beyond the Jordan, then ye have turned back each to his possession, which I have given to you.
'And Jehoshua I have commanded at that time, saying, Thine eyes are seeing all that which Jehovah your God hath done to these two kings — so doth Jehovah to all the kingdoms whither thou are passing over;
fear them not, for Jehovah your God, He is fighting for you.
'And I entreat for grace unto Jehovah, at that time, saying,
Lord Jehovah, Thou — Thou hast begun to shew Thy servant Thy greatness, and Thy strong hand; for who [is] a God in the heavens or in earth who doth according to Thy works, and according to Thy might?
Let me pass over, I pray Thee, and see the good land which [is] beyond the Jordan, this good hill-country, and Lebanon.
'And Jehovah sheweth himself wroth with me, for your sake, and hath not hearkened unto me, and Jehovah saith unto me, Enough for thee; add not to speak unto Me any more about this thing:
go up [to] the top of Pisgah, and lift up thine eyes westward, and northward, and southward, and eastward, and see with thine eyes — for thou dost not pass over this Jordan;
and charge Jehoshua, and strengthen him, and harden him, for he doth pass over before this people, and he doth cause them to inherit the land which thou seest.
'And we dwell in a valley over-against Beth-Peor.
'And now, Israel, hearken unto the statutes, and unto the judgments which I am teaching you to do, so that ye live, and have gone in, and possessed the land which Jehovah God of your fathers is giving to you.
Ye do not add to the word which I am commanding you, nor diminish from it, to keep the commands of Jehovah your God which I am commanding you.
'Your eyes are seeing that which Jehovah hath done in Baal-Peor, for every man who hath gone after Baal-Peor, Jehovah thy God hath destroyed him from thy midst;
and ye who are cleaving to Jehovah your God, [are] alive, all of you, to-day.
'See, I have taught you statutes and judgments, as Jehovah my God hath commanded me — to do so, in the midst of the land whither ye are going in to possess it;
and ye have kept and done [them] (for it [is] your wisdom and your understanding) before the eyes of the peoples who hear all these statutes, and they have said, Only, a people wise and understanding [is] this great nation.
'For which [is] the great nation that hath God near unto it, as Jehovah our God, in all we have called unto him?
and which [is] the great nation which hath righteous statutes and judgments according to all this law which I am setting before you to-day?
'Only, take heed to thyself, and watch thy soul exceedingly, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they turn aside from thy heart, all days of thy life; and thou hast made them known to thy sons, and to thy sons' sons.
'The day when thou hast stood before Jehovah thy God in Horeb — in Jehovah's saying unto me, Assemble to Me the people, and I cause them to hear My words, so that they learn to fear Me all the days that they are alive on the ground, and their sons they teach; —
and ye draw near and stand under the mountain, and the mountain is burning with fire unto the heart of the heavens — darkness, cloud, yea, thick darkness:
'And Jehovah speaketh unto you out of the midst of the fire; a voice of words ye are hearing and a similitude ye are not seeing, only a voice;
and He declareth to you His covenant, which He hath commanded you to do, the Ten Matters, and He writeth them upon two tables of stone.
'And me hath Jehovah commanded at that time to teach you statutes and judgments, for your doing them in the land whither ye are passing over to possess it;
and ye have been very watchful of your souls, for ye have not seen any similitude in the day of Jehovah's speaking unto you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire,
lest ye do corruptly, and have made to you a graven image, a similitude of any figure, a form of male or female —
a form of any beast which [is] in the earth — a form of any winged bird which flieth in the heavens —
a form of any creeping thing on the ground — a form of any fish which [is] in the waters under the earth;
'And lest thou lift up thine eyes towards the heavens, and hast seen the sun, and the moon, and the stars, all the host of the heavens, and thou hast been forced, and hast bowed thyself to them, and served them, which Jehovah thy God hath apportioned to all the peoples under the whole heavens.
'And you hath Jehovah taken, and He is bringing you out from the iron furnace, from Egypt, to be to Him for a people — an inheritance, as [at] this day.
'And Jehovah hath shewed himself wroth with me because of your words, and sweareth to my not passing over the Jordan, and to my not going in unto the good land which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee — an inheritance;
for I am dying in this land; I am not passing over the Jordan, and ye are passing over, and have possessed this good land.
'Take heed to yourselves, lest ye forget the covenant of Jehovah your God, which He hath made with you, and have made to yourselves a graven image, a similitude of anything [concerning] which Jehovah thy God hath charged thee:
for Jehovah thy God is a fire consuming — a zealous God.
'When thou begettest sons and sons' sons, and ye have become old in the land, and have done corruptly, and have made a graven image, a similitude of anything, and have done the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, to provoke Him to anger: —
I have caused to testify against you this day the heavens and the earth, that ye do perish utterly hastily from off the land whither ye are passing over the Jordan to possess it; ye do not prolong days upon it, but are utterly destroyed;
and Jehovah hath scattered you among the peoples, and ye have been left few in number among the nations, whither Jehovah leadeth you,
and ye have served there gods, work of man's hands, wood and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell.
'And — ye have sought from thence Jehovah thy God, and hast found, when thou seekest Him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
in distress [being] to thee, and all these things have found thee, in the latter end of the days, and thou hast turned back unto Jehovah thy God, and hast hearkened to His voice;
for a merciful God [is] Jehovah thy God; He doth not fail thee, nor destroy thee, nor forget the covenant of thy fathers, which He hath sworn to them.
'For, ask, I pray thee, at the former days which have been before thee, from the day that God prepared man on the earth, and from the [one] end of the heavens even unto the [other] end of the heavens, whether there hath been as this great thing — or hath been heard like it?
Hath a people heard the voice of God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou hast heard, thou — and doth live?
Or hath God tried to go in to take to Himself, a nation from the midst of a nation, by trials, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a strong hand, and by a stretched-out arm, and by great terrors — according to all that Jehovah your God hath done to you, in Egypt, before your eyes?
Thou, thou hast been shewn [it], to know that Jehovah He [is] God; there is none else besides Him.
'From the heavens He hath caused thee to hear His voice, to instruct thee, and on earth He hath shewed thee His great fire, and His words thou hast heard out of the midst of the fire.
'And because that He hath loved thy fathers, He doth also fix on their seed after them, and doth bring thee out, in His presence, by His great power, from Egypt:
to dispossess nations greater and stronger than thou, from thy presence, to bring thee in to give to thee their land — an inheritance, as [at] this day.
'And thou hast known to-day, and hast turned [it] back unto thy heart, that Jehovah He [is] God, in the heavens above, and on the earth beneath — there is none else;
and thou hast kept His statutes and His commands which I am commanding thee to-day, so that it is well to thee, and to thy sons after thee, and so that thou prolongest days on the ground which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee — all the days.'
Then Moses separateth three cities beyond the Jordan, towards the sun-rising,
for the fleeing thither of the man-slayer, who slayeth his neighbour unknowingly, and he is not hating him heretofore, and he hath fled unto one of these cities, and he hath lived:
Bezer, in the wilderness, in the land of the plain, of the Reubenite; and Ramoth, in Gilead, of the Gadite; and Golan, in Bashan, of the Manassahite.
And this [is] the law which Moses hath set before the sons of Israel;
these [are] the testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments, which Moses hath spoken unto the sons of Israel, in their coming out of Egypt,
beyond the Jordan, in the valley over-against Beth-Peor, in the land of Sihon, king of the Amorite, who is dwelling in Heshbon, whom Moses and the sons of Israel have smitten, in their coming out of Egypt,
and they possess his land, and the land of Og king of Bashan, two kings of the Amorite who [are] beyond the Jordan, [towards] the sun-rising;
from Aroer, which [is] by the edge of the brook Arnon, even unto mount Sion, which [is] Hermon —
and all the plain beyond the Jordan eastward, even unto the sea of the plain, under the springs of Pisgah.
And Moses calleth unto all Israel, and saith unto them, 'Hear, Israel, the statutes and the judgments which I am speaking in your ears to-day, and ye have learned them, and have observed to do them.
Jehovah our God made with us a covenant in Horeb;
not with our fathers hath Jehovah made this covenant, but with us; we — these — here to-day — all of us alive.
Face to face hath Jehovah spoken with you, in the mount, out of the midst of the fire;
I am standing between Jehovah and you, at that time, to declare to you the word of Jehovah, for ye have been afraid from the presence of the fire, and ye have not gone up into the mount; saying:
'I Jehovah [am] thy God, who hath brought thee out from the land of Egypt, from a house of servants.
'Thou hast no other gods in My presence.
'Thou dost not make to thee a graven image, any similitude which [is] in the heavens above, and which [is] in the earth beneath, and which [is] in the waters under the earth;
thou dost not bow thyself to them nor serve them, for I Jehovah thy God [am] a zealous God, charging iniquity of fathers on children, and on a third [generation], and on a fourth, to those hating Me;
and doing kindness to thousands, to those loving Me, and to those keeping My commands.
'Thou dost not take up the Name of Jehovah thy God for a vain thing, for Jehovah doth not acquit him who taketh up His Name for a vain thing.
'Observe the day of the sabbath — to sanctify it, as Jehovah thy God hath commanded thee;
six days thou dost labour, and hast done all thy work,
and the seventh day [is] a sabbath to Jehovah thy God; thou dost not do any work, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy handmaid, and thine ox, and thine ass, and all thy cattle, and thy sojourner who [is] within thy gates; so that thy man-servant, and thy handmaid doth rest like thyself;
and thou hast remembered that a servant thou hast been in the land of Egypt, and Jehovah thy God is bringing thee out thence by a strong hand, and by a stretched-out arm; therefore hath Jehovah thy God commanded thee to keep the day of the sabbath.
'Honour thy father and thy mother, as Jehovah thy God hath commanded thee, so that thy days are prolonged, and so that it is well with thee, on the ground which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee.
'Thou dost not murder.
'Thou dost not commit adultery.
'Thou dost not steal.
'Thou dost not answer against thy neighbour — a false testimony.
'Thou dost not desire thy neighbour's wife; nor dost thou covet thy neighbour's house, his field, and his man-servant, and his handmaid, his ox, and his ass, and anything which [is] thy neighbour's.
'These words hath Jehovah spoken unto all your assembly, in the mount out of the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and of the thick darkness — a great voice; and He hath not added, and He writeth them on two tables of stone, and giveth them unto me.
'And it cometh to pass as ye hear the voice out of the midst of the darkness, and of the mountain burning with fire, that ye come near unto me, all the heads of your tribes, and your elders,
and say, Lo, Jehovah our God hath shewed us His honour, and His greatness; and His voice we have heard out of the midst of the fire; this day we have seen that God doth speak with man — and he hath lived.
'And, now, why do we die? for consume us doth this great fire — if we add to hear the voice of Jehovah our God any more — then we have died.
For who of all flesh [is] he who hath heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of the fire like us — and doth live?
Draw near thou, and hear all that which Jehovah our God saith, and thou, thou dost speak unto us all that which Jehovah our God speaketh unto thee, and we have hearkened, and done it.
'And Jehovah heareth the voice of your words, in your speaking unto me, and Jehovah saith unto me, I have heard the voice of the words of this people which they have spoken unto thee; they have done well [in] all that they have spoken.
O that their heart had been thus to them, to fear Me, and to keep My commands all the days, that it may be well with them, and with their sons — to the age!
'Go, say to them, Turn back for yourselves, to your tents;
and thou here stand thou with Me, and let Me speak unto thee all the command, and the statutes, and the judgments which thou dost teach them, and they have done in the land which I am giving to them to possess it.
'And ye have observed to do as Jehovah your God hath commanded you, ye turn not aside — right or left;
in all the way which Jehovah your God hath commanded you ye walk, so that ye live, and [it is] well with you, and ye have prolonged days in the land which ye possess.
'And this [is] the command, the statutes and the judgments which Jehovah your God hath commanded to teach you, to do in the land which ye are passing over thither to possess it,
so that thou dost fear Jehovah thy God, to keep all His statutes and His commands, which I am commanding thee, thou, and thy son, and thy son's son, all days of thy life, and so that thy days are prolonged.
'And thou hast heard, O Israel, and observed to do, that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest multiply exceedingly, as Jehovah, God of thy fathers, hath spoken to thee, [in] the land flowing with milk and honey.
'Hear, O Israel, Jehovah our God [is] one Jehovah;
and thou hast loved Jehovah thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might,
and these words which I am commanding thee to-day have been on thine heart,
and thou hast repeated them to thy sons, and spoken of them in thy sitting in thine house, and in thy walking in the way, and in thy lying down, and in thy rising up,
and hast bound them for a sign upon thy hand, and they have been for frontlets between thine eyes,
and thou hast written them on door-posts of thy house, and on thy gates.
'And it hath been, when Jehovah thy God doth bring thee in unto the land which He hath sworn to thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give to thee — cities great and good, which thou hast not built,
and houses full of all good things which thou hast not filled, and wells digged which thou hast not digged, vineyards and olive-yards which thou hast not planted, and thou hast eaten, and been satisfied;
'Take heed to thyself lest thou forget Jehovah who hath brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of a house of servants;
Jehovah thy God thou dost fear, and Him thou dost serve, and by His name thou dost swear;
ye do not go after other gods, of the gods of the peoples who [are] round about you;
for a zealous God [is] Jehovah thy God in thy midst — lest the anger of Jehovah thy God burn against thee, and He hath destroyed thee from off the face of the ground.
'Ye do not try Jehovah your God as ye tried in Massah;
ye do diligently keep the commands of Jehovah your God, and His testimonies, and His statutes which He hath commanded thee,
and thou hast done that which is right and good in the eyes of Jehovah, so that it is well with thee, and thou hast gone in and possessed the good land which Jehovah hath sworn to thy fathers,
to drive away all thine enemies from thy presence, as Jehovah hath spoken.
'When thy son asketh thee hereafter, saying, What [are] the testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments, which Jehovah our God hath commanded you?
then thou hast said to thy son, Servants we have been to Pharaoh in Egypt, and Jehovah bringeth us out of Egypt by a high hand;
and Jehovah giveth signs and wonders, great and sad, on Egypt, on Pharaoh, and on all his house, before our eyes;
and us He hath brought out thence, in order to bring us in, to give to us the land which He had sworn to our fathers.
And Jehovah commandeth us to do all these statutes, to fear Jehovah our God, for good to ourselves all the days, to keep us alive, as [at] this day;
and righteousness it is for us, when we observe to do all this command before Jehovah our God, as He hath commanded us.
'When Jehovah thy God doth bring thee in unto the land whither thou art going in to possess it, and He hath cast out many nations from thy presence, the Hittite, and the Girgashite, and the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite, seven nations more numerous and mighty than thou,
and Jehovah thy God hath given them before thee, and thou hast smitten them — thou dost utterly devote them — thou dost not make with them a covenant, nor dost thou favour them.
'And thou dost not join in marriage with them; thy daughter thou dost not give to his son, and his daughter thou dost not take to thy son,
for he doth turn aside thy son from after Me, and they have served other gods, and the anger of Jehovah hath burned against you, and hath destroyed thee hastily.
'But thus thou dost to them: their altars ye break down, and their standing pillars ye shiver, and their shrines ye cut down, and their graven images ye burn with fire;
for a holy people [art] thou to Jehovah thy God; on thee hath Jehovah thy God fixed, to be to Him for a peculiar people, out of all the peoples who [are] on the face of the ground.
'Not because of your being more numerous than any of the peoples hath Jehovah delighted in you, and fixeth on you, for ye [are] the least of all the peoples,
but because of Jehovah's loving you, and because of His keeping the oath which He hath sworn to your fathers, hath Jehovah brought you out by a strong hand, and doth ransom you from a house of servants, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.
'And thou hast known that Jehovah thy God He [is] God, the faithful God, keeping the covenant, and the kindness, to those loving Him, and to those keeping His commands — to a thousand generations,
and repaying to those hating Him, unto their face, to destroy them; He delayeth not to him who is hating Him — unto his face, He repayeth to him —
and thou hast kept the command, and the statutes, and the judgments, which I am commanding thee to-day to do them.
'And it hath been, because ye hear these judgments, and have kept, and done them, that Jehovah thy God hath kept to thee the covenant and the kindness which He hath sworn to thy fathers,
and hath loved thee, and blessed thee, and multiplied thee, and hath blessed the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy ground, thy corn, and thy new wine, and thine oil, the increase of thine oxen, and the wealth of thy flock, on the ground which He hath sworn to thy fathers to give to thee.
'Blessed art thou above all the peoples, there is not in thee a barren man or a barren woman — nor among your cattle;
and Jehovah hath turned aside from thee every sickness, and none of the evil diseases of Egypt (which thou hast known) doth He put on thee, and He hath put them on all hating thee.
'And thou hast consumed all the peoples whom Jehovah thy God is giving to thee; thine eye hath no pity on them, and thou dost not serve their gods, for a snare it [is] to thee.
'When thou sayest in thine heart, These nations [are] more numerous than I, how am I able to dispossess them? —
thou art not afraid of them; thou dost surely remember that which Jehovah thy God hath done to Pharaoh, and to all Egypt,
the great trials which thine eyes have seen, and the signs, and the wonders, and the strong hand, and the stretched-out arm, with which Jehovah thy God hath brought thee out; so doth Jehovah thy God to all the peoples of whose presence thou art afraid.
'And also the locust doth Jehovah thy God send among them, till the destruction of those who are left, and of those who are hidden from thy presence;
thou art not terrified by their presence, for Jehovah thy God [is] in thy midst, a God great and fearful.
'And Jehovah thy God hath cast out these nations from thy presence little [by] little, (thou art not able to consume them hastily, lest the beast of the field multiply against thee),
and Jehovah thy God hath given them before thee, and destroyed them — a great destruction — till their destruction;
and He hath given their kings into thy hand, and thou hast destroyed their name from under the heavens; no man doth station himself in thy presence till thou hast destroyed them.
'The graven images of their gods ye do burn with fire; thou dost not desire the silver and gold on them, nor hast thou taken [it] to thyself, lest thou be snared by it, for the abomination of Jehovah thy God it [is];
and thou dost not bring in an abomination unto thy house — or thou hast been devoted like it; — thou dost utterly detest it, and thou dost utterly abominate it; for it [is] devoted.
'All the command which I am commanding thee to-day ye observe to do, so that ye live, and have multiplied, and gone in, and possessed the land which Jehovah hath sworn to your fathers;
and thou hast remembered all the way which Jehovah thy God hath caused thee to go these forty years in the wilderness, in order to humble thee to try thee, to know that which [is] in thy heart, whether thou dost keep His commands or not.
'And He doth humble thee, and cause thee to hunger and doth cause thee to eat the manna (which thou hast not known, even thy fathers have not known), in order to cause thee to know that not by bread alone doth man live, but by every produce of the mouth of Jehovah man doth live.
'Thy raiment hath not worn out from off thee, and thy foot hath not swelled these forty years,
and thou hast known, with thy heart, that as a man chastiseth his son Jehovah thy God is chastising thee,
and thou hast kept the commands of Jehovah thy God, to walk in His ways, and to fear Him.
'For Jehovah thy God is bringing thee in unto a good land, a land of brooks of waters, of fountains, and of depths coming out in valley and in mountain:
a land of wheat, and barley, and vine, and fig, and pomegranate; a land of oil olive and honey;
a land in which without scarcity thou dost eat bread, thou dost not lack anything in it; a land whose stones [are] iron, and out of its mountains thou dost dig brass;
and thou hast eaten, and been satisfied, and hast blessed Jehovah thy God, on the good land which he hath given to thee.
'Take heed to thyself, lest thou forget Jehovah thy God so as not to keep His commands, and His judgments, and His statutes which I am commanding thee to-day;
lest thou eat, and hast been satisfied, and good houses dost build, and hast inhabited;
and thy herd and thy flock be multiplied, and silver and gold be multiplied to thee; and all that is thine be multiplied:
'And thy heart hath been high, and thou hast forgotten Jehovah thy God (who is bringing thee out of the land of Egypt, out of a house of servants;
who is causing thee to go in the great and the terrible wilderness — burning serpent, and scorpion, and thirst — where there is no water; who is bringing out to thee waters from the flinty rock;
who is causing thee to eat manna in the wilderness, which thy fathers have not known, in order to humble thee, and in order to try thee, to do thee good in thy latter end),
and thou hast said in thy heart, My power, and the might of my hand, hath made for me this wealth:
'And thou hast remembered Jehovah thy God, for He it [is] who is giving to thee power to make wealth, in order to establish His covenant which He hath sworn to thy fathers as [at] this day.
'And it hath been — if thou really forget Jehovah thy God, and hast gone after other gods, and served them, and bowed thyself to them, I have testified against you to-day that ye do utterly perish;
as the nations whom Jehovah is destroying from your presence, so ye perish; because ye hearken not to the voice of Jehovah your God.
'Hear, Israel, thou art passing over to-day the Jordan, to go in to possess nations greater and mightier than thyself; cities great and fenced in the heavens;
a people great and tall, sons of Anakim, whom thou — thou hast known, (and thou — thou hast heard: Who doth station himself before sons of Anak?)
and thou hast known to-day, that Jehovah thy God [is] He who is passing over before thee — a fire consuming; He doth destroy them, and He doth humble them before thee, and thou hast dispossessed them, and destroyed them hastily, as Jehovah hath spoken to thee.
'Thou dost not speak in thy heart (in Jehovah thy God's driving them away from before thee), saying, For my righteousness hath Jehovah brought me in to possess this land, seeing for the wickedness of these nations is Jehovah dispossessing them from thy presence;
not for thy righteousness, and for the uprightness of thy heart, art thou going in to possess their land; but for the wickedness of these nations is Jehovah thy God dispossessing them from before thee; and in order to establish the word which Jehovah hath sworn to thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob;
and thou hast known, that not for thy righteousness is Jehovah thy God giving to thee this good land to possess it, for a people stiff of neck thou [art].
'Remember — do not forget — that [with] which thou hast made Jehovah thy God wroth in the wilderness; even from the day that thou hast come out of the land of Egypt till your coming in unto this place rebels ye have been with Jehovah;
even in Horeb ye have made Jehovah wroth, and Jehovah sheweth Himself angry against you — to destroy you.
'In my going up into the mount to receive the tables of stone (tables of the covenant which Jehovah hath made with you), and I abide in the mount forty days and forty nights; bread I have not eaten, and water I have not drunk;
and Jehovah giveth unto me the two tables of stone written with the finger of God, and on them according to all the words which Jehovah hath spoken with you in the mount, out of the midst of the fire, in the day of the assembly.
'And it cometh to pass, at the end of forty days and forty nights, Jehovah hath given unto me the two tables of stone — tables of the covenant,
and Jehovah saith unto me, Rise, go down, hasten from this, for thy people hath done corruptly, whom thou hast brought out of Egypt; they have turned aside hastily out of the way which I have commanded them — they have made to themselves a molten thing!
'And Jehovah speaketh unto me, saying, I have seen this people, and lo, a people stiff of neck it [is];
desist from Me, and I destroy them, and blot out their name from under the heavens, and I make thee become a nation more mighty and numerous than it.
'And I turn, and come down from the mount, and the mount is burning with fire, and the two tables of the covenant on my two hands,
and I see, and lo, ye have sinned against Jehovah your God; ye have made to yourselves a molten calf; ye have turned aside hastily out of the way which Jehovah hath commanded you.
'And I lay hold on the two tables, and cast them out of my two hands, and break them before your eyes,
and I throw myself before Jehovah, as at first, forty days and forty nights; bread I have not eaten, and water I have not drunk, because of all your sins which ye have sinned, by doing the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, to make Him angry.
'For I have been afraid because of the anger and the fury with which Jehovah hath been wroth against you, to destroy you; and Jehovah doth hearken unto me also at this time.
'And with Aaron hath Jehovah shewed himself very angry, to destroy him, and I pray also for Aaron at that time;
and your sin, which ye have made — the calf — I have taken, and I burn it with fire, and beat it, grinding well till that it [is] small as dust, and I cast its dust unto the brook which is going down out of the mount.
'And in Taberah, and in Massah, and in Kibroth-Hattaavah, ye have been making Jehovah wroth:
and in Jehovah's sending you from Kadesh-Barnea, saying, Go up, and possess the land which I have given to you, then ye provoke the mouth of Jehovah your God, and have not given credence to Him, nor hearkened to His voice;
rebels ye have been with Jehovah from the day of my knowing you.
'And I throw myself before Jehovah, the forty days and the forty nights, as I had thrown myself, for Jehovah hath said — to destroy you;
and I pray unto Jehovah, and say, Lord Jehovah, destroy not Thy people, and Thine inheritance, whom Thou hast ransomed in Thy greatness; whom Thou hast brought out of Egypt with a strong hand;
be mindful of Thy servants, of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, turn not unto the stiffness of this people, and unto its wickedness, and unto its sin;
lest the land say from which Thou hast brought us out, Because of Jehovah's want of ability to bring them in unto the land of which He hath spoken to them, and because of His hating them, He brought them out to put them to death in the wilderness;
and they [are] Thy people, and Thine inheritance, whom Thou hast brought out by Thy great power, and by Thy stretched-out arm!
'At that time hath Jehovah said unto me, Grave for thee two tables of stone, like the first, and come up unto Me, into the mount, and thou hast made for thee an ark of wood,
and I write on the tables the words which were on the first tables, which thou hast broken, and thou hast placed them in the ark;
and I make an ark of shittim wood, and grave two tables of stone like the first, and go up to the mount, and the two tables in my hand.
'And He writeth on the tables, according to the first writing, the Ten Matters, which Jehovah hath spoken unto you in the mount, out of the midst of the fire, in the day of the assembly, and Jehovah giveth them unto me,
and I turn and come down from the mount, and put the tables in the ark which I had made, and they are there, as Jehovah commanded me.
'And the sons of Israel have journeyed from Beeroth of the sons of Jaakan to Mosera, there Aaron died, and he is buried there, and Eleazar his son doth act as priest in his stead;
thence they journeyed to Gudgodah, and from Gudgodah to Jotbathah, a land of brooks of water.
'At that time hath Jehovah separated the tribe of Levi, to bear the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, to stand before Jehovah, to serve Him, and to bless in His name, unto this day,
therefore there hath not been to Levi a portion and inheritance with his brethren; Jehovah Himself [is] his inheritance, as Jehovah thy God hath spoken to him.
'And I — I have stood in the mount, as the former days, forty days and forty nights, and Jehovah hearkeneth unto me also at that time; Jehovah hath not willed to destroy thee.
'And Jehovah saith unto me, Rise, go to journey before the people, and they go in and possess the land which I have sworn to their fathers to give to them.
'And now, Israel, what is Jehovah thy God asking from thee, except to fear Jehovah thy God, to walk in all His ways, and to love Him, and to serve Jehovah thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
to keep the commands of Jehovah, and His statutes which I am commanding thee to-day, for good to thee?
'Lo, to Jehovah thy God [are] the heavens and the heavens of the heavens, the earth and all that [is] in it;
only in thy fathers hath Jehovah delighted — to love them, and He doth fix on their seed after them — on you, out of all the peoples as [at] this day;
and ye have circumcised the foreskin of your heart, and your neck ye do not harden any more;
for Jehovah your God — He [is] God of the gods, and Lord of the lords; God, the great, the mighty, and the fearful; who accepteth not persons, nor taketh a bribe;
He is doing the judgment of fatherless and widow, and loving the sojourner, to give to him bread and raiment.
'And ye have loved the sojourner, for sojourners ye were in the land of Egypt.
'Jehovah thy God thou dost fear, Him thou dost serve, and to Him thou dost cleave, and by His name thou dost swear.
He [is] thy praise, and He [is] thy God, who hath done with thee these great and fearful [things] which thine eyes have seen:
with seventy persons did thy fathers go down to Egypt, and now hath Jehovah thy God made thee as stars of the heavens for multitude.
'And thou hast loved Jehovah thy God, and kept His charge, and His statutes, and His judgments, and His commands, all the days;
and ye have known to-day — for it is not your sons who have not known, and who have not seen the chastisement of Jehovah your God, His greatness, His strong hand, and His stretched-out arm,
and His signs, and His doings, which He hath done in the midst of Egypt, to Pharaoh king of Egypt, and to all his land;
and that which He hath done to the force of Egypt, to its horses, and to its chariot, when He hath caused the waters of the Red Sea to flow against their faces in their pursuing after them, and Jehovah destroyeth them, unto this day;
and that which He hath done to you in the wilderness, till your coming in unto this place;
and that which He hath done to Dathan, and to Abiram, sons of Eliab, sons of Reuben, when the earth hath opened her mouth and swalloweth them, and their houses, and their tents, and all that liveth, which is at their feet, in the midst of all Israel:
' — But [it is] your eyes which are seeing all the great work of Jehovah, which He hath done;
and ye have kept all the command which I am commanding thee to-day, so that ye are strong, and have gone in, and possessed the land whither ye are passing over to possess it,
and so that ye prolong days on the ground which Jehovah hath sworn to your fathers to give to them and to their seed — a land flowing with milk and honey.
'For the land whither thou art going in to possess it, is not as the land of Egypt whence ye have come out, where thou sowest thy seed, and hast watered with thy foot, as a garden of the green herb;
but the land whither ye are passing over to possess it, [is] a land of hills and valleys; of the rain of the heavens it drinketh water;
a land which Jehovah thy God is searching; continually [are] the eyes of Jehovah thy God upon it, from the beginning of the year even unto the latter end of the year.
'And it hath been — if thou hearken diligently unto My commands which I am commanding you to-day, to love Jehovah your God, and to serve Him with all your heart, and with all your soul —
that I have given the rain of your land in its season — sprinkling and gathered — and thou hast gathered thy corn, and thy new wine, and thine oil,
and I have given herbs in thy field for thy cattle, and thou hast eaten, and been satisfied.
'Take heed to yourselves, lest your heart be enticed, and ye have turned aside, and served other gods, and bowed yourselves to them,
and the anger of Jehovah hath burned against you, and He hath restrained the heavens, and there is no rain, and the ground doth not give her increase, and ye have perished hastily from off the good land which Jehovah is giving to you.
'And ye have placed these my words on your heart, and on your soul, and have bound them for a sign on your hand, and they have been for frontlets between your eyes;
and ye have taught them to your sons, by speaking of them in thy sitting in thy house, and in thy going in the way, and in thy lying down, and in thy rising up,
and hast written them on the side-posts of thy house, and on thy gates,
so that your days are multiplied, and the days of your sons, on the ground which Jehovah hath sworn to your fathers to give to them, as the days of the heavens on the earth.
'For, if ye diligently keep all this command which I am commanding you — to do it, to love Jehovah your God, to walk in all His ways, and to cleave to Him,
then hath Jehovah dispossessed all these nations from before you, and ye have possessed nations, greater and mightier than you;
every place on which the sole of your foot treadeth is yours; from the wilderness, and Lebanon, from the river, the river Phrat, even unto the farther sea is your border;
no man doth station himself in your presence; your dread and your fear doth Jehovah your God put on the face of all the land on which ye tread, as He hath spoken to you.
'See, I am setting before you to-day a blessing and a reviling:
the blessing, when ye hearken unto the commands of Jehovah your God, which I am commanding you to-day;
and the reviling, if ye do not hearken unto the commands of Jehovah your God, and have turned aside out of the way which I am commanding you to-day, to go after other gods which ye have not known.
'And it hath been, when Jehovah thy God doth bring thee in unto the land whither thou art going in to possess it, that thou hast given the blessing on mount Gerizim, and the reviling on mount Ebal;
are they not beyond the Jordan, behind the way of the going in of the sun, in the land of the Canaanite, who is dwelling in the plain over-against Gilgal, near the oaks of Moreh?
for ye are passing over the Jordan to go in to possess the land which Jehovah your God is giving to you; and ye have possessed it, and dwelt in it,
and observed to do all the statutes and the judgments which I am setting before you to day.
'These [are] the statutes and the judgments which ye observe to do in the land which Jehovah, God of thy fathers, hath given to thee to possess it, all the days that ye are living on the ground:
ye do utterly destroy all the places where the nations which ye are dispossessing served their gods, on the high mountains, and on the heights, and under every green tree;
and ye have broken down their altars, and shivered their standing pillars, and their shrines ye burn with fire, and graven images of their gods ye cut down, and have destroyed their name out of that place.
'Ye do not do so to Jehovah your God;
but unto the place which Jehovah your God doth choose out of all your tribes to put His name there, to His tabernacle ye seek, and thou hast entered thither,
and hast brought in thither your burnt-offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and the heave-offering of your hand, and your vows, and your free-will offerings, and the firstlings of your herd and of your flock;
and ye have eaten there before Jehovah your God, and have rejoiced in every putting forth of your hand, ye and your households, with which Jehovah thy God hath blessed thee.
'Ye do not do according to all that we are doing here to-day, each anything that is right in his own eyes,
for ye have not come in hitherto unto the rest, and unto the inheritance, which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee;
and ye have passed over the Jordan, and have dwelt in the land which Jehovah your God is causing you to inherit, and He hath given rest to you from all your enemies round about, and ye have dwelt confidently:
'And it hath been, the place on which Jehovah your God doth fix to cause His name to tabernacle there, thither ye bring in all that which I am commanding you, your burnt-offerings, and your sacrifices, your tithes, and the heave-offering of your hand, and all the choice of your vows which ye vow to Jehovah;
and ye have rejoiced before Jehovah your God, ye, and your sons, and your daughters, and your men-servants, and your handmaids, and the Levite who [is] within your gates, for he hath no part and inheritance with you.
'Take heed to thee, lest thou cause thy burnt-offerings to ascend in any place which thou seest,
except in the place which Jehovah doth choose in one of thy tribes, there thou dost cause thy burnt-offerings to ascend, and there thou dost do all that which I am commanding thee.
'Only, with all the desire of thy soul thou dost sacrifice, and hast eaten flesh according to the blessing of Jehovah thy God which He hath given to thee, in all thy gates; the unclean and the clean do eat it, as of the roe, and as of the hart.
'Only, the blood ye do not eat — on the earth thou dost pour it as water;
thou art not able to eat within thy gates the tithe of thy corn, and of thy new wine, and thine oil, and the firstlings of thy herd and of thy flock, and any of thy vows which thou vowest, and thy free-will offerings, and heave-offering of thy hand;
but before Jehovah thy God thou dost eat it, in the place which Jehovah thy God doth fix on, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy handmaid, and the Levite who [is] within thy gates, and thou hast rejoiced before Jehovah thy God in every putting forth of thy hand;
take heed to thee lest thou forsake the Levite all thy days on thy ground.
'When Jehovah thy God doth enlarge thy border, as He hath spoken to thee, and thou hast said, Let me eat flesh — for thy soul desireth to eat flesh — of all the desire of thy soul thou dost eat flesh.
'When the place is far from thee which Jehovah thy God doth choose to put His name there, then thou hast sacrificed of thy herd and of thy flock which Jehovah hath given to thee, as I have commanded thee, and hast eaten within thy gates, of all the desire of thy soul;
only, as the roe and the hart is eaten, so dost thou eat it; the unclean and the clean doth alike eat it.
'Only, be sure not to eat the blood, for the blood [is] the life, and thou dost not eat the life with the flesh;
thou dost not eat it, on the earth thou dost pour it as water;
thou dost not eat it, in order that it may be well with thee, and with thy sons after thee, when thou dost that which [is] right in the eyes of Jehovah.
'Only, thy holy things which thou hast, and thy vows, thou dost take up, and hast gone in unto the place which Jehovah doth choose,
and thou hast made thy burnt-offerings — the flesh and the blood — on the altar of Jehovah thy God; and the blood of thy sacrifices is poured out by the altar of Jehovah thy God, and the flesh thou dost eat.
Observe, and thou hast obeyed all these words which I am commanding thee, in order that it may be well with thee and with thy sons after thee — to the age, when thou dost that which [is] good and right in the eyes of Jehovah thy God.
'When Jehovah thy God doth cut off the nations — whither thou art going in to possess them — from thy presence, and thou hast possessed them, and hast dwelt in their land —
take heed to thee, lest thou be snared after them, after their being destroyed out of thy presence, and lest thou enquire about their gods, saying, How do these nations serve their gods, and I do so — even I?
'Thou dost not do so to Jehovah thy God; for every abomination of Jehovah which He is hating they have done to their gods, for even their sons and their daughters they burn with fire to their gods.
The whole thing which I am commanding you — it ye observe to do; thou dost not add unto it, nor diminish from it.
'When there ariseth in your midst a prophet, or a dreamer of a dream, and he hath given unto thee a sign or wonder,
and the sign and the wonder hath come which he hath spoken of unto thee, saying, Let us go after other gods (which thou hast not known), and serve them,
thou dost not hearken unto the words of that prophet, or unto that dreamer of the dream, for Jehovah your God is trying you, to know whether ye are loving Jehovah your God with all your heart, and with all your soul;
after Jehovah your God ye walk, and Him ye fear, and His commands ye keep, and to His voice ye hearken, and Him ye serve, and to Him ye cleave.
'And that prophet, or that dreamer of the dream, is put to death, for he hath spoken apostasy against Jehovah your God (who is bringing you out of the land of Egypt, and hath ransomed you out of a house of servants), to drive you out of the way in which Jehovah thy God hath commanded thee to walk, and thou hast put away the evil thing from thy midst.
'When thy brother — son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend who [is] as thine own soul — doth move thee, in secret, saying, Let us go and serve other gods — (which thou hast not known, thou and thy fathers,
of the gods of the peoples who [are] round about you, who are near unto thee, or who are far off from thee, from the end of the earth even unto the end of the earth) —
thou dost not consent to him, nor hearken unto him, nor doth thine eye have pity on him, nor dost thou spare, nor dost thou cover him over.
'But thou dost surely kill him; thy hand is on him, in the first place, to put him to death, and the hand of all the people last;
and thou hast stoned him with stones, and he hath died, for he hath sought to drive thee away from Jehovah thy God, who is bringing thee out of the land of Egypt, out of a house of servants;
and all Israel do hear and fear, and add not to do like this evil thing in thy midst.
'When thou hearest, in one of thy cities which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee to dwell there, [one] saying,
Men, sons of worthlessness, have gone out of thy midst, and they force away the inhabitants of their city, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which ye have not known —
and thou hast enquired, and searched, and asked diligently, and lo, truth; the thing is established; this abomination hath been done in thy midst:
'Thou dost surely smite the inhabitants of that city by the mouth of the sword; devoting it, and all that [is] in it, even its cattle, by the mouth of the sword;
and all its spoil thou dost gather unto the midst of its broad place, and hast burned with fire the city and all its spoil completely, before Jehovah thy God, and it hath been a heap age-during, it is not built any more;
and there doth not cleave to thy hand any of the devoted thing, so that Jehovah doth turn back from the fierceness of His anger, and hath given to thee mercies, and loved thee, and multiplied thee, as He hath sworn to thy fathers,
when thou dost hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God, to keep all his commands which I am commanding thee to-day, to do that which [is] right in the eyes of Jehovah thy God.
'Sons ye [are] to Jehovah your God; ye do not cut yourselves, nor make baldness between your eyes for the dead;
for a holy people [art] thou to Jehovah thy God, and on thee hath Jehovah fixed to be to Him for a people, a peculiar treasure, out of all the peoples who [are] on the face of the ground.
'Thou dost not eat any abominable thing;
'this [is] the beast which ye do eat: ox, lamb of the sheep, or kid of the goats,
hart, and roe, and fallow deer, and wild goat, and pygarg, and wild ox, and chamois;
and every beast dividing the hoof, and cleaving the cleft into two hoofs, bringing up the cud, among the beasts — it ye do eat.
'Only, this ye do not eat, of those bringing up the cud, and of those dividing the cloven hoof: the camel, and the hare, and the rabbit, for they are bringing up the cud but the hoof have not divided; unclean they [are] to you;
and the sow, for it is dividing the hoof, and not [bringing] up the cud, unclean it [is] to you; of their flesh ye do not eat, and against their carcase ye do not come.
'This ye do eat of all that [are] in the waters; all that hath fins and scales ye do eat;
and anything which hath not fins and scales ye do not eat; unclean it [is] to you.
'Any clean bird ye do eat;
and these [are] they of which ye do not eat: the eagle, and the ossifrage, and the ospray,
and the glede, and the kite, and the vulture after its kind,
and every raven after its kind;
and the owl, and the night-hawk, and the cuckoo, and the hawk after its kind;
the [little] owl, and the [great] owl, and the swan,
and the pelican, and the gier-eagle, and the cormorant,
and the stork, and the heron after its kind, and the lapwing, and the bat;
and every teeming thing which is flying, unclean it [is] to you; they are not eaten;
any clean fowl ye do eat.
'Ye do not eat of any carcase; to the sojourner who [is] within thy gates thou dost give it, and he hath eaten it; or sell [it] to a stranger; for a holy people thou [art] to Jehovah thy God; thou dost not boil a kid in its mother's milk.
'Thou dost certainly tithe all the increase of thy seed which the field is bringing forth year by year;
and thou hast eaten before Jehovah thy God, in the place where He doth choose to cause His name to tabernacle, the tithe of thy corn, of thy new wine, and of thine oil, and the firstlings of thy herd, and of thy flock, so that thou dost learn to fear Jehovah thy God all the days.
'And when the way is too much for thee, that thou art not able to carry it — when the place is too far off from thee which Jehovah thy God doth choose to put His name there, when Jehovah thy God doth bless thee; —
then thou hast given [it] in money, and hast bound up the money in thy hand, and gone unto the place on which Jehovah thy God doth fix;
and thou hast given the money for any thing which thy soul desireth, for oxen, and for sheep, and for wine, and for strong drink, and for any thing which thy soul asketh, and thou hast eaten there before Jehovah thy God, and thou hast rejoiced, thou and thy house.
As to the Levite who [is] within thy gates, thou dost not forsake him, for he hath no portion and inheritance with thee.
'At the end of three years thou dost bring out all the tithe of thine increase in that year, and hast placed [it] within thy gates;
and come in hath the Levite (for he hath no part and inheritance with thee), and the sojourner, and the fatherless, and the widow, who [are] within thy gates, and they have eaten, and been satisfied, so that Jehovah thy God doth bless thee in all the work of thy hand which thou dost.
'At the end of seven years thou dost make a release,
and this [is] the matter of the release: Every owner of a loan [is] to release his hand which he doth lift up against his neighbour, he doth not exact of his neighbour and of his brother, but hath proclaimed a release to Jehovah;
of the stranger thou mayest exact, and that which is thine with thy brother doth thy hand release;
only when there is no needy one with thee, for Jehovah doth greatly bless thee in the land which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee — an inheritance to possess it.
'Only, if thou dost diligently hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God, to observe to do all this command which I am commanding thee to-day,
for Jehovah thy God hath blessed thee as He hath spoken to thee; and thou hast lent [to] many nations, and thou hast not borrowed; and thou hast ruled over many nations, and over thee they do not rule.
'When there is with thee any needy one of one of thy brethren, in one of thy cities, in thy land which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee, thou dost not harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand from thy needy brother;
for thou dost certainly open thy hand to him, and dost certainly lend him sufficient for his lack which he lacketh.
'Take heed to thee lest there be a word in thy heart — worthless, saying, Near [is] the seventh year, the year of release; and thine eye is evil against thy needy brother, and thou dost not give to him, and he hath called concerning thee unto Jehovah, and it hath been in thee sin;
thou dost certainly give to him, and thy heart is not sad in thy giving to him, for because of this thing doth Jehovah thy God bless thee in all thy works, and in every putting forth of thy hand;
because the needy one doth not cease out of the land, therefore I am commanding thee, saying, Thou dost certainly open thy hand to thy brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy one, in thy land.
'When thy brother is sold to thee, a Hebrew or a Hebrewess, and he hath served thee six years — then in the seventh year thou dost send him away free from thee.
And when thou dost send him away free from thee, thou dost not send him away empty;
thou dost certainly encircle him out of thy flock, and out of thy threshing-floor, and out of thy wine-vat; [of] that which Jehovah thy God hath blessed thee thou dost give to him,
and thou hast remembered that a servant thou hast been in the land of Egypt, and Jehovah thy God doth ransom thee; therefore I am commanding thee this thing to-day.
'And it hath been, when he saith unto thee, I go not out from thee — because he hath loved thee, and thy house, because [it is] good for him with thee —
then thou hast taken the awl, and hast put [it] through his ear, and through the door, and he hath been to thee a servant age-during; and also to thy handmaid thou dost do so.
'It is not hard in thine eyes, in thy sending him away free from thee; for the double of the hire of an hireling he hath served thee six years, and Jehovah thy God hath blessed thee in all that thou dost.
'Every firstling that is born in thy herd and in thy flock — the male thou dost sanctify to Jehovah thy God; thou dost not work with the firstling of thine ox, nor shear the firstling of thy flock;
before Jehovah thy God thou dost eat it year by year, in the place which Jehovah doth choose, thou and thy house.
'And when there is in it a blemish, lame, or blind, any evil blemish, thou dost not sacrifice it to Jehovah thy God;
within thy gates thou dost eat it, the unclean and the clean alike, as the roe, and as the hart.
Only, its blood thou dost not eat; on the earth thou dost pour it as water.
'Observe the month of Abib — and thou hast made a passover to Jehovah thy God, for in the month of Abib hath Jehovah thy God brought thee out of Egypt by night;
and thou hast sacrificed a passover to Jehovah thy God, of the flock, and of the herd, in the place which Jehovah doth choose to cause His name to tabernacle there.
'Thou dost not eat with it any fermented thing, seven days thou dost eat with it unleavened things, bread of affliction; for in haste thou hast come out of the land of Egypt; so that thou dost remember the day of thy coming out of the land of Egypt all days of thy life;
and there is not seen with thee leaven in all thy border seven days, and there doth not remain of the flesh which thou dost sacrifice at evening on the first day till morning.
'Thou art not able to sacrifice the passover within any of thy gates which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee,
except at the place which Jehovah thy God doth choose to cause His name to tabernacle — there thou dost sacrifice the passover in the evening, at the going in of the sun, the season of thy coming out of Egypt;
and thou hast cooked and eaten in the place on which Jehovah thy God doth fix, and hast turned in the morning, and gone to thy tents;
six days thou dost eat unleavened things, and on the seventh day [is] a restraint to Jehovah thy God; thou dost do no work.
'Seven weeks thou dost number to thee; from the beginning of the sickle among the standing corn thou dost begin to number seven weeks,
and thou hast made the feast of weeks to Jehovah thy God, a tribute of a free-will offering of thy hand, which thou dost give, as Jehovah thy God doth bless thee.
And thou hast rejoiced before Jehovah thy God, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy handmaid, and the Levite who [is] within thy gates, and the sojourner, and the fatherless, and the widow, who [are] in thy midst, in the place which Jehovah thy God doth choose to cause His name to tabernacle there,
and thou hast remembered that a servant thou hast been in Egypt, and hast observed and done these statutes.
'The feast of booths thou dost make for thee seven days, in thine in-gathering of thy threshing-floor, and of thy wine-vat;
and thou hast rejoiced in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy handmaid, and the Levite, and the sojourner, and the fatherless, and the widow, who [are] within thy gates.
Seven days thou dost feast before Jehovah thy God, in the place which Jehovah doth choose, for Jehovah thy God doth bless thee in all thine increase, and in every work of thy hands, and thou hast been only rejoicing.
'Three times in a year doth every one of thy males appear before Jehovah thy God in the place which He doth choose — in the feast of unleavened things, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of booths; and they do not appear before Jehovah empty;
each according to the gift of his hand, according to the blessing of Jehovah thy God, which He hath given to thee.
'Judges and authorities thou dost make to thee within all thy gates which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee, for thy tribes; and they have judged the people — a righteous judgment.
Thou dost not turn aside judgment; thou dost not discern faces, nor take a bribe, for the bribe blindeth the eyes of the wise, and perverteth the words of the righteous.
Righteousness — righteousness thou dost pursue, so that thou livest, and hast possessed the land which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee.
'Thou dost not plant for thee a shrine of any trees near the altar of Jehovah thy God, which thou makest for thyself,
and thou dost not raise up to thee any standing image which Jehovah thy God is hating.
'Thou dost not sacrifice to Jehovah thy God ox or sheep in which there is a blemish — any evil thing; for it [is] the abomination of Jehovah thy God.
'When there is found in thy midst, in one of thy cities which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee, a man or a woman who doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah thy God by transgressing His covenant,
and he doth go and serve other gods, and doth bow himself to them, and to the sun, or to the moon, or to any of the host of the heavens, which I have not commanded —
and it hath been declared to thee, and thou hast heard, and hast searched diligently, and lo, truth; the thing is established; this abomination hath been done in Israel —
'Then thou hast brought out that man, or that woman, who hath done this evil thing, unto thy gates — the man or the woman — and thou hast stoned them with stones, and they have died.
By the mouth of two witnesses or of three witnesses is he who is dead put to death; he is not put to death by the mouth of one witness;
the hand of the witnesses is on him, in the first place, to put him to death, and the hand of all the people last; and thou hast put away the evil thing out of thy midst.
'When anything is too hard for thee for judgment, between blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke — matters of strife within thy gates — then thou hast risen, and gone up unto the place on which Jehovah thy God doth fix,
and hast come in unto the priests, the Levites, and unto the judge who is in those days, and hast inquired, and they have declared to thee the word of judgment,
and thou hast done according to the tenor of the word which they declare to thee ([they] of that place which Jehovah doth choose; and thou hast observed to do according to all that they direct thee.
'According to the tenor of the law which they direct thee, and according to the judgment which they say to thee thou dost do; thou dost not turn aside from the word which they declare to thee, right or left.
And the man who acteth with presumption, so as not to hearken unto the priest (who is standing to serve there Jehovah thy God), or unto the judge, even that man hath died, and thou hast put away the evil thing from Israel,
and all the people do hear and fear, and do not presume any more.
'When thou comest in unto the land which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee, and hast possessed it, and dwelt in it, and thou hast said, Let me set over me a king like all the nations which [are] round about me, —
thou dost certainly set over thee a king on whom Jehovah doth fix; from the midst of thy brethren thou dost set over thee a king; thou art not able to set over thee a stranger, who is not thy brother.
'Only, he doth not multiply to himself horses, nor cause the people to turn back to Egypt, so as to multiply horses, seeing Jehovah hath said to you, Ye do not add to turn back in this way any more.
And he doth not multiply to himself wives, and his heart doth not turn aside, and silver and gold he doth not multiply to himself — exceedingly.
'And it hath been, when he sitteth on the throne of his kingdom, that he hath written for himself the copy of this law, on a book, from [that] before the priests the Levites,
and it hath been with him, and he hath read in it all days of his life, so that he doth learn to fear Jehovah his God, to keep all the words of this law, and these statutes, to do them;
so that his heart is not high above his brethren, and so as not to turn aside from the command, right or left, so that he prolongeth days over his kingdom, he and his sons, in the midst of Israel.
'There is not to the priests the Levites — all the tribe of Levi — a portion and inheritance with Israel; fire-offerings of Jehovah, even His inheritance, they eat,
and he hath no inheritance in the midst of his brethren; Jehovah Himself [is] his inheritance, as He hath spoken to him.
'And this is the priest's right from the people, from those sacrificing a sacrifice, whether ox or sheep, he hath even given to the priest the leg, and the two cheeks, and the stomach;
the first of thy corn, of thy new wine, and of thine oil, and the first of the fleece of thy flock, thou dost give to him;
for on him hath Jehovah thy God fixed, out of all thy tribes, to stand to serve in the name of Jehovah, He and his sons continually.
'And when the Levite cometh from one of thy cities out of all Israel, where he hath sojourned, and hath come with all the desire of his soul unto the place which Jehovah doth choose,
then he hath ministered in the name of Jehovah his God, like all his brethren, the Levites, who are standing there before Jehovah,
portion as portion they do eat, apart from his sold things, with the fathers.
'When thou art coming in unto the land which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee, thou dost not learn to do according to the abominations of those nations:
there is not found in thee one causing his son and his daughter to pass over into fire, a user of divinations, an observer of clouds, and an enchanter, and a sorcerer,
and a charmer, and one asking at a familiar spirit, and a wizard, and one seeking unto the dead.
'For the abomination of Jehovah [is] every one doing these, and because of these abominations is Jehovah thy God dispossessing them from thy presence.
Perfect thou art with Jehovah thy God,
for these nations whom thou art possessing, unto observers of clouds, and unto diviners, do hearken; and thou — not so hath Jehovah thy God suffered thee.
'A prophet out of thy midst, out of thy brethren, like to me, doth Jehovah thy God raise up to thee — unto him ye hearken;
according to all that thou didst ask from Jehovah thy God, in Horeb, in the day of the assembly, saying, Let me not add to hear the voice of Jehovah my God, and this great fire let me not see any more, and I die not;
and Jehovah saith unto me, They have done well that they have spoken;
a prophet I raise up to them, out of the midst of their brethren, like to thee; and I have given my words in his mouth, and he hath spoken unto them all that which I command him;
and it hath been — the man who doth not hearken unto My words which he doth speak in My name, I require [it] of him.
'Only, the prophet who presumeth to speak a word in My name — that which I have not commanded him to speak — and who speaketh in the name of other gods — even that prophet hath died.
'And when thou sayest in thy heart, How do we know the word which Jehovah hath not spoken? —
that which the prophet speaketh in the name of Jehovah, and the thing is not, and cometh not — it [is] the word which Jehovah hath not spoken; in presumption hath the prophet spoken it; — thou art not afraid of him.
'When Jehovah thy God doth cut off the nations, whose land Jehovah thy God is giving to thee, and thou hast succeeded them, and dwelt in their cities, and in their houses,
three cities thou dost separate for thee in the midst of thy land which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee to possess it.
Thou dost prepare for thee the way, and hast divided into three parts the border of thy land which Jehovah thy God doth cause thee to inherit, and it hath been for the fleeing thither of every man-slayer.
'And this [is] the matter of the man-slayer who fleeth thither, and hath lived: He who smiteth his neighbour unknowingly, and is not hating him heretofore,
even he who cometh in with his neighbour into a forest to hew wood, and his hand hath driven with an axe to cut the tree, and the iron hath slipped from the wood, and hath met his neighbour, and he hath died — he doth flee unto one of these cities, and hath lived,
lest the redeemer of blood pursue after the man-slayer when his heart is hot, and hath overtaken him (because the way is great), and hath smitten him — the life, and he hath no sentence of death, for he is not hating him heretofore;
therefore I am commanding thee, saying, Three cities thou dost separate to thee.
'And if Jehovah thy God doth enlarge thy border, as He hath sworn to thy fathers, and hath given to thee all the land which He hath spoken to give to thy fathers —
when thou keepest all this command to do it, which I am commanding thee to-day, to love Jehovah thy God, and to walk in His ways all the days — then thou hast added to thee yet three cities to these three;
and innocent blood is not shed in the midst of thy land which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee — an inheritance, and there hath been upon thee blood.
'And when a man is hating his neighbour, and hath lain in wait for him, and risen against him, and smitten him — the life, and he hath died, and he hath fled unto one of these cities,
then the elders of his city have sent and taken him from thence, and given him into the hand of the redeemer of blood, and he hath died;
thine eye hath no pity on him, and thou hast put away the innocent blood from Israel, and it is well with thee.
'Thou dost not remove a border of thy neighbour, which they of former times have made, in thine inheritance, which thou dost inherit in the land which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee to possess it.
'One witness doth not rise against a man for any iniquity, and for any sin, in any sin which he sinneth; by the mouth of two witnesses, or by the mouth of three witnesses, is a thing established.
'When a violent witness doth rise against a man, to testify against him apostasy,
then have both the men who have the strife stood before Jehovah, before the priests and the judges who are in those days,
and the judges have searched diligently, and lo, the witness [is] a false witness, a falsehood he hath testified against his brother:
'Then ye have done to him as he devised to do to his brother, and thou hast put away the evil thing out of thy midst,
and those who are left do hear and fear, and add not to do any more according to this evil thing in thy midst;
and thine eye doth not pity — life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.
'When thou goest out to battle against thine enemy, and hast seen horse and chariot — a people more numerous than thou — thou art not afraid of them, for Jehovah thy God [is] with thee, who is bringing thee up out of the land of Egypt;
and it hath been, in your drawing near unto the battle, that the priest hath come nigh, and spoken unto the people,
and said unto them, Hear, Israel, ye are drawing near to-day to battle against your enemies, let not your hearts be tender, fear not, nor make haste, nor be terrified at their presence,
for Jehovah your God [is] He who is going with you, to fight for you with your enemies — to save you.
'And the authorities have spoken unto the people, saying, Who [is] the man that hath built a new house, and hath not dedicated it? — let him go and turn back to his house, lest he die in battle, and another man dedicate it.
'And who [is] the man that hath planted a vineyard, and hath not made it common? — let him go and turn back to his house, lest he die in battle, and another man make it common.
'And who [is] the man that hath betrothed a woman, and hath not taken her? — let him go and turn back to his house, lest he die in battle, and another man take her.
'And the authorities have added to speak unto the people, and said, Who [is] the man that is afraid and tender of heart? — let him go and turn back to his house, and the heart of his brethren doth not melt like his heart;
and it hath come to pass as the authorities finish to speak unto the people, that they have appointed princes of the hosts at the head of the people.
'When thou drawest near unto a city to fight against it, then thou hast called unto it for Peace,
and it hath been, if Peace it answer thee, and hath opened to thee, then it hath come to pass — all the people who are found in it are to thee for tributaries, and have served thee.
'And if it doth not make peace with thee, and hath made with thee war, then thou hast laid siege against it,
and Jehovah thy God hath given it into thy hand, and thou hast smitten every male of it by the mouth of the sword.
Only, the women, and the infants, and the cattle, and all that is in the city, all its spoil, thou dost seize for thyself, and thou hast eaten the spoil of thine enemies which Jehovah thy God hath given to thee.
So thou dost do to all the cities which are very far off from thee, which are not of the cities of these nations.
'Only, of the cities of these peoples which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee [for] an inheritance, thou dost not keep alive any breathing;
for thou dost certainly devote the Hittite, and the Amorite, the Canaanite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, as Jehovah thy God hath commanded thee,
so that they teach you not to do according to all their abominations which they have done to their gods, and ye have sinned against Jehovah your God.
'When thou layest siege unto a city many days, to fight against it, to capture it, thou dost not destroy its trees to force an axe against them, for of them thou dost eat, and them thou dost not cut down — for man's [is] the tree of the field — to go in at thy presence in the siege.
Only, the tree, which thou knowest that it [is] not a fruit-tree, it thou dost destroy, and hast cut down, and hast built a bulwark against the city which is making with thee war till thou hast subdued it.
'When one is found slain on the ground which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee to possess it — fallen in a field — it is not known who hath smitten him,
then have thine elders and thy judges gone out and measured unto the cities which [are] round about the slain one,
and it hath been, the city which [is] near unto the slain one, even the elders of that city have taken a heifer of the herd, which hath not been wrought with, which hath not drawn in the yoke,
and the elders of that city have brought down the heifer unto a hard valley, which is not tilled nor sown, and have beheaded there the heifer in the valley.
'And the priests, sons of Levi, have come nigh — for on them hath Jehovah thy God fixed to serve Him, and to bless in the name of Jehovah, and by their mouth is every strife, and every stroke —
and all the elders of that city, who are near unto the slain one, do wash their hands over the heifer which is beheaded in the valley,
and they have answered and said, Our hands have not shed this blood, and our eyes have not seen —
receive atonement for Thy people Israel, whom Thou hast ransomed, O Jehovah, and suffer not innocent blood in the midst of Thy people Israel; and the blood hath been pardoned to them,
and thou dost put away the innocent blood out of thy midst, for thou dost that which [is] right in the eyes of Jehovah.
'When thou goest out to battle against thine enemies, and Jehovah thy God hath given them into thy hand, and thou hast taken captive its captivity,
and hast seen in the captivity a woman of fair form, and hast delighted in her, and hast taken to thee for a wife,
then thou hast brought her in unto the midst of thy household, and she hath shaved her head, and prepared her nails,
and turned aside the raiment of her captivity from off her, and hath dwelt in thy house, and bewailed her father and her mother a month of days, and afterwards thou dost go in unto her and hast married her, and she hath been to thee for a wife:
'And it hath been — if thou hast not delighted in her, that thou hast sent her away at her desire, and thou dost not at all sell her for money; thou dost not tyrannize over her, because that thou hast humbled her.
'When a man hath two wives, the one loved and the other hated, and they have borne to him sons (the loved one and the hated one), and the first-born son hath been to the hated one;
then it hath been, in the day of his causing his sons to inherit that which he hath, he is not able to declare first-born the son of the loved one, in the face of the son of the hated one — the first-born.
But the first-born, son of the hated one, he doth acknowledge, to give to him a double portion of all that is found with him, for he [is] the beginning of his strength; to him [is] the right of the first-born.
'When a man hath a son apostatizing and rebellious — he is not hearkening to the voice of his father, and to the voice of his mother, and they have chastised him, and he doth not hearken unto them —
then laid hold on him have his father and his mother, and they have brought him out unto the elders of his city, and unto the gate of his place,
and have said unto the elders of his city, Our son — this one — is apostatizing and rebellious; he is not hearkening to our voice — a glutton and drunkard;
and all the men of his city have stoned him with stones, and he hath died, and thou hast put away the evil out of thy midst, and all Israel do hear and fear.
'And when there is in a man a sin — a cause of death, and he hath been put to death, and thou hast hanged him on a tree,
his corpse doth not remain on the tree, for thou dost certainly bury him in that day — for a thing lightly esteemed of God [is] the hanged one — and thou dost not defile thy ground which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee — an inheritance.
'Thou dost not see the ox of thy brother or his sheep driven away, and hast hidden thyself from them, thou dost certainly turn them back to thy brother;
and if thy brother [is] not near unto thee, and thou hast not known him, then thou hast removed it unto the midst of thy house, and it hath been with thee till thy brother seek it, and thou hast given it back to him;
and so thou dost to his ass, and so thou dost to his garment, and so thou dost to any lost thing of thy brother's, which is lost by him, and thou hast found it; thou art not able to hide thyself.
'Thou dost not see the ass of thy brother, or his ox, falling in the way, and hast hid thyself from them; thou dost certainly raise [them] up with him.
'The habiliments of a man are not on a woman, nor doth a man put on the garment of a woman, for the abomination of Jehovah thy God [is] any one doing these.
'When a bird's nest cometh before thee in the way, in any tree, or on the earth, brood or eggs, and the mother sitting on the brood or on the eggs, thou dost not take the mother with the young ones;
thou dost certainly send away the mother, and the young ones dost take to thyself, so that it is well with thee, and thou hast prolonged days.
'When thou buildest a new house, then thou hast made a parapet to thy roof, and thou dost not put blood on thy house when one falleth from it.
'Thou dost not sow thy vineyard [with] divers things, lest the fulness of the seed which thou dost sow, and the increase of the vineyard, be separated.
'Thou dost not plow with an ox and with an ass together.
'Thou dost not put on a mixed cloth, wool and linen together.
'Fringes thou dost make to thee on the four skirts of thy covering with which thou dost cover [thyself].
'When a man taketh a wife, and hath gone in unto her, and hated her,
and laid against her actions of words, and brought out against her an evil name, and said, This woman I have taken, and I draw near unto her, and I have not found in her tokens of virginity:
'Then hath the father of the damsel — and her mother — taken and brought out the tokens of virginity of the damsel unto the elders of the city in the gate,
and the father of the damsel hath said unto the elders, My daughter I have given to this man for a wife, and he doth hate her;
and lo, he hath laid actions of words, saying, I have not found to thy daughter tokens of virginity — and these [are] the tokens of the virginity of my daughter! and they have spread out the garment before the elders of the city.
'And the elders of that city have taken the man, and chastise him,
and fined him a hundred silverlings, and given to the father of the damsel, because he hath brought out an evil name on a virgin of Israel, and she is to him for a wife, he is not able to send her away all his days.
'And if this thing hath been truth — tokens of virginity have not been found for the damsel —
then they have brought out the damsel unto the opening of her father's house, and stoned her have the men of her city with stones, and she hath died, for she hath done folly in Israel, to go a-whoring [in] her father's house; and thou hast put away the evil thing out of thy midst.
'When a man is found lying with a woman, married to a husband, then they have died even both of them, the man who is lying with the woman, also the woman; and thou hast put away the evil thing out of Israel.
'When there is a damsel, a virgin, betrothed to a man, and a man hath found her in a city, and lain with her;
then ye have brought them both out unto the gate of that city, and stoned them with stones, and they have died: — the damsel, because that she hath not cried, [being] in a city; and the man, because that he hath humbled his neighbour's wife; and thou hast put away the evil thing out of thy midst.
'And if in a field the man find the damsel who is betrothed, and the man hath laid hold on her, and lain with her, then hath the man who hath lain with her died alone;
and to the damsel thou dost not do anything, the damsel hath no deadly sin; for as a man riseth against his neighbour and hath murdered him — the life, so [is] this thing;
for in a field he found her, she hath cried — the damsel who is betrothed — and she hath no saviour.
'When a man findeth a damsel, a virgin who is not betrothed, and hath caught her, and lain with her, and they have been found,
then hath the man who is lying with her given to the father of the damsel fifty silverlings, and to him she is for a wife; because that he hath humbled her, he is not able to send her away all his days.
'A man doth not take his father's wife, nor uncover his father's skirt.
'One wounded, bruised, or cut in the member doth not enter into the assembly of Jehovah;
a bastard doth not enter into the assembly of Jehovah; even a tenth generation of him doth not enter into the assembly of Jehovah.
'An Ammonite and a Moabite doth not enter into the assembly of Jehovah; even a tenth generation of them doth not enter into the assembly of Jehovah — to the age;
because that they have not come before you with bread and with water in the way, in your coming out from Egypt, and because he hath hired against thee Balaam son of Beor, of Pethor of Aram-Naharaim, to revile thee;
and Jehovah thy God hath not been willing to hearken unto Balaam, and Jehovah thy God doth turn for thee the reviling to a blessing, because Jehovah thy God hath loved thee;
thou dost not seek their peace and their good all thy days — to the age.
'Thou dost not abominate an Edomite, for thy brother he [is]; thou dost not abominate an Egyptian, for a sojourner thou hast been in his land;
sons who are begotten of them, a third generation of them, doth enter into the assembly of Jehovah.
'When a camp goeth out against thine enemies, then thou hast kept from every evil thing.
'When there is in thee a man who is not clean, from an accident at night — then he hath gone out unto the outside of the camp — he doth not come in unto the midst of the camp —
and it hath been, at the turning of the evening, he doth bathe with water, and at the going in of the sun he doth come in unto the midst of the camp.
'And a station thou hast at the outside of the camp, and thou hast gone out thither without,
and a nail thou hast on thy staff, and it hath been, in thy sitting without, that thou hast digged with it, and turned back, and covered thy filth;
for Jehovah thy God is walking up and down in the midst of thy camp, to deliver thee, and to give thine enemies before thee, and thy camp hath been holy, and He doth not see in thee the nakedness of anything, and hath turned back from after thee.
'Thou dost not shut up a servant unto his lord, who is delivered unto thee from his lord;
with thee he doth dwell, in thy midst, in the place which he chooseth within one of thy gates, where it is pleasing to him; thou dost not oppress him.
'There is not a whore among the daughters of Israel, nor is there a whoremonger among the sons of Israel;
thou dost not bring a gift of a whore, or a price of a dog, into the house of Jehovah thy God, for any vow; for the abomination of Jehovah thy God [are] even both of them.
'Thou dost not lend in usury to thy brother; usury of money, usury of food, usury of anything which is lent on usury.
To a stranger thou mayest lend in usury, and to thy brother thou dost not lend in usury, so that Jehovah thy God doth bless thee in every putting forth of thy hand on the land whither thou goest in to possess it.
'When thou vowest a vow to Jehovah thy God, thou dost not delay to complete it; for Jehovah thy God doth certainly require it from thee, and it hath been in thee — sin.
'And when thou forbearest to vow, it is not in thee a sin.
The produce of thy lips thou dost keep, and hast done [it], as thou hast vowed to Jehovah thy God; a free-will-offering, which thou hast spoken with thy mouth.
'When thou comest in unto the vineyard of thy neighbour, then thou hast eaten grapes, according to thy desire, thy sufficiency; but into thy vessel thou dost not put [any].
When thou comest in among the standing-corn of thy neighbour, then thou hast plucked the ears with thy hand, but a sickle thou dost not wave over the standing-corn of thy neighbour.
'When a man doth take a wife, and hath married her, and it hath been, if she doth not find grace in his eyes (for he hath found in her nakedness of anything), and he hath written for her a writing of divorce, and given [it] into her hand, and sent her out of his house,
and she hath gone out of his house, and hath gone and been another man's,
and the latter man hath hated her, and written for her a writing of divorce, and given [it] into her hand, and sent her out of his house, or when the latter man dieth, who hath taken her to himself for a wife:
'Her former husband who sent her away is not able to turn back to take her to be to him for a wife, after that she hath become defiled; for an abomination it [is] before Jehovah, and thou dost not cause the land to sin which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee — an inheritance.
'When a man taketh a new wife, he doth not go out into the host, and [one] doth not pass over unto him for anything; free he is at his own house one year, and hath rejoiced his wife whom he hath taken.
'None doth take in pledge millstones, and rider, for life it [is] he is taking in pledge.
'When a man is found stealing a person, of his brethren, of the sons of Israel, and hath tyrannized over him, and sold him, then hath that thief died, and thou hast put away the evil thing out of thy midst.
'Take heed, in the plague of leprosy, to watch greatly, and to do according to all that the priests, the Levites, teach you; as I have commanded them ye observe to do;
remember that which Jehovah thy God hath done to Miriam in the way, in your coming out of Egypt.
'When thou liftest up on thy brother a debt of anything, thou dost not go in unto his house to obtain his pledge;
at the outside thou dost stand, and the man on whom thou art lifting [it] up is bringing out unto thee the pledge at the outside.
'And if he is a poor man, thou dost not lie down with his pledge;
thou dost certainly give back to him the pledge at the going in of the sun, and he hath lain down in his own raiment, and hath blessed thee; and to thee it is righteousness before Jehovah thy God.
'Thou dost not oppress a hireling, poor and needy, of thy brethren or of thy sojourner who is in thy land within thy gates;
in his day thou dost give his hire, and the sun doth not go in upon it, for he [is] poor, and unto it he is lifting up his soul, and he doth not cry against thee unto Jehovah, and it hath been in thee — sin.
'Fathers are not put to death for sons, and sons are not put to death for fathers — each for his own sin, they are put to death.
'Thou dost not turn aside the judgment of a fatherless sojourner, nor take in pledge the garment of a widow;
and thou hast remembered that a servant thou hast been in Egypt, and Jehovah thy God doth ransom thee from thence; therefore I am commanding thee to do this thing.
'When thou reapest thy harvest in thy field, and hast forgotten a sheaf in a field, thou dost not turn back to take it; to the sojourner, to the fatherless, and to the widow, it is; so that Jehovah thy God doth bless thee in all the work of thy hands.
'When thou beatest thine olive, thou dost not examine the branch behind thee; to the sojourner, to the fatherless, and to the widow, it is.
'When thou cuttest thy vineyard, thou dost not glean behind thee; to the sojourner, to the fatherless, and to the widow, it is;
and thou hast remembered that a servant thou hast been in the land of Egypt; therefore I am commanding thee to do this thing.
'When there is a strife between men, and they have come nigh unto the judgment, and they have judged, and declared righteous the righteous, and declared wrong the wrong-doer,
then it hath come to pass, if the wrong-doer is to be smitten, that the judge hath caused him to fall down, and [one] hath smitten him in his presence, according to the sufficiency of his wrong-doing, by number;
forty [times] he doth smite him — he is not adding, lest, he is adding to smite him above these — many stripes, and thy brother is lightly esteemed in thine eyes.
'Thou dost not muzzle an ox in its threshing.
'When brethren dwell together, and one of them hath died, and hath no son, the wife of the dead is not without to a strange man; her husband's brother doth go in unto her, and hath taken her to him for a wife, and doth perform the duty of her husband's brother;
and it hath been, the first-born which she beareth doth rise for the name of his dead brother, and his name is not wiped away out of Israel.
'And if the man doth not delight to take his brother's wife, then hath his brother's wife gone up to the gate, unto the elders, and said, My husband's brother is refusing to raise up to his brother a name in Israel; he hath not been willing to perform the duty of my husband's brother;
and the elders of his city have called for him, and spoken unto him, and he hath stood and said, I have no desire to take her;
'Then hath his brother's wife drawn nigh unto him, before the eyes of the elders, and drawn his shoe from off his foot, and spat in his face, and answered and said, Thus it is done to the man who doth not build up the house of his brother;
and his name hath been called in Israel — The house of him whose shoe is drawn off.
'When men strive together, one with another, and the wife of the one hath drawn near to deliver her husband out of the hand of his smiter, and hath put forth her hand, and laid hold on his secrets,
then thou hast cut off her hand, thine eye doth not spare.
'Thou hast not in thy bag a stone and a stone, a great and a small.
Thou hast not in thy house an ephah and an ephah, a great and a small.
Thou hast a stone complete and just, thou hast an ephah complete and just, so that they prolong thy days on the ground which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee;
for the abomination of Jehovah thy God [is] any one doing these things, any one doing iniquity.
'Remember that which Amalek hath done to thee in the way, in your going out from Egypt,
that he hath met thee in the way, and smiteth in all those feeble behind thee (and thou wearied and fatigued), and is not fearing God.
And it hath been, in Jehovah thy God's giving rest to thee, from all thine enemies round about, in the land which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee — an inheritance to possess it — thou dost blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under the heavens — thou dost not forget.
'And it hath been, when thou comest in unto the land which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee — an inheritance, and thou hast possessed it, and dwelt in it,
that thou hast taken of the first of all the fruits of the ground which thou dost bring in out of thy land which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee, and hast put [it] in a basket, and gone unto the place which Jehovah thy God doth choose to cause His name to tabernacle there.
'And thou hast come in unto the priest who is in those days, and hast said unto him, I have declared to-day to Jehovah thy God, that I have come in unto the land which Jehovah hath sworn to our fathers to give to us;
and the priest hath taken the basket out of thy hand, and placed it before the altar of Jehovah thy God.
'And thou hast answered and said before Jehovah thy God, A perishing Aramaean [is] my father! and he goeth down to Egypt, and sojourneth there with few men, and becometh there a nation, great, mighty, and numerous;
and the Egyptians do us evil, and afflict us, and put on us hard service;
and we cry unto Jehovah, God of our fathers, and Jehovah heareth our voice, and seeth our affliction, and our labour, and our oppression;
and Jehovah bringeth us out from Egypt, by a strong hand, and by a stretched-out arm, and by great fear, and by signs, and by wonders,
and he bringeth us in unto this place, and giveth to us this land — a land flowing with milk and honey.
'And now, lo, I have brought in the first of the fruits of the ground which thou hast given to me, O Jehovah; — and thou hast placed it before Jehovah thy God, and bowed thyself before Jehovah thy God,
and rejoiced in all the good which Jehovah thy God hath given to thee, and to thy house, thou, and the Levite, and the sojourner who [is] in thy midst.
'When thou dost complete to tithe all the tithe of thine increase in the third year, the year of the tithe, then thou hast given to the Levite, to the sojourner, to the fatherless, and to the widow, and they have eaten within thy gates, and been satisfied,
and thou hast said before Jehovah thy God, I have put away the separated thing out of the house, and also have given it to the Levite, and to the sojourner, and to the orphan, and to the widow, according to all Thy command which Thou hast commanded me; I have not passed over from Thy commands, nor have I forgotten.
I have not eaten in mine affliction of it, nor have I put away of it for uncleanness, nor have I given of it for the dead; I have hearkened to the voice of Jehovah my God; I have done according to all that Thou hast commanded me;
look from Thy holy habitation, from the heavens, and bless Thy people Israel, and the ground which Thou hast given to us, as Thou hast sworn to our fathers — a land flowing [with] milk and honey.
'This day Jehovah thy God is commanding thee to do these statutes and judgments; and thou hast hearkened and done them with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
Jehovah thou hast caused to promise to-day to become thy God, and to walk in His ways, and to keep His statutes, and His commands, and His judgments, and to hearken to His voice.
'And Jehovah hath caused thee to promise to-day to become His people, a peculiar treasure, as He hath spoken to thee, and to keep all His commands;
so as to make thee uppermost above all the nations whom He hath made for a praise, and for a name, and for beauty, and for thy being a holy people to Jehovah thy God, as He hath spoken.
'And Moses — the elders of Israel also — commandeth the people, saying, Keep all the command which I am commanding you to-day;
and it hath been, in the day that ye pass over the Jordan unto the land which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee, that thou hast raised up for thee great stones, and plaistered them with plaister,
and written on them all the words of this law in thy passing over, so that thou goest in unto the land which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee — a land flowing with milk and honey, as Jehovah, God of thy fathers, hath spoken to thee.
'And it hath been, in your passing over the Jordan, ye raise up these stones which I am commanding you to-day, in mount Ebal, and thou hast plaistered them with plaister,
and built there an altar to Jehovah thy God, an altar of stones, thou dost not wave over them iron.
Of complete stones thou buildest the altar of Jehovah thy God, and hast caused to ascend on it burnt-offerings to Jehovah thy God,
and sacrificed peace-offerings, and eaten there, and rejoiced before Jehovah thy God,
and written on the stones all the words of this law, well engraved.'
And Moses speaketh — the priests, the Levites, also — unto all Israel, saying, 'Keep silent, and hear, O Israel, this day thou hast become a people to Jehovah thy God;
and thou hast hearkened to the voice of Jehovah thy God, and done His commands, and His statutes, which I am commanding thee to-day.'
And Moses commandeth the people on that day, saying,
'These do stand, to bless the people, on mount Gerizzim, in your passing over the Jordan: Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Joseph, and Benjamin.
And these do stand, for the reviling, on mount Ebal: Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.
'And the Levites have answered and said unto every man of Israel — a loud voice:
'Cursed [is] the man who maketh a graven and molten image, the abomination of Jehovah, work of the hands of an artificer, and hath put [it] in a secret place, — and all the people have answered and said, Amen.
'Cursed [is] He who is making light of his father and his mother, — and all the people have said, Amen.
'Cursed [is] he who is removing his neighbour's border, — and all the people have said, Amen.
'Cursed [is] he who is causing the blind to err in the way, — and all the people have said, Amen.
'Cursed [is] he who is turning aside the judgment of fatherless, sojourner, and widow, — and all the people have said, Amen.
'Cursed [is] he who is lying with his father's wife, for he hath uncovered his father's skirt, — and all the people have said, Amen.
'Cursed [is] he who is lying with any beast, — and all the people have said, Amen.
'Cursed [is] he who is lying with his sister, daughter of his father, or daughter of his mother, — and all the people have said, Amen.
'Cursed [is] he who is lying with his mother-in-law, — and all the people have said, Amen.
'Cursed [is] he who is smiting his neighbour in secret, — and all the people have said, Amen.
'Cursed [is] he who is taking a bribe to smite a person, innocent blood, — and all the people have said, Amen.
'Cursed [is] he who doth not establish the words of this law, to do them, — and all the people have said, Amen.
'And it hath been, if thou dost hearken diligently to the voice of Jehovah thy God, to observe to do all His commands which I am commanding thee to-day, that Jehovah thy God hath made thee uppermost above all the nations of the earth,
and all these blessings have come upon thee, and overtaken thee, because thou dost hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God:
'Blessed [art] thou in the city, and blessed [art] thou in the field.
'Blessed [is] the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, increase of thine oxen, and wealth of thy flock.
'Blessed [is] thy basket and thy kneading-trough.
'Blessed [art] thou in thy coming in, and blessed [art] thou in thy going out.
'Jehovah giveth thine enemies, who are rising up against thee — smitten before thy face; in one way they come out unto thee, and in seven ways they flee before thee.
'Jehovah commandeth with thee the blessing in thy storehouses, and in every putting forth of thy hand, and hath blessed thee in the land which Jehovah thy God is giving to thee.
'Jehovah doth establish thee to Himself for a holy people, as He hath sworn to thee, when thou keepest the commands of Jehovah thy God, and hast walked in His ways;
and all the peoples of the land have seen that the name of Jehovah is called upon thee, and they have been afraid of thee.
'And Jehovah hath made thee abundant in good, in the fruit of the womb, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy ground, on the ground which Jehovah hath sworn to thy fathers to give to thee.
'Jehovah doth open to thee his good treasure — the heavens — to give the rain of thy land in its season, and to bless all the work of thy hand, and thou hast lent to many nations, and thou — thou dost not borrow.
'And Jehovah hath given thee for head, and not for tail; and thou hast been only above, and art not beneath, for thou dost hearken unto the commands of Jehovah thy God, which I am commanding thee to-day, to keep and to do,
and thou dost not turn aside from all the words which I am commanding you to-day — right or left — to go after other gods, to serve them.
'And it hath been, if thou dost not hearken unto the voice of Jehovah thy God to observe to do all His commands, and His statutes, which I am commanding thee to-day, that all these revilings have come upon thee, and overtaken thee:
'Cursed [art] thou in the city, and cursed [art] thou in the field.
'Cursed [is] thy basket and thy kneading-trough.
'Cursed [is] the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy land, increase of thine oxen, and wealth of thy flock.
'Cursed [art] thou in thy coming in, and cursed [art] thou in thy going out.
'Jehovah doth send on thee the curse, the trouble, and the rebuke, in every putting forth of thy hand which thou dost, till thou art destroyed, and till thou perish hastily, because of the evil of thy doings [by] which thou hast forsaken Me.
'Jehovah doth cause to cleave to thee the pestilence, till He consume thee from off the ground whither thou art going in to possess it.
'Jehovah doth smite thee with consumption, and with fever, and with inflammation, and with extreme burning, and with sword, and with blasting, and with mildew, and they have pursued thee till thou perish
'And thy heavens which [are] over thy head have been brass, and the earth which [is] under thee iron;
Jehovah giveth the rain of thy land — dust and ashes; from the heavens it cometh down on thee till thou art destroyed.
'Jehovah giveth thee smitten before thine enemies; in one way thou goest out unto them, and in seven ways dost flee before them, and thou hast been for a trembling to all kingdoms of the earth;
and thy carcase hath been for food to every fowl of the heavens, and to the beast of the earth, and there is none causing trembling.
'Jehovah doth smite thee with the ulcer of Egypt, and with emerods, and with scurvy, and with itch, of which thou art not able to be healed.
'Jehovah doth smite thee with madness, and with blindness, and with astonishment of heart;
and thou hast been gropling at noon, as the blind gropeth in darkness; and thou dost not cause thy ways to prosper; and thou hast been only oppressed and plundered all the days, and there is no saviour.
'A woman thou dost betroth, and another man doth lie with her; a house thou dost build, and dost not dwell in it; a vineyard thou dost plant, and dost not make it common;
thine ox [is] slaughtered before thine eyes, and thou dost not eat of it; thine ass [is] taken violently away from before thee, and it is not given back to thee; thy sheep [are] given to thine enemies, and there is no saviour for thee.
'Thy sons and thy daughters [are] given to another people, and thine eyes are looking and consuming for them all the day, and thy hand is not to God!
The fruit of thy ground, and all thy labour, eat up doth a people whom thou hast not known; and thou hast been only oppressed and bruised all the days;
and thou hast been mad, because of the sight of thine eyes which thou dost see.
'Jehovah doth smite thee with an evil ulcer, on the knees, and on the legs (of which thou art not able to be healed), from the sole of thy foot even unto thy crown.
'Jehovah doth cause thee to go, and thy king whom thou raisest up over thee, unto a nation which thou hast not known, thou and thy fathers, and thou hast served there other gods, wood and stone;
and thou hast been for an astonishment, for a simile, and for a byword among all the peoples whither Jehovah doth lead thee.
'Much seed thou dost take out into the field, and little thou dost gather in, for the locust doth consume it;
vineyards thou dost plant, and hast laboured, and wine thou dost not drink nor gather, for the worm doth consume it;
olives are to thee in all thy border, and oil thou dost not pour out, for thine olive doth fall off.
'Sons and daughters thou dost beget, and they are not with thee, for they go into captivity;
all thy trees and the fruit of thy ground doth the locust possess;
the sojourner who [is] in thy midst goeth up above thee very high, and thou goest down very low;
he doth lend [to] thee, and thou dost not lend [to] him; he is for head, and thou art for tail.
'And come upon thee have all these curses, and they have pursued thee, and overtaken thee, till thou art destroyed, because thou hast not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah thy God, to keep His commands, and His statutes, which he hath commanded thee;
and they have been on thee for a sign and for a wonder, also on thy seed — to the age.
'Because that thou hast not served Jehovah thy God with joy, and with gladness of heart, because of the abundance of all things —
thou hast served thine enemies, whom Jehovah sendeth against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in lack of all things; and he hath put a yoke of iron on thy neck, till He hath destroyed thee.
'Jehovah doth lift up against thee a nation, from afar, from the end of the earth, as the eagle it flieth; a nation whose tongue thou hast not heard,
a nation — fierce of countenance — which accepteth not the face of the aged, and the young doth not favour;
and it hath eaten the fruit of thy cattle, and the fruit of thy ground, till thou art destroyed; which leaveth not to thee corn, new wine, and oil, increase of thine oxen, and wealth of thy flock, till it hath destroyed thee.
'And it hath laid siege to thee in all thy gates, till thy walls come down, the high and the fenced ones in which thou art trusting, in all thy land; yea, it hath laid siege to thee in all thy gates, in all thy land, which Jehovah thy God hath given to thee;
and thou hast eaten the fruit of thy body, flesh of thy sons and thy daughters (whom Jehovah thy God hath given to thee), in the siege, and in the straitness with which thine enemies do straiten thee.
'The man who is tender in thee, and who [is] very delicate — his eye is evil against his brother, and against the wife of his bosom, and against the remnant of his sons whom he leaveth,
against giving to one of them of the flesh of his sons whom he eateth, because he hath nothing left to him, in the siege, and in the straitness with which thine enemy doth straiten thee in all thy gates.
'The tender woman in thee, and the delicate, who hath not tried the sole of her foot to place on the ground because of delicateness and because of tenderness — her eye is evil against the husband of her bosom, and against her son, and against her daughter,
and against her seed which cometh out from between her feet, even against her sons whom she doth bear, for she doth eat them for the lacking of all things in secret, in the siege and in the straitness with which thine enemy doth straiten thee within thy gates.
'If thou dost not observe to do all the words of this law which are written in this book, to fear this honoured and fearful name — Jehovah thy God —
then hath Jehovah made wonderful thy strokes, and the strokes of thy seed — great strokes, and stedfast, and evil sicknesses, and stedfast.
'And He hath brought back on thee all the diseases of Egypt, of the presence of which thou hast been afraid, and they have cleaved to thee;
also every sickness and every stroke which is not written in the book of this law; Jehovah doth cause them to go up upon thee till thou art destroyed,
and ye have been left with few men, instead of which ye have been as stars of the heavens for multitude, because thou hast not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah thy God.
'And it hath been, as Jehovah hath rejoiced over you to do you good, and to multiply you, so doth Jehovah rejoice over you to destroy you, and to lay you waste; and ye have been pulled away from off the ground whither thou art going in to possess it;
and Jehovah hath scattered thee among all the peoples, from the end of the earth even unto the end of the earth; and thou hast served there other gods which thou hast not known, thou and thy fathers — wood and stone.
'And among those nations thou dost not rest, yea, there is no resting-place for the sole of thy foot, and Jehovah hath given to thee there a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and grief of soul;
and thy life hath been hanging in suspense before thee, and thou hast been afraid by night and by day, and dost not believe in thy life;
in the morning thou sayest, O that it were evening! and in the evening thou sayest, O that it were morning! from the fear of thy heart, with which thou art afraid, and from the sight of thine eyes which thou seest.
'And Jehovah hath brought thee back to Egypt with ships, by a way of which I said to thee, Thou dost not add any more to see it, and ye have sold yourselves there to thine enemies, for men-servants and for maid-servants, and there is no buyer.'
These [are] the words of the covenant which Jehovah hath commanded Moses to make with the sons of Israel in the land of Moab, apart from the covenant which He made with them in Horeb.
And Moses calleth unto all Israel, and saith unto them, 'Ye — ye have seen all that which Jehovah hath done before your eyes in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land;
the great trials which thine eyes have seen, the signs, and those great wonders;
and Jehovah hath not given to you a heart to know, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, till this day,
and I cause you to go forty years in a wilderness; your garments have not been consumed from off you, and thy shoe hath not worn away from off thy foot;
bread ye have not eaten, and wine and strong drink ye have not drunk, so that ye know that I [am] Jehovah your God.
'And ye come in unto this place, and Sihon king of Heshbon — also Og king of Bashan — doth come out to meet us, to battle, and we smite them,
and take their land, and give it for an inheritance to the Reubenite, and to the Gadite, and to the half of the tribe of Manasseh;
and ye have kept the words of this covenant, and done them, so that ye cause all that ye do to prosper.
'Ye are standing to-day, all of you, before Jehovah your God — your heads, your tribes, your elders, and your authorities — every man of Israel;
your infants, your wives, and thy sojourner who [is] in the midst of thy camps, from the hewer of thy wood unto the drawer of thy water —
for thy passing over into the covenant of Jehovah thy God, and into His oath which Jehovah thy God is making with thee to-day;
in order to establish thee to-day to Him for a people, and He Himself is thy God, as He hath spoken to thee, and as He hath sworn to thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.
'And not with you alone am I making this covenant and this oath;
but with him who is here with us, standing to-day before Jehovah our God, and with him who is not here with us to-day,
for ye have known how ye dwelt in the land of Egypt, and how we passed by through the midst of the nations which ye have passed by;
and ye see their abominations, and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which [are] with them,
lest there be among you a man or woman, or family or tribe, whose heart is turning to-day from Jehovah our God, to go to serve the gods of those nations, lest there be in you a root fruitful of gall and wormwood:
'And it hath been, in his hearing the words of this oath, and he hath blessed himself in his heart, saying, I have peace, though in the stubbornness of my heart I go on, in order to end the fulness with the thirst.
Jehovah is not willing to be propitious to him, for then doth the anger of Jehovah smoke, also His zeal, against that man, and lain down on him hath all the oath which is written in this book, and Jehovah hath blotted out his name from under the heavens,
and Jehovah hath separated him for evil, out of all the tribes of Israel, according to all the oaths of the covenant which is written in this book of the law.
'And the latter generation of your sons who rise after you, and the stranger who cometh in from a land afar off, have said when they have seen the strokes of that land, and its sicknesses which Jehovah hath sent into it, —
([with] brimstone and salt is the whole land burnt, it is not sown, nor doth it shoot up, nor doth there go up on it any herb, like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim, which Jehovah overturned in His anger, and in His fury,) —
yea, all the nations have said, Wherefore hath Jehovah done thus to this land? what the heat of this great anger?
'And they have said, Because that they have forsaken the covenant of Jehovah, God of their fathers, which He made with them in His bringing them out of the land of Egypt,
and they go and serve other gods, and bow themselves to them — gods which they have not known, and which He hath not apportioned to them;
and the anger of Jehovah burneth against that land, to bring in on it all the reviling that is written in this book,
and Jehovah doth pluck them from off their ground in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath, and doth cast them unto another land, as [at] this day.
'The things hidden [are] to Jehovah our God, and the things revealed [are] to us and to our sons — to the age, to do all the words of this law.
'And it hath been, when all these things come upon thee, the blessing and the reviling, which I have set before thee, and thou hast brought [them] back unto thy heart, among all the nations whither Jehovah thy God hath driven thee away,
and hast turned back unto Jehovah thy God, and hearkened to His voice, according to all that I am commanding thee to-day, thou and thy sons, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul —
then hath Jehovah thy God turned back [to] thy captivity, and pitied thee, yea, He hath turned back and gathered thee out of all the peoples whither Jehovah thy God hath scattered thee.
'If thine outcast is in the extremity of the heavens, thence doth Jehovah thy God gather thee, and thence He doth take thee;
and Jehovah thy God hath brought thee in unto the land which thy fathers have possessed, and thou hast inherited it, and He hath done thee good, and multiplied thee above thy fathers.
'And Jehovah thy God hath circumcised thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love Jehovah thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, for the sake of thy life;
and Jehovah thy God hath put all this oath on thine enemies, and on those hating thee, who have pursued thee.
'And thou dost turn back, and hast hearkened to the voice of Jehovah, and hast done all His commands which I am commanding thee to-day;
and Jehovah thy God hath made thee abundant in every work of thy hand, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy ground, for good; for Jehovah turneth back to rejoice over thee for good, as He rejoiced over thy fathers,
for thou dost hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God, to keep His commands, and His statutes, which are written in the book of this law, for thou turnest back unto Jehovah thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul.
'For this command which I am commanding thee to-day, it is not too wonderful for thee, nor [is] it far off.
It is not in the heavens, — saying, Who doth go up for us into the heavens, and doth take it for us, and doth cause us to hear it — that we may do it.
And it [is] not beyond the sea, — saying, Who doth pass over for us beyond the sea, and doth take it for us, and doth cause us to hear it — that we may do it?
For very near unto thee is the word, in thy mouth, and in thy heart — to do it.
'See, I have set before thee to-day life and good, and death and evil,
in that I am commanding thee to-day to love Jehovah thy God, to walk in His ways, and to keep His commands, and His statutes, and His judgments; and thou hast lived and multiplied, and Jehovah thy God hath blessed thee in the land whither thou art going in to possess it.
'And if thy heart doth turn, and thou dost not hearken, and hast been driven away, and hast bowed thyself to other gods, and served them,
I have declared to you this day, that ye do certainly perish, ye do not prolong days on the ground which thou art passing over the Jordan to go in thither to possess it.
'I have caused to testify against you to-day the heavens and the earth; life and death I have set before thee, the blessing and the reviling; and thou hast fixed on life, so that thou dost live, thou and thy seed,
to love Jehovah thy God, to hearken to His voice, and to cleave to Him (for He [is] thy life, and the length of thy days), to dwell on the ground which Jehovah hath sworn to thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give to them.'
And Moses goeth and speaketh these words unto all Israel,
and he saith unto them, 'A son of a hundred and twenty years [am] I to-day; I am not able any more to go out and to come in, and Jehovah hath said unto me, Thou dost not pass over this Jordan,
'Jehovah thy God He is passing over before thee, He doth destroy these nations from before thee, and thou hast possessed them; Joshua — he is passing over before thee as Jehovah hath spoken,
and Jehovah hath done to them as he hath done to Sihon and to Og, kings of the Amorite, and to their land, whom He destroyed.
And Jehovah hath given them before your face, and ye have done to them according to all the command which I have commanded you;
be strong and courageous, fear not, nor be terrified because of them, for Jehovah thy God [is] He who is going with thee; He doth not fail thee nor forsake thee.'
And Moses calleth for Joshua, and saith unto him before the eyes of all Israel, 'Be strong and courageous, for thou — thou dost go in with this people unto the land which Jehovah hath sworn to their fathers to give to them, and thou — thou dost cause them to inherit it;
and Jehovah [is] He who is going before thee, He himself is with thee; He doth not fail thee nor forsake thee; fear not, nor be affrighted.'
And Moses writeth this law, and giveth it unto the priests (sons of Levi, those bearing the ark of the covenant of Jehovah), and unto all the elders of Israel,
and Moses commandeth them, saying, 'At the end of seven years, in the appointed time, the year of release, in the feast of booths,
in the coming in of all Israel to see the face of Jehovah in the place which He chooseth, thou dost proclaim this law before all Israel, in their ears.
'Assemble the people, the men, and the women, and the infants, and thy sojourner who [is] within thy gates, so that they hear, and so that they learn, and have feared Jehovah your God, and observed to do all the words of this law;
and their sons, who have not known, do hear, and have learned to fear Jehovah your God all the days which ye are living on the ground whither ye are passing over the Jordan to possess it.'
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Lo, thy days have drawn near to die; call Joshua, and station yourselves in the tent of meeting, and I charge him;' and Moses goeth — Joshua also — and they station themselves in the tent of meeting,
and Jehovah is seen in the tent, in a pillar of a cloud; and the pillar of the cloud standeth at the opening of the tent.
And Jehovah saith unto Moses, 'Lo, thou art lying down with thy fathers, and this people hath risen, and gone a-whoring after the gods of the stranger of the land into the midst of which it hath entered, and forsaken Me, and broken My covenant which I made with it;
and Mine anger hath burned against it in that day, and I have forsaken them, and hidden My face from them, and it hath been for consumption, and many evils and distresses have found it, and it hath said in that day, Is it not because that my God is not in my midst — these evils have found me?
and I certainly hide My face in that day for all the evil which it hath done, for it hath turned unto other gods.
'And now, write for you this song, and teach it the sons of Israel; put it in their mouths, so that this song is to Me for a witness against the sons of Israel,
and I bring them in unto the ground which I have sworn to their fathers — flowing with milk and honey, and they have eaten, and been satisfied, and been fat, and have turned unto other gods, and they have served them, and despised Me, and broken My covenant.
'And it hath been, when many evils and distresses do meet it, that this song hath testified to its face for a witness; for it is not forgotten out of the mouth of its seed, for I have known its imagining which it is doing to-day, before I bring them in unto the land of which I have sworn.'
And Moses writeth this song on that day, and doth teach it the sons of Israel,
and He commandeth Joshua son of Nun, and saith, 'Be strong and courageous, for thou dost bring in the sons of Israel unto the land which I have sworn to them, and I — I am with thee.'
And it cometh to pass, when Moses finisheth to write the words of this law on a book till their completion,
that Moses commandeth the Levites bearing the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, saying,
'Take this Book of the Law, and thou hast set it on the side of the ark of the covenant of Jehovah your God, and it hath been there against thee for a witness;
for I — I have known thy rebellion, and thy stiff neck; lo, in my being yet alive with you to-day, rebellious ye have been with Jehovah, and also surely after my death.
'Assemble unto me all the elders of your tribes, and your authorities, and I speak in their ears these words, and cause to testify against them the heavens and the earth,
for I have known that after my death ye do very corruptly, and have turned aside out of the way which I commanded you, and evil hath met you in the latter end of the days, because ye do the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, to make Him angry with the work of your hands.'
And Moses speaketh in the ears of all the assembly of Israel the words of this song, till their completion: —
'Give ear, O heavens, and I speak; And thou dost hear, O earth, sayings of my mouth!
Drop as rain doth My doctrine; Flow as dew doth My sayings; As storms on the tender grass, And as showers on the herb,
For the Name of Jehovah I proclaim, Ascribe ye greatness to our God!
The Rock! — perfect [is] His work, For all His ways [are] just; God of stedfastness, and without iniquity: Righteous and upright [is] He.
It hath done corruptly to Him; Their blemish is not His sons', A generation perverse and crooked!
To Jehovah do ye act thus, O people foolish and not wise? Is not He thy father — thy possessor? He made thee, and doth establish thee.
Remember days of old — Understand the years of many generations — Ask thy father, and he doth tell thee; Thine elders, and they say to thee:
In the Most High causing nations to inherit, In His separating sons of Adam — He setteth up the borders of the peoples By the number of the sons of Israel.
For Jehovah's portion [is] His people, Jacob [is] the line of His inheritance.
He findeth him in a land — a desert, And in a void — a howling wilderness, He turneth him round — He causeth him to understand — He keepeth him as the apple of His eye.
As an eagle waketh up its nest, Over its young ones fluttereth, Spreadeth its wings — taketh them, Beareth them on its pinions; —
Jehovah alone doth lead him, And there is no strange god with him.
He maketh him ride on high places of earth, And he eateth increase of the fields, And He maketh him suck honey from a rock, And oil out of the flint of a rock;
Butter of the herd, and milk of the flock, With fat of lambs, and rams, sons of Bashan, And he-goats, with fat of kidneys of wheat; And of the blood of the grape thou dost drink wine!
And Jeshurun waxeth fat, and doth kick: Thou hast been fat — thou hast been thick, Thou hast been covered. And he leaveth God who made him, And dishonoureth the Rock of his salvation.
They make Him zealous with strangers, With abominations they make Him angry.
They sacrifice to demons — no god! Gods they have not known — New ones — from the vicinity they came; Not feared them have your fathers!
The Rock that begat thee thou forgettest, And neglectest God who formeth thee.
And Jehovah seeth and despiseth — For the provocation of His sons and His daughters.
And He saith: I hide My face from them, I see what [is] their latter end; For a froward generation [are] they, Sons in whom is no stedfastness.
They have made Me zealous by 'no-god,' They made Me angry by their vanities; And I make them zealous by 'no-people,' By a foolish nation I make them angry.
For a fire hath been kindled in Mine anger, And it burneth unto Sheol — the lowest, And consumeth earth and its increase, And setteth on fire foundations of mountains.
I gather upon them evils, Mine arrows I consume upon them.
Exhausted by famine, And consumed by heat, and bitter destruction. And the teeth of beasts I send upon them, With poison of fearful things of the dust.
Without bereave doth the sword, And at the inner-chambers — fear, Both youth and virgin, Suckling with man of grey hair.
I have said: I blow them away, I cause their remembrance to cease from man;
If not — the anger of an enemy I fear, Lest their adversaries know — Lest they say, Our hand is high, And Jehovah hath not wrought all this.
For a nation lost to counsels [are] they, And there is no understanding in them.
If they were wise — They deal wisely [with] this; They attend to their latter end:
How doth one pursue a thousand, And two cause a myriad to flee! If not — that their rock hath sold them, And Jehovah hath shut them up?
For not as our Rock [is] their rock, (And our enemies [are] judges!)
For of the vine of Sodom their vine [is], And of the fields of Gomorrah; Their grapes [are] grapes of gall — They have bitter clusters;
The poison of dragons [is] their wine And the fierce venom of asps.
Is it not laid up with Me? Sealed among My treasures?
Mine [are] vengeance and recompense, At the due time — doth their foot slide; For near is a day of their calamity, And haste do things prepared for them.
For Jehovah doth judge His people, And for His servants doth repent Himself. For He seeth — the going away of power, And none is restrained and left.
And He hath said, Where [are] their gods — The rock in which they trusted;
Which the fat of their sacrifices do eat, They drink the wine of their libation! Let them arise and help you, Let it be for you a hiding-place!
See ye, now, that I — I [am] He, And there is no god with Me: I put to death, and I keep alive; I have smitten, and I heal; And there is not from My hand a deliverer,
For I lift up unto the heavens My hand, And have said, I live — to the age!
If I have sharpened the brightness of My sword, And My hand doth lay hold on judgment, I turn back vengeance to Mine adversaries, And to those hating Me — I repay!
I make drunk Mine arrows with blood, And My sword devoureth flesh, From the blood of the pierced and captive, From the head of the freemen of the enemy.
Sing ye nations — [with] his people, For the blood of His servants He avengeth, And vengeance He turneth back on His adversaries, And hath pardoned His land — His people.'
And Moses cometh and speaketh all the words of this song in the ears of the people, he and Hoshea son of Nun;
and Moses finisheth to speak all these words unto all Israel,
and saith unto them, 'Set your heart to all the words which I am testifying against you to-day, that ye command your sons to observe to do all the words of this law,
for it [is] not a vain thing for you, for it [is] your life, and by this thing ye prolong days on the ground whither ye are passing over the Jordan to possess it.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Moses, in this self-same day, saying,
'Go up unto this mount Abarim, mount Nebo, which [is] in the land of Moab, which [is] on the front of Jericho, and see the land of Canaan which I am giving to the sons of Israel for a possession;
and die in the mount whither thou art going up, and be gathered unto thy people, as Aaron thy brother hath died in the mount Hor, and is gathered unto his people:
'Because ye trespassed against me in the midst of the sons of Israel at the waters of Meribath-Kadesh, the wilderness of Zin — because ye sanctified Me not in the midst of the sons of Israel;
but over-against thou seest the land, and thither thou dost not go in, unto the land which I am giving to the sons of Israel.'
And this [is] the blessing [with] which Moses the man of God blessed the sons of Israel before his death,
and he saith: — 'Jehovah from Sinai hath come, And hath risen from Seir for them; He hath shone from mount Paran, And hath come [with] myriads of holy ones; At His right hand [are] springs for them.
Also He [is] loving the peoples; All His holy ones [are] in thy hand, And they — they sat down at thy foot, [Each] He lifteth up at thy words.
A law hath Moses commanded us, A possession of the assembly of Jacob.
And he is in Jeshurun king, In the heads of the people gathering together, The tribes of Israel!
Let Reuben live, and not die, And let his men be a number.
And this [is] for Judah; and he saith: — Hear, O Jehovah, the voice of Judah, And unto his people do Thou bring him in; His hand hath striven for him, And an help from his adversaries art Thou.
And of Levi he said: — Thy Thummim and thy Urim [are] for thy pious one, Whom Thou hast tried in Massah, Thou dost strive with Him at the waters of Meribah;
Who is saying of his father and his mother, I have not seen him; And his brethren he hath not discerned, And his sons he hath not known; For they have observed Thy saying, And Thy covenant they keep.
They teach Thy judgments to Jacob, And Thy law to Israel; They put perfume in Thy nose, And whole burnt-offering on Thine altar.
Bless, O Jehovah, his strength, And the work of his hands Thou acceptest, Smite the loins of his withstanders, And of those hating him — that they rise not!
Of Benjamin he said: — The beloved of Jehovah doth tabernacle confidently by him, Covering him over all the day; Yea, between his shoulders He doth tabernacle.
And of Joseph he said: — Blessed of Jehovah [is] his land, By precious things of the heavens, By dew, and by the deep crouching beneath,
And by precious things — fruits of the sun, And by precious things — cast forth by the moons,
And by chief things — of the ancient mountains, And by precious things — of the age-during heights,
And by precious things — of earth and its fulness, And the good pleasure Of Him who is dwelling in the bush, — Let it come for the head of Joseph, And for the crown of him Who is separate from his brethren.
His honour [is] a firstling of his ox, And his horns [are] horns of a reem; By them peoples he doth push together To the ends of earth; And they [are] the myriads of Ephraim, And they [are] the thousands of Manasseh.
And of Zebulun he said: — Rejoice, O Zebulun, in thy going out, And, O Issachar, in thy tents;
Peoples [to] the mountain they call, There they sacrifice righteous sacrifices; For the abundance of the seas they suck, And hidden things hidden in the sand.
And of Gad he said: — Blessed of the Enlarger [is] Gad, As a lioness he doth tabernacle, And hath torn the arm — also the crown!
And he provideth the first part for himself, For there the portion of the lawgiver is covered, And he cometh [with] the heads of the people; The righteousness of Jehovah he hath done, And His judgments with Israel.
And of Dan he said: — Dan [is] a lion's whelp; he doth leap from Bashan.
And of Naphtali he said: — O Naphtali, satisfied with pleasure, And full of the blessing of Jehovah, West and south possess thou.
And of Asher he said: — Blessed with sons [is] Asher, Let him be accepted by his brethren, And dipping in oil his foot.
Iron and brass [are] thy shoes, And as thy days — thy strength.
There is none like the God of Jeshurun, Riding the heavens in thy help, And in His excellency the skies.
A habitation [is] the eternal God, And beneath [are] arms age-during. And He casteth out from thy presence the enemy, and saith, 'Destroy!'
And Israel doth tabernacle [in] confidence alone; The eye of Jacob [is] unto a land of corn and wine; Also His heavens drop down dew.
O thy happiness, O Israel! who is like thee? A people saved by Jehovah, The shield of thy help, And He who [is] the sword of thine excellency: And thine enemies are subdued for thee, And thou on their high places dost tread.'
And Moses goeth up from the plains of Moab unto mount Nebo, the top of Pisgah, which [is] on the front of Jericho, and Jehovah sheweth him all the land — Gilead unto Dan,
and all Naphtali, and the land of Ephraim, and Manasseh, and all the land of Judah unto the further sea,
and the south, and the circuit of the valley of Jericho, the city of palms, unto Zoar.
And Jehovah saith unto him, 'This [is] the land which I have sworn to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, To thy seed I give it; I have caused thee to see with thine eyes, and thither thou dost not pass over.'
And Moses, servant of the Lord, dieth there, in the land of Moab, according to the command of Jehovah;
and He burieth him in a valley in the land of Moab, over-against Beth-Peor, and no man hath known his burying place unto this day.
And Moses [is] a son of a hundred and twenty years when he dieth; his eye hath not become dim, nor hath his moisture fled.
And the sons of Israel bewail Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days; and the days of weeping [and] mourning for Moses are completed.
And Joshua son of Nun is full of the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands upon him, and the sons of Israel hearken unto him, and do as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And there hath not arisen a prophet any more in Israel like Moses, whom Jehovah hath known face unto face,
in reference to all the signs and the wonders which Jehovah sent him to do in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land,
and in reference to all the strong hand, and to all the great fear which Moses did before the eyes of all Israel.
And it cometh to pass after the death of Moses, servant of Jehovah, that Jehovah speaketh unto Joshua son of Nun, minister of Moses, saying,
'Moses my servant is dead, and now, rise, pass over this Jordan, thou, and all this people, unto the land which I am giving to them, to the sons of Israel.
'Every place on which the sole of your foot treadeth, to you I have given it, as I have spoken unto Moses.
From this wilderness and Lebanon, and unto the great river, the river Phrath, all the land of the Hittites, and unto the great Sea — the going in of the sun — is your border.
'No man doth station himself before thee all days of thy life; as I have been with Moses, I am with thee, I do not fail thee, nor forsake thee;
be strong and courageous, for thou — thou dost cause this people to inherit the land which I have sworn to their fathers to give to them.
'Only, be strong and very courageous, to observe to do according to all the law which Moses My servant commanded thee; thou dost not turn aside from it right or left, so that thou dost act wisely in every [place] whither thou goest;
the book of this law doth not depart out of thy mouth, and thou hast meditated in it by day and by night, so that thou dost observe to do according to all that is written in it, for then thou dost cause thy way to prosper, and then thou dost act wisely.
'Have not I commanded thee? be strong and courageous; be not terrified nor affrighted, for with thee [is] Jehovah thy God in every [place] whither thou goest.'
And Joshua commandeth the authorities of the people, saying,
'Pass over into the midst of the camp, and command the people, saying, Prepare for yourselves provision, for within three days ye are passing over this Jordan, to go in to possess the land which Jehovah your God is giving to you to possess it.'
And to the Reubenite, and to the Gadite, and to the half of the tribe of Manasseh, hath Joshua spoken, saying,
'Remember the word which Moses, servant of Jehovah, commanded you, saying, Jehovah your God is giving rest to you, and He hath given to you this land;
your wives, your infants, and your substance, abide in the land which Moses hath given to you beyond the Jordan, and ye — ye pass over by fifties, before your brethren, all the mighty ones of valour, and have helped them,
till that Jehovah giveth rest to your brethren as to yourselves, and they have possessed, even they, the land which Jehovah your God is giving to them; then ye have turned back to the land of your possession, and have possessed it, which Moses, servant of Jehovah, hath given to you beyond the Jordan, [at] the sun-rising.'
And they answer Joshua, saying, 'All that thou hast commanded us we do; and unto every [place] whither thou dost send us, we go;
according to all that we hearkened unto Moses [in], so we hearken unto thee; surely Jehovah thy God is with thee as He hath been with Moses.
Any man who doth provoke thy mouth, and doth not hear thy words, in all that thou dost command him, is put to death; only, be strong and courageous.'
And Joshua son of Nun sendeth from Shittim, two men, spies, silently, saying, 'Go, see the land — and Jericho;' and they go and come into the house of a woman, a harlot, and her name [is] Rahab, and they lie down there.
And it is told to the king of Jericho, saying, 'Lo, men have come in hither to-night, from the sons of Israel, to search the land.
And the king of Jericho sendeth unto Rahab, saying, 'Bring out the men who are coming in unto thee, who have come into thy house, for to search the whole of the land they have come in.
And the woman taketh the two men, and hideth them, and saith thus: 'The men came in unto me, and I have not known whence they [are];
and it cometh to pass — the gate is to [be] shut — in the dark, and the men have gone out; I have not known whither the men have gone; pursue ye, hasten after them, for ye overtake them;'
and she hath caused them to go up on the roof, and hideth them with the flax wood, which is arranged for her on the roof.
And the men have pursued after them the way of the Jordan, by the fords, and the gate they have shut afterwards, when the pursuers have gone out after them.
And — before they lie down — she hath gone up unto them on the roof,
and she saith unto the men, 'I have known that Jehovah hath given to you the land, and that your terror hath fallen upon us, and that all the inhabitants of the land have melted at your presence.
'For we have heard how Jehovah dried up the waters of the Red Sea at your presence, in your going out of Egypt, and that which ye have done to the two kings of the Amorite who [are] beyond the Jordan; to Sihon and to Og whom ye devoted.
And we hear, and melt doth our heart, and there hath not stood any more spirit in [any] man, from your presence, for Jehovah your God, He [is] God in the heavens above, and on the earth beneath.
'And now, swear ye, I pray you, to me by Jehovah — because I have done with you kindness — that ye have done, even ye, kindness with the house of my father, and have given to me a true token,
and have kept alive my father, and my mother, and my brothers, and my sisters, and all that they have, and have delivered our souls from death.'
And the men say to her, 'Our soul for yours — to die; if ye declare not this our matter, then it hath been, in Jehovah's giving to us this land, that we have done with thee kindness and truth.'
And she causeth them to go down by a rope through the window, for her house [is] in the side of the wall, and in the wall she [is] dwelling;
and she saith to them, 'To the mountain go, lest the pursuers come upon you; and ye have been hidden there three days till the turning back of the pursuers, and afterwards ye go on your way.'
And the men say unto her, 'We are acquitted of this thine oath which thou hast caused us to swear:
lo, we are coming into the land, this line of scarlet thread thou dost bind to the window by which thou hast caused us to go down, and thy father, and thy mother, and thy brethren, and all the house of thy father thou dost gather unto thee, to the house;
and it hath been, any one who goeth out from the doors of thy house without, his blood [is] on his head, and we are innocent; and any one who is with thee in the house, his blood [is] on our head, if a hand is on him;
and if thou declare this our matter, then we have been acquitted from thine oath which thou hast caused us to swear.'
And she saith, 'According unto your words, so it [is];' and she sendeth them away, and they go; and she bindeth the scarlet line to the window.
And they go, and come in to the mountain, and abide there three days until the pursuers have turned back; and the pursuers seek in all the way, and have not found.
And the two men turn back, and come down from the hill, and pass over, and come in unto Joshua son of Nun, and recount to him all that hath come upon them;
and they say unto Joshua, 'Surely Jehovah hath given into our hand all the land; and also, all the inhabitants of the land have melted at our presence.'
And Joshua riseth early in the morning, and they journey from Shittim, and come in unto the Jordan, he and all the sons of Israel, and they lodge there before they pass over.
And it cometh to pass, at the end of three days, that the authorities pass over into the midst of the camp,
and command the people, saying, 'When ye see the ark of the covenant of Jehovah your God, and the priests, the Levites, bearing it, then ye journey from your place, and have gone after it;
only, a distance is between you and it, about two thousand cubits by measure; ye do not come near unto it, so that ye know the way in which ye go, for ye have not passed over in the way heretofore.'
And Joshua saith unto the people, 'Sanctify yourselves, for to-morrow doth Jehovah do in your midst wonders.'
And Joshua speaketh unto the priests, saying, 'Take up the ark of the covenant, and pass over before the people;' and they take up the ark of the covenant, and go before the people.
And Jehovah saith unto Joshua, 'This day I begin to make thee great in the eyes of all Israel, so that they know that as I was with Moses I am with thee;
and thou, thou dost command the priests bearing the ark of the covenant, saying, When ye come unto the extremity of the waters of the Jordan — in the Jordan ye stand.'
And Joshua saith unto the sons of Israel, 'Come nigh hither, and hear the words of Jehovah your God;
and Joshua saith, 'By this ye know that the living God [is] in your midst, and He doth certainly dispossess from before you the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Hivite, and the Perizzite, and the Girgashite, and the Amorite, and the Jebusite:
lo, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth is passing over before you into Jordan;
and now, take for you twelve men out of the tribes of Israel, one man — one man for a tribe;
and it hath been, at the resting of the soles of the feet of the priests bearing the ark of Jehovah, Lord of all the earth, in the waters of the Jordan, the waters of the Jordan are cut off — the waters which are coming down from above — and they stand — one heap.'
And it cometh to pass, in the journeying of the people from their tents to pass over the Jordan, and of the priests bearing the ark of the covenant before the people,
and at those bearing the ark coming in unto the Jordan, and the feet of the priests bearing the ark have been dipped in the extremity of the waters (and the Jordan is full over all its banks all the days of harvest) —
that the waters stand; those coming down from above have risen — one heap, very far above Adam the city, which [is] at the side of Zaretan; and those going down by the sea of the plain, the Salt Sea, have been completely cut off; and the people have passed through over-against Jericho;
and the priests bearing the ark of the covenant of Jehovah stand on dry ground in the midst of the Jordan — established, and all Israel are passing over on dry ground till that all the nation hath completed to pass over the Jordan.
And it cometh to pass, when all the nation hath completed to pass over the Jordan, that Jehovah speaketh unto Joshua, saying,
'Take for you out of the people twelve men, one man — one man out of a tribe;
and command ye them, saying, Take up for you from this [place], from the midst of the Jordan, from the established standing-place of the feet of the priests, twelve stones, and ye have removed them over with you, and placed them in the lodging-place in which ye lodge to-night.'
And Joshua calleth unto the twelve men whom he prepared out of the sons of Israel, one man — one man out of a tribe;
and Joshua saith to them, 'Pass over before the ark of Jehovah your God unto the midst of the Jordan and lift up for you each, one stone on his shoulder, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Israel,
so that this is a sign in your midst, when your children ask hereafter, saying, What [are] these stones to you?
that ye have said to them, Because the waters of the Jordan were cut off, at the presence of the ark of the covenant of Jehovah; in its passing over into the Jordan were the waters of the Jordan cut off; and these stones have been for a memorial to the sons of Israel — to the age.'
And the sons of Israel do so as Joshua commanded, and take up twelve stones out of the midst of the Jordan, as Jehovah hath spoken unto Joshua, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Israel, and remove them over with them unto the lodging-place, and place them there,
even the twelve stones hath Joshua raised up out of the midst of the Jordan, the place of the standing of the feet of the priests bearing the ark of the covenant, and they are there unto this day.
And the priests bearing the ark are standing in the midst of the Jordan till the completion of the whole thing which Jehovah commanded Joshua to speak unto the people, according to all that Moses commanded Joshua, and the people haste and pass over.
And it cometh to pass when all the people have completed to pass over, that the ark of Jehovah passeth over, and the priests, in the presence of the people;
and the sons of Reuben, and the sons of Gad, and the half of the tribe of Manasseh, pass over, by fifties, before the sons of Israel, as Moses had spoken unto them;
about forty thousand, armed ones of the host, passed over before Jehovah for battle, unto the plains of Jericho.
On that day hath Jehovah made Joshua great in the eyes of all Israel, and they reverence him, as they reverenced Moses, all days of his life.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Joshua, saying,
'Command the priests bearing the ark of the testimony, and they come up out of the Jordan.'
And Joshua commandeth the priests, saying, 'Come ye up out of the Jordan.'
And it cometh to pass, in the coming up of the priests bearing the ark of the covenant of Jehovah out of the midst of the Jordan — the soles of the feet of the priests have been drawn up into the dry ground — and the waters of the Jordan turn back to their place, and go as heretofore over all its banks.
And the people have come up out of the Jordan on the tenth of the first month, and encamp in Gilgal, in the extremity east of Jericho;
and these twelve stones, which they have taken out of the Jordan, hath Joshua raised up in Gilgal.
And he speaketh unto the sons of Israel, saying, 'When your sons ask their fathers hereafter, saying, What [are] these stones?
then ye have caused your sons to know, saying, On dry land Israel passed over this Jordan;
because Jehovah your God dried up the waters of the Jordan at your presence, till your passing over, as Jehovah your God did to the Red Sea which He dried up at our presence till our passing over;
so that all the people of the land do know the hand of Jehovah that it [is] strong, so that ye have reverenced Jehovah your God all the days.'
And it cometh to pass when all the kings of the Amorite which [are] beyond the Jordan, towards the sea, and all the kings of the Canaanite which [are] by the sea, hear how that Jehovah hath dried up the waters of the Jordan at the presence of the sons of Israel till their passing over, that their heart is melted, and there hath not been in them any more spirit because of the presence of the sons of Israel.
At that time said Jehovah unto Joshua, 'Make for thee knives of flint, and turn back, circumcise the sons of Israel a second time;'
and Joshua maketh for him knives of flint, and circumciseth the sons of Israel at the height of the foreskins.
And this [is] the thing [for] which Joshua circumciseth [them]: all the people who are coming out of Egypt, who are males, all the men of war have died in the wilderness, in the way, in their coming out of Egypt,
for all the people who are coming out were circumcised, and all the people who [are] born in the wilderness, in the way, in their coming out from Egypt, they have not circumcised;
for forty years have the sons of Israel gone in the wilderness, till all the nation of the men of war who are coming out of Egypt, who hearkened not to the voice of Jehovah, to whom Jehovah hath sworn not to show them the land which Jehovah sware to their fathers to give to us, a land flowing with milk and honey, are consumed;
and their sons He raised up in their stead, them hath Joshua circumcised, for they have been uncircumcised, for they have not circumcised them in the way.
And it cometh to pass when all the nation have completed to be circumcised, that they abide in their places in the camp till their recovering;
and Jehovah saith unto Joshua, 'To-day I have rolled the reproach of Egypt from off you;' and [one] calleth the name of that place Gilgal unto this day.
And the sons of Israel encamp in Gilgal, and make the passover on the fourteenth day of the month, at evening, in the plains of Jericho;
and they eat of the old corn of the land on the morrow of the passover, unleavened things and roasted [corn], in this self-same day;
and the manna doth cease on the morrow in their eating of the old corn of the land, and there hath been no more manna to the sons of Israel, and they eat of the increase of the land of Canaan in that year.
And it cometh to pass in Joshua's being by Jericho, that he lifteth up his eyes, and looketh, and lo, one standing over-against him, and his drawn sword in his hand, and Joshua goeth unto him, and saith to him, 'Art thou for us or for our adversaries?'
And He saith, 'No, for I [am] Prince of Jehovah's host; now I have come;' and Joshua falleth on his face to the earth, and doth obeisance, and saith to Him, 'What is my Lord speaking unto His servant?'
And the Prince of Jehovah's host saith unto Joshua, 'Cast off thy shoe from off thy foot, for the place on which thou art standing is holy;' and Joshua doth so;
(And Jericho shutteth itself up, and is shut up, because of the presence of the sons of Israel — none going out, and none coming in;)
And Jehovah saith unto Joshua, 'See, I have given into thy hand Jericho and its king — mighty ones of valour,
and ye have compassed the city — all the men of battle — going round the city once; thus thou dost six days;
and seven priests do bear seven trumpets of the jubilee before the ark, and on the seventh day ye compass the city seven times, and the priests blow with the trumpets,
and it hath been, in the prolongation of the horn of the jubilee, in your hearing the voice of the trumpet, all the people shout — a great shout, and the wall of the city hath fallen under it, and the people have gone up, each over-against him.'
And Joshua son of Nun calleth unto the priests, and saith unto them, 'Bear ye the ark of the covenant, and seven priests do bear seven trumpets of the jubilee before the ark of Jehovah;'
and He said unto the people, 'Pass over, and compass the city, and he who is armed doth pass over before the ark of Jehovah.'
And it cometh to pass, when Joshua speaketh unto the people, that the seven priests bearing seven trumpets of the jubilee before Jehovah have passed over and blown with the trumpets, and the ark of the covenant of Jehovah is going after them;
and he who is armed is going before the priests blowing the trumpets, and he who is gathering up is going after the ark, going on and blowing with the trumpets;
and the people hath Joshua commanded, saying, 'Ye do not shout, nor cause your voice to be heard, nor doth there go out from your mouth a word, till the day of my saying unto you, Shout ye — then ye have shouted.'
And the ark of Jehovah doth compass the city, going round once, and they come into the camp, and lodge in the camp.
And Joshua riseth early in the morning, and the priests bear the ark of Jehovah,
and seven priests bearing seven trumpets of the jubilee before the ark of Jehovah are walking, going on, and they have blown with the trumpets — and he who is armed is going before them, and he who is gathering up is going behind the ark of Jehovah — going on and blowing with the trumpets.
And they compass the city on the second day once, and turn back to the camp; thus they have done six days.
And it cometh to pass, on the seventh day, that they rise early, at the ascending of the dawn, and compass the city, according to this manner, seven times; (only, on that day they have compassed the city seven times);
and it cometh to pass, at the seventh time, the priests have blown with the trumpets, and Joshua saith unto the people, 'Shout ye, for Jehovah hath given to you the city;
and the city hath been devoted, it and all that [is] in it, to Jehovah; only Rahab the harlot doth live, she and all who [are] with her in the house, for she hid the messengers whom we sent;
and surely ye have kept from the devoted thing, lest ye devote [yourselves], and have taken from the devoted thing, and have made the camp of Israel become a devoted thing, and have troubled it;
and all the silver and gold, and vessels of brass and iron, holy they [are] to Jehovah; into the treasury of Jehovah they come.'
And the people shout, and blow with the trumpets, and it cometh to pass when the people hear the voice of the trumpet, that the people shout — a great shout, and the wall falleth under it, and the people goeth up into the city, each over-against him, and they capture the city;
and they devote all that [is] in the city, from man even unto woman, from young even unto aged, even unto ox, and sheep, and ass, by the mouth of the sword.
And to the two men who are spying the land Joshua said, 'Go into the house of the woman, the harlot, and bring out thence the woman, and all whom she hath, as ye have sworn to her.'
And the young man, the spies, go in and bring out Rahab, and her father, and her mother, and her brethren, and all whom she hath; yea, all her families they have brought out, and place them at the outside of the camp of Israel.
And the city they have burnt with fire, and all that [is] in it; only, the silver and the gold, and the vessels of brass, and of iron, they have given [to] the treasury of the house of Jehovah;
and Rahab the harlot, and the house of her father, and all whom she hath, hath Joshua kept alive; and she dwelleth in the midst of Israel unto this day, for she hid the messengers whom Joshua sent to spy out Jericho.
And Joshua adjureth [them] at that time, saying, 'Cursed [is] the man before Jehovah who raiseth up and hath built this city, [even] Jericho; in his first-born he doth lay its foundation, and in his youngest he doth set up its doors;'
and Jehovah is with Joshua, and his fame is in all the land.
And the sons of Israel commit a trespass in the devoted thing, and Achan, son of Carmi, son of Zabdi, son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, taketh of the devoted thing, and the anger of Jehovah burneth against the sons of Israel.
And Joshua sendeth men from Jericho to Ai, which [is] near Beth-Aven, on the east of Bethel, and speaketh unto them, saying, 'Go up and spy the land;' and the men go up and spy Ai,
and they turn back unto Joshua, and say unto him, 'Let not all the people go up; let about two thousand men, or about three thousand men, go up, and they smite Ai; cause not all the people to labour thither; for they [are] few.'
And there go up of the people thither about three thousand men, and they flee before the men of Ai,
and the men of Ai smite of them about thirty and six men, and pursue them before the gate unto Shebarim, and they smite them in Morad; and the heart of the people is melted, and becometh water.
And Joshua rendeth his garments, and falleth on his face to the earth before the ark of Jehovah till the evening, he and the elders of Israel, and they cause dust to go up on their head.
And Joshua saith, 'Ah, Lord Jehovah, why hast Thou at all caused this people to pass over the Jordan, to give us into the hand of the Amorite to destroy us? — and oh that we had been willing — and we dwell beyond the Jordan!
Oh, Lord, what do I say, after that Israel hath turned the neck before its enemies?
and the Canaanite and all the inhabitants of the land do hear, and have come round against us, and cut off our name out of the earth; and what dost Thou do for Thy great name?'
And Jehovah saith unto Joshua, 'Rise for thee, why [is] this? — thou [art] falling on thy face?
Israel hath sinned, and also they have transgressed My covenant which I commanded them, and also taken of the devoted thing, and also stolen, and also deceived, and also put [it] among their vessels,
and the sons of Israel have not been able to stand before their enemies; the neck they turn before their enemies, for they have become a devoted thing; I add not to be with you — if ye destroy not the devoted thing out of your midst.
'Rise, sanctify the people, and thou hast said, Sanctify yourselves for to-morrow; for thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, A devoted thing [is] in thy midst, O Israel, thou art not able to stand before thine enemies till your turning aside of the devoted thing out of your midst;
and ye have been brought near in the morning by your tribes, and it hath been, the tribe which Jehovah doth capture doth draw near by families, and the family which Jehovah doth capture doth draw near by households, and the household which Jehovah doth capture doth draw near by men;
and it hath been, he who is captured with the devoted thing is burnt with fire, he and all that he hath, because he hath transgressed the covenant of Jehovah, and because he hath done folly in Israel.'
And Joshua riseth early in the morning, and bringeth Israel near by its tribes, and the tribe of Judah is captured;
and he bringeth near the family of Judah, and he captureth the family of the Zarhite; and he bringeth near the family of the Zarhite by men, and Zabdi is captured;
and he bringeth near his household by men, and Achan — son of Carmi, son of Zabdi, son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah — is captured.
And Joshua saith unto Achan, 'My son, put, I pray thee, honour on Jehovah, God of Israel, and give to Him thanks, and declare, I pray thee, to me, what thou hast done — hide not from me.'
And Achan answereth Joshua, and saith, 'Truly I have sinned against Jehovah, God of Israel, and thus and thus I have done;
and I see among the spoil a goodly robe of Shinar, and two hundred shekels of silver, and one wedge of gold, whose weight [is] fifty shekels, and I desire them, and take them; and lo, they [are] hid in the earth, in the midst of my tent, and the silver under it.'
And Joshua sendeth messengers, and they run unto the tent, and lo, it is hidden in his tent, and the silver under it;
and they take them out of the midst of the tent, and bring them in unto Joshua, and unto all the sons of Israel, and pour them out before Jehovah.
And Joshua taketh Achan son of Zerah, and the silver, and the robe, and the wedge of gold, and his sons, and his daughters, and his ox, and his ass, and his flock, and his tent, and all that he hath, and all Israel with him, and they cause them to go up the valley of Achor.
And Joshua saith, 'What! thou hast troubled us! — Jehovah doth trouble thee this day;' and all Israel cast stones at him, and they burn them with fire, and they stone them with stones,
and they raise up over him a great heap of stones unto this day, and Jehovah turneth back from the heat of His anger, therefore hath [one] called the name of that place 'Valley of Achor' till this day.
And Jehovah saith unto Joshua, 'Fear not, nor be affrighted, take with thee all the people of war, and rise, go up to Ai; see, I have given into thy hand the king of Ai, and his people, and his city, and his land,
and thou hast done to Ai and to her king as thou hast done to Jericho and to her king; only, its spoil and its cattle ye spoil for yourselves; set for thee an ambush for the city at its rear.'
And Joshua riseth, and all the people of war, to go up to Ai, and Joshua chooseth thirty thousand men, mighty ones of valour, and sendeth them away by night,
and commandeth them, saying, 'See, ye are liers in wait against the city, at the rear of the city, ye go not very far off from the city, and all of you have been prepared,
and I and all the people who [are] with me draw near unto the city, and it hath come to pass when they come out to meet us as at the first, and we have fled before them,
and they have come out after us till we have drawn them out of the city, for they say, They are fleeing before us as at the first, and we have fled before them,
and ye rise from the ambush, and have occupied the city, and Jehovah your God hath given it into your hand;
and it hath been, when ye capture the city, ye burn the city with fire, according to the word of Jehovah ye do, see, I have commanded you.'
And Joshua sendeth them away, and they go unto the ambush, and abide between Bethel and Ai, on the west of Ai; and Joshua lodgeth on that night in the midst of the people.
And Joshua riseth early in the morning, and inspecteth the people, and goeth up, he and the elders of Israel, before the people to Ai;
and all the people of war who [are] with him have gone up, and draw nigh and come in over-against the city, and encamp on the north of Ai; and the valley [is] between him and Ai.
And he taketh about five thousand men, and setteth them an ambush between Bethel and Ai, on the west of the city;
and they set the people, all the camp which [is] on the north of the city, and its rear on the west of the city, and Joshua goeth on that night into the midst of the valley.
And it cometh to pass, when the king of Ai seeth [it], that hasten, and rise early, and go out do the men of the city to meet Israel for battle, he and all his people, at the appointed season, at the front of the plain, and he hath not known that an ambush [is] against him, on the rear of the city.
And Joshua and all Israel [seem] stricken before them, and flee the way of the wilderness,
and all the people who [are] in the city are called to pursue after them, and they pursue after Joshua, and are drawn away out of the city,
and there hath not been left a man in Ai and Bethel who hath not gone out after Israel, and they leave the city open, and pursue after Israel.
And Jehovah saith unto Joshua, 'Stretch out with the javelin which [is] in thy hand towards Ai, for into thy hand I give it;' and Joshua stretcheth out with the javelin which [is] in his hand toward the city,
and the ambush hath risen [with] haste, out of its place, and they run at the stretching out of his hand, and go into the city, and capture it, and hasten, and burn the city with fire.
And the men of Ai look behind them, and see, and lo, the smoke of the city hath gone up unto the heavens, and there hath not been in them power to flee hither and thither — and the people who are fleeing to the wilderness have turned against the pursuer, —
and Joshua and all Israel have seen that the ambush hath captured the city, and that the smoke of the city hath gone up, and they turn back and smite the men of Ai;
and these have come out from the city to meet them, and they are in the midst of Israel, some on this side, and some on that, and they smite them till he hath not left to them a remnant and escaped one;
and the king of Ai they caught alive, and bring him near unto Joshua.
And it cometh to pass, at Israel's finishing to slay all the inhabitants of Ai in the field, in the wilderness in which they pursued them (and they fall all of them by the mouth of the sword till their consumption), that all Israel turn back to Ai, and smite it by the mouth of the sword;
and all who fall during the day, of men and of women, are twelve thousand — all men of Ai.
And Joshua hath not brought back his hand which he stretched out with the javelin till that he hath devoted all the inhabitants of Ai;
only, the cattle and the spoil of that city have Israel spoiled for themselves, according to the word of Jehovah which He commanded Joshua.
And Joshua burneth Ai, and maketh it a heap age-during — a desolation unto this day;
and the king of Ai he hath hanged on the tree till even-time, and at the going in of the sun hath Joshua commanded, and they take down his carcase from the tree, and cast it unto the opening of the gate of the city, and raise over it a great heap of stones till this day.
Then doth Joshua build an altar to Jehovah, God of Israel, in mount Ebal,
as Moses, servant of Jehovah, commanded the sons of Israel, as it is written in the book of the law of Moses — an altar of whole stones, over which he hath not waved iron — and they cause to go up upon it burnt-offerings to Jehovah, and sacrifice peace-offerings;
and he writeth there on the stones the copy of the law of Moses, which he hath written in the presence of the sons of Israel.
And all Israel, and its elders, and authorities, and its judges, are standing on this side and on that of the ark, over-against the priests, the Levites, bearing the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, as well the sojourner as the native, half of them over-against mount Gerizim, and the half of them over-against mount Ebal, as Moses servant of Jehovah commanded to bless the people of Israel at the first.
And afterwards he hath proclaimed all the words of the law, the blessing and the reviling, according to all that is written in the book of the law;
there hath not been a thing of all that Moses commanded which Joshua hath not proclaimed before all the assembly of Israel, and the women, and the infants, and the sojourner who is going in their midst.
And it cometh to pass, when all the kings who [are] beyond the Jordan, in the hill-country, and in the low-country, and in every haven of the great sea, over-against Lebanon, the Hittite, and the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, hear —
that they gather themselves together to fight with Joshua, and with Israel — one mouth.
And the inhabitants of Gibeon have heard that which Joshua hath done to Jericho and to Ai,
and they work, even they, with subtilty, and go, and feign to be ambassadors, and take old sacks for their asses, and wine-bottles, old, and rent, and bound up,
and sandals, old and patched, on their feet, and old garments upon them, and all the bread of their provision is dry — it was crumbs.
And they go unto Joshua, unto the camp at Gilgal, and say unto him, and unto the men of Israel, 'From a land far off we have come, and now, make with us a covenant;'
and the men of Israel say unto the Hivite, 'It may be in our midst ye are dwelling, and how do we make with thee a covenant?'
and they say unto Joshua, 'Thy servants we [are].' And Joshua saith unto them, 'Who [are] ye? and whence come ye?'
And they say unto him, 'From a land very far off have thy servants come, for the name of Jehovah thy God, for we have heard His fame, and all that He hath done in Egypt,
and all that He hath done to the two kings of the Amorite who [are] beyond the Jordan, to Sihon king of Heshbon, and to Og king of Bashan, who [is] in Ashtaroth.
'And our elders, and all the inhabitants of our land speak unto us, saying, Take in your hand provision for the way, and go to meet them, and ye have said unto them, Your servants we [are], and now, make with us a covenant;
this our bread — hot we provided ourselves with it out of our houses, on the day of our coming out to go unto you, and now, lo, it is dry, and hath been crumbs;
and these [are] the wine-bottles which we filled, new, and lo, they have rent; and these, our garments and our sandals, have become old, from the exceeding greatness of the way.'
And the men take of their provision, and the mouth of Jehovah have not asked;
and Joshua maketh with them peace, and maketh with them a covenant, to keep them alive; and swear to them do the princes of the company.
And it cometh to pass, at the end of three days after that they have made with them a covenant, that they hear that they [are] their neighbours — that in their midst they are dwelling.
And the sons of Israel journey and come in unto their cities on the third day — and their cities [are] Gibeon, and Chephirah, and Beeroth, and Kirjath-Jearim —
and the sons of Israel have not smitten them, for sworn to them have the princes of the company by Jehovah God of Israel, and all the company murmur against the princes.
And all the princes say unto all the company, 'We — we have sworn to them by Jehovah, God of Israel; and now, we are not able to come against them;
this we do to them, and have kept them alive, and wrath is not upon us, because of the oath which we have sworn to them.'
And the princes say unto them, 'They live, and are hewers of wood and drawers of water for all the company, as the princes spake to them.'
And Joshua calleth for them, and speaketh unto them, saying, 'Why have ye deceived us, saying, We are very far from you, and ye in our midst dwelling?
and now, cursed are ye, and none of you is cut off [from being] a servant, even hewers of wood and drawers of water, for the house of my God.'
And they answer Joshua and say, 'Because it was certainly declared to thy servants, that Jehovah thy God commanded Moses His servant to give to you all the land, and to destroy all the inhabitants of the land from before you; and we fear greatly for ourselves because of you, and we do this thing;
and now, lo, we [are] in thy hand, as [it is] good, and as [it is] right in thine eyes to do to us — do.'
And he doth to them so, and delivereth them from the hand of the sons of Israel, and they have not slain them;
and Joshua maketh them on that day hewers of wood and drawers of water for the company, and for the altar of Jehovah, unto this day, at the place which He doth choose.
And it cometh to pass, when Adoni-Zedek king of Jerusalem heareth that Joshua hath captured Ai, and doth devote it (as he had done to Jericho and to her king so he hath done to Ai and to her king), and that the inhabitants of Gibeon have made peace with Israel, and are in their midst, —
that they are greatly afraid, because Gibeon [is] a great city, as one of the royal cities, and because it [is] greater than Ai, and all its men — heroes.
And Adoni-Zedek king of Jerusalem sendeth unto Hoham king of Hebron, and unto Piram king of Jarmuth, and unto Japhia king of Lachish, and unto Debir king of Eglon, saying,
'Come up unto me, and help me, and we smite Gibeon, for it hath made peace with Joshua, and with the sons of Israel.'
And five kings of the Amorite (the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, the king of Eglon) are gathered together, and go up, they and all their camps, and encamp against Gibeon, and fight against it.
And the men of Gibeon send unto Joshua, unto the camp at Gilgal, saying, 'Let not thy hand cease from thy servants; come up unto us [with] haste, and give safety to us, and help us; for all the kings of the Amorite, dwelling in the hill-country, have been assembled against us.'
And Joshua goeth up from Gilgal, he, and all the people of war with him, even all the mighty men of valour.
And Jehovah saith unto Joshua, 'Be not afraid of them, for into thy hand I have given them, there doth not stand a man of them in thy presence.'
And Joshua cometh in unto them suddenly (all the night he hath gone up from Gilgal),
and Jehovah doth crush them before Israel, and it smiteth them — a great smiting — at Gibeon, and pursueth them the way of the ascent of Beth-Horon, and smiteth them unto Azekah, and unto Makkedah.
And it cometh to pass, in their fleeing from the face of Israel — they [are] in the descent of Beth-Horon — and Jehovah hath cast upon them great stones out of the heavens, unto Azekah, and they die; more are they who have died by the hailstones than they whom the sons of Israel have slain by the sword.
Then speaketh Joshua to Jehovah in the day of Jehovah's giving up the Amorites before the sons of Israel, and he saith, before the eyes of Israel, 'Sun — in Gibeon stand still; and moon — in the valley of Ajalon;'
and the sun standeth still, and the moon hath stood — till the nation taketh vengeance [on] its enemies; is it not written on the Book of the Upright, 'and the sun standeth in the midst of the heavens, and hath not hasted to go in — as a perfect day?'
And there hath not been like that day before it or after it, for Jehovah's hearkening to the voice of a man; for Jehovah is fighting for Israel.
And Joshua turneth back, and all Israel with him, unto the camp at Gilgal.
And these five kings flee, and are hidden in a cave at Makkedah,
and it is declared to Joshua, saying, 'The five kings have been found hidden in a cave at Makkedah.'
And Joshua saith, 'Roll great stones unto the mouth of the cave, and appoint over it men to watch them;
and ye, stand not, pursue after your enemies, and ye have smitten the hindmost of them; suffer them not to go in unto their cities, for Jehovah your God hath given them into your hand.'
And it cometh to pass, when Joshua and the sons of Israel finish to smite them — a very great smiting, till they are consumed, and the remnant who have remained of them go in unto the fenced cities,
that all the people turn back to the camp, unto Joshua, [at] Makkedah, in peace; none moved sharply his tongue against the sons of Israel.
And Joshua saith, 'Open ye the mouth of the cave, and bring out unto me these five kings from the cave;'
and they do so, and bring out unto him these five kings from the cave: the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, the king of Eglon.
And it cometh to pass, when they bring out these kings unto Joshua, that Joshua calleth unto every man of Israel, and saith unto the captains of the men of war, who have gone with him, 'Draw near, set your feet on the necks of these kings;' and they draw near, and set their feet on their necks.
And Joshua saith unto them, 'Fear not, nor be affrighted; be strong and courageous; for thus doth Jehovah do to all your enemies with whom ye are fighting;'
and Joshua smiteth them afterwards, and putteth them to death, and hangeth them on five trees; and they are hanging on the trees till the evening.
And it cometh to pass, at the time of the going in of the sun, Joshua hath commanded, and they take them down from off the trees, and cast them unto the cave where they had been hid, and put great stones on the mouth of the cave till this very day.
And Makkedah hath Joshua captured on that day, and he smiteth it by the mouth of the sword, and its king he hath devoted, them and every person who [is] in it — he hath not left a remnant; and he doth to the king of Makkedah as he did to the king of Jericho.
And Joshua passeth over, and all Israel with him, from Makkedah [to] Libnah, and fighteth with Libnah;
and Jehovah giveth also it into the hand of Israel, and its king, and it smiteth it by the mouth of the sword, and every person who [is] in it — it left not in it a remnant; and it doth to its king as it did to the king of Jericho.
And Joshua passeth over, and all Israel with him, from Libnah to Lachish, and encampeth against it, and fighteth against it;
And Jehovah giveth Lachish into the hand of Israel, and it captureth it on the second day, and smiteth it by the mouth of the sword, and every person who [is] in it, according to all that it did to Libnah.
Than hath Horam king of Gezer come up to help Lachish, and Joshua smiteth him and his people, till he hath not left to him a remnant.
And Joshua passeth over, and all Israel with him, from Lachish to Eglon, and they encamp against it, and fight against it,
and capture it on that day, and smite it by the mouth of the sword, and every person who [is] in it on that day he hath devoted, according to all that he did to Lachish.
And Joshua goeth up, and all Israel with him, from Eglon to Hebron, and they fight against it,
and capture it, and smite it by the mouth of the sword, and its king, and all its cities, and every person who [is] in it — he hath not left a remnant — according to all that he did to Eglon — and doth devote it, and every person who [is] in it.
And Joshua turneth back, and all Israel with him, to Debir, and fighteth against it,
and captureth it, and its king, and all its cities, and they smite them by the mouth of the sword, and devote every person who [is] in it — he hath not left a remnant; as he did to Hebron so he did to Debir, and to its king, and as he did to Libnah, and to its king.
And Joshua smiteth all the land of the hill-country, and of the south, and of the low-country, and of the springs, and all their kings — he hath not left a remnant, and all that doth breathe he hath devoted, as Jehovah, God of Israel, commanded.
And Joshua smiteth them from Kadesh-Barnea, even unto Gaza, and all the land of Goshen, even unto Gibeon;
and all these kings and their land hath Joshua captured [at] one time, for Jehovah, God of Israel, is fighting for Israel.
and Joshua turneth back, and all Israel with him, unto the camp at Gilgal.
And it cometh to pass when Jabin king of Hazor heareth, that he sendeth unto Jobab king of Madon, and unto the king of Shimron, and unto the king of Achshaph,
and unto the kings who [are] on the north in the hill-country, and in the plain south of Chinneroth, and in the low country, and in the elevations of Dor, on the west,
[to] the Canaanite on the east, and on the west, and the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite in the hill-country, and the Hivite under Hermon, in the land of Mizpeh —
and they go out, they and all their camps with them, a people numerous, as the sand which [is] on the sea-shore for multitude, and horse and charioteer very many;
and all these kings are met together, and they come and encamp together at the waters of Merom, to fight with Israel.
And Jehovah saith unto Joshua, 'Be not afraid of their presence, for to-morrow about this time I am giving all of them wounded before Israel; their horses thou dost hough, and their chariots burn with fire.'
And Joshua cometh, and all the people of war with him, against them by the waters of Merom suddenly, and they fall on them;
and Jehovah giveth them into the hand of Israel, and they smite them and pursue them unto the great Zidon, and unto Misrephoth-Maim, and unto the valley of Mizpeh eastward, and they smite them, till he hath not left to them a remnant;
and Joshua doth to them as Jehovah said to him; their horses he hath houghed, and their chariots burnt with fire.
And Joshua turneth back at that time, and captureth Hazor, and its king he hath smitten by the sword; for Hazor formerly [is] head of all these kingdoms;
and they smite every person who [is] in it by the mouth of the sword; he hath devoted — he hath not left any one breathing, and Hazor he hath burnt with fire;
and all the cities of these kings, and all their kings, hath Joshua captured, and he smiteth them by the mouth of the sword; he devoted them, as Moses, servant of Jehovah, commanded.
Only, all the cities which are standing by their hill, Israel hath not burned them, save Hazor only, [it] hath Joshua burnt;
and all the spoil of these cities, and the cattle, have the sons of Israel spoiled for themselves; only, every human being they have smitten by the mouth of the sword, till their destroying them; they have not left any one breathing.
As Jehovah commanded Moses His servant, so did Moses command Joshua, and so hath Joshua done; he hath not turned aside a thing of all that Jehovah commanded Moses.
And Joshua taketh all this land: the hill-country, and all the south, and all the land of Goshen, and the low country, and the plain, even the hill-country of Israel and its low lands,
from the mount of Halak, which is going up [to] Seir, and unto Baal-Gad, in the valley of Lebanon, under mount Hermon; and all their kings he hath captured, and he smiteth them, and putteth them to death.
Many days hath Joshua made with all these kings war;
there hath not been a city which made peace with the sons of Israel save the Hivite, inhabitants of Gibeon; the whole they have taken in battle;
for from Jehovah it hath been to strengthen their heart, to meet in battle with Israel, in order to devote them, so that they have no grace, but in order to destroy them, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And Joshua cometh at that time, and cutteth off the Anakim from the hill-country, from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, even from all the hill-country of Judah, and from all the hill-country of Israel; with their cities hath Joshua devoted them.
There hath not been left Anakim in the land of the sons of Israel; only in Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod, were they left.
And Joshua taketh the whole of the land, according to all that Jehovah hath spoken unto Moses, and Joshua giveth it for an inheritance to Israel according to their divisions, by their tribes; and the land hath rest from war.
And these [are] kings of the land whom the sons of Israel have smitten, and possess their land, beyond the Jordan, at the sun-rising, from the brook Arnon unto mount Hermon, and all the plain eastward.
Sihon, king of the Amorite, who is dwelling in Heshbon, ruling from Aroer which [is] on the border of the brook Arnon, and the middle of the brook, and half of Gilead, and unto Jabok the brook, the border of the Bene-Ammon;
And the plain unto the sea of Chinneroth eastward, and unto the sea of the plain (the salt sea) eastward, the way to Beth-Jeshimoth, and from the south under the springs of Pisgah.
And the border of Og king of Bashan (of the remnant of the Rephaim), who is dwelling in Ashtaroth and in Edrei,
and ruling in mount Hermon, and in Salcah, and in all Bashan, unto the border of the Geshurite, and the Maachathite, and the half of Gilead, the border of Sihon king of Heshbon.
Moses, servant of Jehovah, and the sons of Israel have smitten them, and Moses, servant of Jehovah, giveth it — a possession to the Reubenite, and to the Gadite, and to the half of the tribe of Manasseh.
And these [are] kings of the land whom Joshua and the sons of Israel have smitten beyond the Jordan westward, from Baal-Gad, in the valley of Lebanon, and unto the mount of Halak, which is going up to Seir; and Joshua giveth it to the tribes of Israel — a possession according to their divisions;
in the hill-country, and in the low country, and in the plain, and in the springs, and in the wilderness, and in the south; the Hittite, the Amorite, and the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite:
The king of Jericho, one; The king of Ai, which [is] beside Bethel, one;
The king of Jerusalem, one; The king of Hebron, one;
The king of Jarmuth, one; The king of Lachish, one;
The king of Eglon, one; The king of Gezer, one;
The king of Debir, one; The king of Geder, one;
The king of Hormah, one; The king of Arad, one;
The king of Libnah, one; The king of Adullam, one;
The king of Mekkedah, one; The king of Beth-El, one;
The king of Tappuah, one; The king of Hepher, one;
The king of Aphek, one; The king of Lasharon, one;
The king of Madon, one; The king of Hazor, one;
The king of Shimron-Meron, one; The king of Achshaph, one;
The king of Taanach, one; The king of Megiddo, one;
The king of Kedesh, one; The king of Jokneam of Carmel, one;
The king of Dor, at the elevation of Dor, one; The king of the Goyim of Gilgal, one;
The king of Tirzah, one; all the kings [are] thirty and one.
And Joshua is old, entering into days, and Jehovah saith unto him, 'Thou hast become aged, thou hast entered into days; as to the land, very much hath been left to possess.
'This [is] the land that is left; all the circuits of the Philistines, and all Geshuri,
from Sihor which [is] on the front of Egypt, and unto the border of Ekron northward, to the Canaanite it is reckoned, five princes of the Philistines, the Gazathite, and the Ashdothite, the Eshkalonite, the Gittite, and the Ekronite, also the Avim.
'From the south, all the land of the Canaanite, and Mearah, which [is] to the Sidonians, unto Aphek, unto the border of the Amorite;
and the land of the Giblite, and all Lebanon, at the sun-rising, from Baal-Gad under mount Hermon, unto the going in to Hamath:
all the inhabitants of the hill-country, from Lebanon unto Misrephoth-Maim, all the Sidonians: I — I dispossess them before the sons of Israel; only, cause it to fall to Israel for an inheritance, as I have commanded thee.
'And now, apportion this land for an inheritance to the nine tribes, and the half of the tribe of Manasseh,' —
with it the Reubenite, and the Gadite, have received their inheritance, which Moses hath given to them beyond the Jordan eastward, as Moses servant of Jehovah hath given to them;
from Aroer, which [is] on the edge of the brook Arnon, and the city which [is] in the midst of the brook, and all the plain of Medeba unto Dihon,
and all the cities of Sihon king of the Amorite, who reigned in Heshbon, unto the border of the Bene-Ammon,
and Gilead, and the border of the Geshurite, and of the Maachathite, and all mount Hermon, and all Bashan unto Salcah;
all the kingdom of Og in Bashan, who reigned in Ashtaroth and in Edrei; he was left of the remnant of the Rephaim, and Moses doth smite them, and dispossess them;
and the sons of Israel dispossessed not the Geshurite, and the Maachathite; and Geshur and Maachath dwell in the midst of Israel unto this day.
Only, to the tribe of Levi he hath not given an inheritance; fire-offerings of Jehovah, God of Israel, is its inheritance, as He hath spoken to it.
And Moses giveth to the tribe of the sons of Reuben, for their families;
and the border is to them from Aroer, which [is] on the edge of the brook Arnon, and the city which [is] in the midst of the brook, and all the plain by Medeba,
Heshbon, and all its cities which [are] in the plain, Dibon, and Bamoth-Baal, and Beth-Baal-Meon,
and Jahazah, and Kedemoth, and Mephaath,
and Kirjathaim, and Sibmah, and Zareth-Shahar, in the mount of the valley,
and Beth-Peor, and the springs of Pisgah, and Beth-Jeshimoth,
and all the cities of the plain, and all the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorite, who reigned in Heshbon, whom Moses smote, with the princes of Midian, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, princes of Sihon, inhabitants of the land.
And Balaam, son of Beor, the diviner, have the sons of Israel slain with the sword, among their wounded ones.
And the border of the sons of Reuben is the Jordan, and [its] border; this [is] the inheritance of the sons of Reuben, for their families, the cities and their villages.
And Moses giveth to the tribe of Gad, to the sons of Gad, for their families;
and the border is to them Jazer, and all the cities of Gilead, and the half of the land of the Bene-Ammon, unto Aroer which [is] on the front of Rabbah,
and from Heshbon unto Ramath-Mispeh, and Betonim, and from Mahanaim unto the border of Debir,
and in the valley, Beth-Aram, and Beth-Nimrah, and Succoth, and Zaphon, the rest of the kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon, the Jordan and [its] border, unto the extremity of the sea of Chinnereth, beyond the Jordan, eastward.
This [is] the inheritance of the sons of Gad, for their families, the cities and their villages.
And Moses giveth to the half of the tribe of Manasseh; and it is to the half of the tribe of the sons of Manasseh, for their families.
And their border is from Mahanaim, all Bashan, all the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, and all the small towns of Jair, which [are] in Bashan, sixty cities;
and the half of Gilead, and Ashteroth, and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan, [are] to the sons of Machir, son of Manasseh, to the half of the sons of Machir, for their families.
These [are] they whom Moses caused to inherit in the plains of Moab, beyond the Jordan, [by] Jericho, eastward;
and to the tribe of Levi Moses gave not an inheritance; Jehovah, God of Israel, Himself [is] their inheritance, as He hath spoken to them.
And these [are] they [of] the sons of Israel who inherited in the land of Canaan, whom Eleazar the priest, and Joshua son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the sons of Israel, caused to inherit;
by lot [is] their inheritance, as Jehovah commanded by the hand of Moses, for the nine of the tribes, and the half of the tribe;
for Moses hath given the inheritance of two of the tribes, and of half of the tribe, beyond the Jordan, and to the Levites he hath not given an inheritance in their midst;
for the sons of Joseph hath been two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim, and they have not given a portion to the Levites in the land, except cities to dwell in, and their suburbs for their cattle, and for their possessions;
as Jehovah commanded Moses, so have the sons of Israel done, and they apportion the land.
And the sons of Judah come nigh unto Joshua in Gilgal, and Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenezzite saith unto him, 'Thou hast known the word that Jehovah hath spoken unto Moses the man of God, concerning me and concerning thee in Kadesh-Barnea:
a son of forty years [am] I in Moses, servant of Jehovah, sending me from Kadesh-Barnea, to spy the land, and I bring him back word as with my heart;
and my brethren who have gone up with me have caused the heart of the people to melt, and I have been fully after Jehovah my God;
and Moses sweareth in that day, saying, If not — the land on which thy foot hath trodden, to thee it is for inheritance, and to thy sons — to the age, for thou hast been fully after Jehovah my God.
'And, now, lo, Jehovah hath kept me alive, as He hath spoken, these forty and five years, since Jehovah spake this word unto Moses, when Israel went in the wilderness; and now, lo, I [am] to-day a son of five and eighty years;
yet [am] I to-day strong as in the day of Moses' sending me; as my power then, so [is] my power now, for battle, and to go out, and to come in.
'And now, give to me this hill-country, of which Jehovah spake in that day, for thou didst hear in that day, for Anakim [are] there, and cities, great, fenced; if so be Jehovah [is] with me, then I have dispossessed them, as Jehovah hath spoken.'
And Joshua blesseth him, and giveth Hebron to Caleb son of Jephunneh for an inheritance,
therefore hath Hebron been to Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenezzite for an inheritance unto this day, because that he was fully after Jehovah, God of Israel;
and the name of Hebron formerly [is] Kirjath-Arba (he [is] the great man among the Anakim); and the land hath rest from war.
And the lot for the tribe of the sons of Judah, for their families, is unto the border of Edom; the wilderness of Zin southward, at the extremity of the south;
and to them the south border is at the extremity of the salt sea, from the bay which is looking southward;
and it hath gone out unto the south to Maaleh-Akrabbim, and passed over to Zin, and gone up on the south to Kadesh-Barnea, and passed over [to] Hezron, and gone up to Adar, and turned round to Karkaa,
and passed over [to] Azmon, and gone out [at] the brook of Egypt, and the outgoings of the border have been at the sea; this is to you the south border.
And the east border [is] the salt sea, unto the extremity of the Jordan, and the border at the north quarter [is] from the bay of the sea, at the extremity of the Jordan;
and the border hath gone up [to] Beth-Hoglah, and passed over on the north of Beth-Arabah, and the border hath gone up [to] the stone of Bohan son of Reuben:
and the border hath gone up towards Debir from the valley of Achor, and northward looking unto Gilgal, which [is] over-against the ascent of Adummim, which [is] on the south of the brook, and the border hath passed over unto the waters of En-Shemesh, and its outgoings have been unto En-Rogel;
and the border hath gone up the valley of the son of Hinnom, unto the side of the Jebusite on the south (it [is] Jerusalem), and the border hath gone up unto the top of the hill-country which [is] on the front of the valley of Hinnom westward, which [is] in the extremity of the valley of the Rephaim northward;
and the border hath been marked out, from the top of the hill-country unto the fountain of the waters of Nephtoah, and hath gone out unto the cities of mount Ephron, and the border hath been marked out [to] Baalah, (it [is] Kirjath-Jearim);
and the border hath gone round from Baalah westward, unto mount Seir, and passed over unto the side of mount Jearim (it [is] Chesalon), on the north, and gone down [to] Beth-Shemesh, and passed over to Timnah;
and the border hath gone out unto the side of Ekron northward, and the border hath been marked out [to] Shicron, and hath passed over to mount Baalah, and gone out [to] Jabneel; and the outgoings of the border have been at the sea.
And the west border [is] to the great sea, and [its] border; this [is] the border of the sons of Judah round about for their families.
And to Caleb son of Jephunneh hath he given a portion in the midst of the sons of Judah, according to the command of Jehovah to Joshua, [even] the city of Arba, father of Anak — it [is] Hebron.
And Caleb is dispossessing thence the three sons of Anak, Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai, children of Anak,
and he goeth up thence unto the inhabitants of Debir; and the name of Debir formerly is Kirjath-Sepher.
And Caleb saith, 'He who smiteth Kirjath-Sephar, and hath captured it — I have given to him Achsah my daughter for a wife.'
And Othniel son of Kenaz, brother of Caleb, doth capture it, and he giveth to him Achsah his daughter for a wife.
And it cometh to pass, in her coming in, that she persuadeth him to ask from her father a field, and she lighteth from off the ass, and Caleb saith to her, 'What — to thee?'
And she saith, 'Give to me a blessing; when the land of the south thou hast given me, then thou hast given to me springs of waters;' and he giveth to her the upper springs and the lower springs.
This [is] the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Judah, for their families.
And the cities at the extremity of the tribe of the sons of Judah are unto the border of Edom in the south, Kabzeel, and Eder, and Jagur,
and Kinah, and Dimonah, and Adadah,
and Kedesh, and Hazor, and Ithnan,
Ziph, and Telem, and Bealoth,
and Hazor, Hadattah, and Kerioth, Hezron, (it [is] Hazor,)
Amam, and Shema, and Moladah,
and Hazar-Gaddah, and Heshmon, and Beth-Palet,
and Hazar-Shual, and Beer-Sheba, and Bizjothjah,
Baalah, and Iim, and Azem,
And Eltolad, and Chesil, and Hormah,
and Ziklag, and Madmannah, and Sansannah,
and Lebaoth, and Shilhim, and Ain, and Rimmon; all the cities [are] twenty and nine, and their villages.
In the low country: Eshtaol, and Zoreah, and Ashnah,
and Zanoah, and En-Gannim, Tappuah, and Enam,
Jarmuth, and Adullam, Socoh, and Azekah,
and Sharaim, and Adithaim, and Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourteen cities and their villages.
Zenan, and Hadashah, and Migdal-Gad,
and Dilean, and Mizpeh, and Joktheel,
Lachish, and Bozkath, and Eglon,
and Cabbon, and Lahmam, and Kithlish,
and Gederoth, Beth-Dagon, and Naamah, and Makkedah; sixteen cities and their villages.
Libnah, and Ether, and Ashan,
and Jiphtah, and Ashnah, and Nezib,
and Keilah, and Achzib, and Mareshah; nine cities and their villages.
Ekron and its towns and its villages,
from Ekron and westward, all that [are] by the side of Ashdod, and their villages.
Ashdod, its towns and its villages, Gaza, its towns and its villages, unto the brook of Egypt, and the great sea, and [its] border.
And in the hill-country: Shamir, and Jattir, and Socoh,
and Dannah, and Kirjath-Sannah (it [is] Debir)
and Anab, and Eshtemoh, and Anim,
and Goshen, and Holon, and Giloh; eleven cities and their villages.
Arab, and Dumah, and Eshean,
and Janum, and Beth-Tappuah, and Aphekah,
and Humtah, and Kirjath-Arba (it [is] Hebron), and Zior; nine cities and their villages.
Maon, Carmel, and Ziph, and Juttah,
and Jezreel, and Jokdeam, and Zanoah,
Cain, Gibeah, and Timnah; ten cities and their villages.
Halhul, Beth-Zur, and Gedor,
and Maarath, and Beth-Anoth, and Eltekon; six cities and their villages.
Kirjath-Baal (it [is] Kirjath-Jearim), and Rabbah; two cities and their villages.
In the wilderness: Beth-Arabah, Middin, and Secacah,
and Nibshan, and the city of Salt, and En-Gedi; six cities and their villages.
As to the Jebusites, inhabitants of Jerusalem, the sons of Judah have not been able to dispossess them, and the Jebusite dwelleth with the sons of Judah in Jerusalem unto this day.
And the lot for the sons of Joseph goeth out from Jordan [by] Jericho, to the waters of Jericho on the east, to the wilderness going up from Jericho in the hill-country of Beth-El,
and hath gone out from Beth-El to Luz, and passed over unto the border of Archi [to] Ataroth,
and gone down westward unto the border of Japhleti, unto the border of Beth-Horon the lower, and unto Gezer, and its outgoings have been at the sea.
And the sons of Joseph — Manasseh and Ephraim — inherit.
And the border of the sons of Ephraim is by their families; and the border of their inheritance is on the east, Atroth-Addar unto Beth-Horon the upper;
and the border hath gone out at the sea, to Michmethah on the north, and the border hath gone round eastward [to] Taanath-Shiloh, and passed over it eastward to Janohah,
and gone down from Janohah [to] Ataroth, and to Naarath, and touched against Jericho, and gone out at the Jordan.
From Tappuah the border goeth westward unto the brook of Kanah, and its outgoings have been at the sea: this [is] the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Ephraim, for their families.
And the separate cities of the sons of Ephraim [are] in the midst of the inheritance of the sons of Manasseh, all the cities and their villages;
and they have not dispossessed the Canaanite who is dwelling in Gezer, and the Canaanite dwelleth in the midst of Ephraim unto this day, and is to tribute — a servant.
And the lot is for the tribe of Manasseh (for he [is] first-born of Joseph), for Machir first-born of Manasseh, father of Gilead, for he hath been a man of war, and his are Gilead and Bashan.
And there is for the sons of Manasseh who are left, for their families; for the sons of Abiezer, and for the sons of Helek, and for the sons of Asriel, and for the sons of Shechem, and for the sons of Hepher, and for the sons of Shemida; these [are] the children of Manasseh son of Joseph — the males — by their families.
As to Zelophehad, son of Hepher, son of Gilead, son of Machir, son of Manasseh, he hath no children except daughters, and these [are] the names of his daughters: Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah,
and they draw near before Eleazar the priest, and before Joshua son of Nun, and before the princes, saying, 'Jehovah commanded Moses to give to us an inheritance in the midst of our brethren;' and he giveth to them, at the command of Jehovah, an inheritance in the midst of the brethren of their father.
And ten portions fall [to] Manasseh, apart from the land of Gilead and Bashan, which [are] beyond the Jordan;
for the daughters of Manasseh have inherited an inheritance in the midst of his sons, and the land of Gilead hath been to the sons of Manasseh who are left.
And the border of Manasseh is from Asher to Michmethah, which [is] on the front of Shechem, and the border hath gone on unto the right, unto the inhabitants of En-Tappuah.
To Manasseh hath been the land of Tappuah, and Tappuah unto the border of Manasseh is to the sons of Ephraim.
And the border hath come down [to] the brook of Kanah, southward of the brook; these cities of Ephraim [are] in the midst of the cities of Manasseh, and the border of Manasseh [is] on the north of the brook, and its outgoings are at the sea.
Southward [is] to Ephraim and northward to Manasseh, and the sea is his border, and in Asher they meet on the north, and in Issachar on the east.
And Manasseh hath in Issachar and in Asher, Beth-Shean and its towns, and Ibleam and its towns, and the inhabitants of Dor and its towns, and the inhabitants of En-Dor and its towns, and the inhabitants of Taanach and its towns, and the inhabitants of Megiddo and its towns, three counties.
And the sons of Manasseh have not been able to occupy these cities, and the Canaanite is desirous to dwell in this land,
and it cometh to pass when the sons of Israel have been strong, that they put the Canaanite to tribute, and have not utterly dispossessed him.
And the sons of Joseph speak with Joshua, saying, 'Wherefore hast thou given to me an inheritance — one lot and one portion, and I a numerous people? hitherto hath Jehovah blessed me.'
And Joshua saith unto them, 'If thou [art] a numerous people, go up for thee to the forest, then thou hast prepared for thee there, in the land of the Perizzite, and of the Rephaim, when mount Ephraim hath been narrow for thee.'
And the sons of Joseph say, 'The hill is not found to us, and a chariot of iron [is] with every Canaanite who is dwelling in the land of the valley — to him who [is] in Beth-Shean and its towns, and to him who [is] in the valley of Jezreel.'
And Joshua speaketh unto the house of Joseph, to Ephraim and to Manasseh, saying, 'Thou [art] a numerous people, and hast great power; thou hast not one lot [only],
because the mountain is thine; because it [is] a forest — thou hast prepared it, and its outgoings have been thine; because thou dost dispossess the Canaanite, though it hath chariots of iron — though it [is] strong.'
And all the company of the sons of Israel are assembled [at] Shiloh, and they cause the tent of meeting to tabernacle there, and the land hath been subdued before them.
And there are left among the sons of Israel who have not shared their inheritance, seven tribes,
and Joshua saith unto the sons of Israel, 'Till when are ye remiss to go in to possess the land which He hath given to you, Jehovah, God of your fathers?
Give for you three men for a tribe, and I send them, and they rise and go up and down through the land, and describe it according to their inheritance, and come in unto me,
and they have divided it into seven portions — Judah doth stay by its border on the south, and the house of Joseph do stay by their border on the north —
and ye describe the land [in] seven portions, and have brought [it] in unto me hither, and I have cast for you a lot here before Jehovah our God;
for there is no portion to the Levites in your midst, for the priesthood of Jehovah [is] their inheritance, and Gad, and Reuben, and the half of the tribe of Manasseh received their inheritance beyond the Jordan eastward, which Moses servant of Jehovah gave to them.'
And the men rise and go; and Joshua commandeth those who are going to describe the land, saying, 'Go, and walk up and down through the land, and describe it, and turn back unto me, and here I cast for you a lot before Jehovah in Shiloh.'
And the men go, and pass over through the land, and describe it by cities, in seven portions, on a book, and they come in unto Joshua, unto the camp, [at] Shiloh.
And Joshua casteth for them a lot in Shiloh before Jehovah, and there Joshua apportioneth the land to the sons of Israel, according to their divisions.
And a lot goeth up [for] the tribe of the sons of Benjamin, for their families; and the border of their lot goeth out between the sons of Judah and the sons of Joseph.
And the border is to them at the north side from the Jordan, and the border hath gone up unto the side of Jericho on the north, and gone up through the hill-country westward, and its outgoings have been at the wilderness of Beth-Aven;
and the border hath gone over thence to Luz, unto the side of Luz (it [is] Beth-El) southward, and the border hath gone down [to] Atroth-Addar, by the hill that [is] on the south of the lower Beth-Horon;
and the border hath been marked out, and hath gone round to the corner of the sea southward, from the hill which [is] at the front of Beth-Horon southward, and its outgoings have been unto Kirjath-Baal (it [is] Kirjath-Jearim), a city of the sons of Judah: this [is] the west quarter.
And the south quarter [is] from the end of Kirjath-Jearim, and the border hath gone out westward, and gone out unto the fountain of the waters of Nephtoah;
and the border hath come down unto the extremity of the hill which [is] on the front of the valley of the son of Hinnom, which [is] in the valley of the Rephaim northward, and hath gone down the valley of Hinnom unto the side of Jebusi southward, and gone down [to] En-Rogel,
and hath been marked out on the north, and gone out to En-Shemesh, and gone out unto Geliloth, which [is] over-against the ascent of Adummim, and gone down [to] the stone of Bohan son of Reuben,
and passed over unto the side over-against Arabah northward, and gone down to Arabah;
and the border hath passed over unto the side of Beth-Hoglah northward, and the outgoings of the border have been unto the north bay of the salt sea, unto the south extremity of the Jordan; this [is] the south border;
and the Jordan doth border it at the east quarter; this [is] the inheritance of the sons of Benjamin, by its borders round about, for their families.
And the cities for the tribe of the sons of Benjamin, for their families, have been Jericho, and Beth-Hoglah, and the valley of Keziz,
and Beth-Arabah, Zemaraim, and Beth-El,
and Avim, and Parah, and Ophrah,
and Chephar-Haammonai, and Ophni, and Gaba; twelve cities and their villages.
Gibeon, and Ramah, and Beeroth,
and Mizpeh, and Chephirah, and Mozah,
and Rekem, and Irpeel, and Taralah,
and Zelah, Eleph, and Jebusi (it [is] Jerusalem), Gibeath, Kirjath: fourteen cities and their villages. This [is] the inheritance of the sons of Benjamin, for their families.
And the second lot goeth out for Simeon, for the tribe of the sons of Simeon, for their families; and their inheritance is in the midst of the inheritance of the sons of Judah,
and they have in their inheritance Beer-Sheba, and Sheba, and Moladah,
and Hazar-Shual, and Balah, and Azem,
and Eltolad, and Bethul, and Hormah,
and Ziklag, and Beth-Marcaboth, and Hazar-Susah,
and Beth-Lebaoth, and Sharuhen; thirteen cities and their villages.
Ain, Remmon, and Ether, and Ashan; four cities and their villages;
also all the villages which [are] round about these cities, unto Baalath-Beer, Ramoth of the south. This [is] the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Simeon, for their families;
out of the portion of the sons of Judah [is] the inheritance of the sons of Simeon, for the portion of the sons of Judah hath been too much for them, and the sons of Simeon inherit in the midst of their inheritance.
And the third lot goeth up for the sons of Zebulun, for their families; and the border of their inheritance is unto Sarid,
and their border hath gone up towards the sea, and Maralah, and come against Dabbasheth, and come unto the brook which [is] on the front of Jokneam,
and turned back from Sarid eastward, at the sun-rising, by the border of Chisloth-Tabor, and gone out unto Daberath, and gone up to Japhia,
and thence it hath passed over eastward, to the east, to Gittah-Hepher, [to] Ittah-Kazin, and gone out [to] Rimmon-Methoar to Neah;
and the border hath gone round about it, from the north to Hannathon; and its outgoings have been [in] the valley of Jiphthah-El,
and Kattath, and Nahallal, and Shimron, and Idalah, and Beth-Lehem; twelve cities and their villages.
This [is] the inheritance of the sons of Zebulun, for their families, these cities and their villages.
For Issachar hath the fourth lot gone out, for the sons of Issachar, for their families;
and their border is [at] Jezreel, and Chesulloth, and Shunem,
and Haphraim, and Shihon, and Anaharath,
and Rabbith, and Kishion, and Abez,
and Remeth, and En-Gannim, and En-Haddah, and Beth-Pazzez;
and the border hath touched against Tabor, and Shahazimah, and Beth-Shemesh, and the outgoings of their border have been [at] the Jordan; sixteen cities and their villages.
This [is] the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Issachar, for their families, the cities and their villages.
And the fifth lot goeth out for the tribe of the sons of Asher, for their families;
and their border is Helkath, and Hali, and Beten, and Achshaph,
and Alammelech, and Amad, and Misheal; and it toucheth against Carmel westward, and against Shihor-Libnath;
and hath turned back, at the sun-rising, [to] Beth-Dagon, and come against Zebulun, and against the valley of Jiphthah-El toward the north of Beth-Emek, and Neiel, and hath gone out unto Cabul on the left,
and Hebron, and Rehob, and Hammon, and Kanah, unto great Zidon;
and the border hath turned back to Ramah, and unto the fenced city Tyre; and the border hath turned back to Hosah, and its outgoings are at the sea, from the coast to Achzib,
and Ummah, and Aphek, and Rehob; twenty and two cities and their villages.
This [is] the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Asher, for their families, these cities and their villages.
For the sons of Naphtali hath the sixth lot gone out, for the sons of Naphtali, for their families;
and their border is from Heleph, from Allon in Zaanannim, and Adami, Nekeb, and Jabneel, unto Lakkum, and its outgoings are [at] the Jordan;
and the border hath turned back westward [to] Aznoth-Tabor, and gone out thence to Hukkok, and touched against Zebulun on the south, and against Asher it hath touched on the west, and against Judah [at] the Jordan, at the sun-rising;
and the cities of defence [are] Ziddim, Zer, and Hammath, Rakkath, and Chinnereth,
and Adamah, and Ramah, and Hazor,
and Kedesh, and Edrei, and En-Hazor,
and Iron, and Migdal-El, Horem, and Beth-Anath, and Beth-Shemesh; nineteen cities and their villages.
This [is] the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Naphtali, for their families, the cities and their villages.
For the tribe of the sons of Dan, for their families, hath the seventh lot gone out;
and the border of their inheritance is Zorah, and Eshtaol, and Ir-Shemesh,
and Shalabbin, and Aijalon, and Jethlah,
and Elon, and Thimnathah, and Ekron,
and Eltekeh, and Gibbethon, and Baalath,
and Jehud, and Bene-Barak, and Gath-Rimmon,
and Me-Jarkon, and Rakkon, with the border over-against Japho.
And the border of the sons of Dan goeth out from them, and the sons of Dan go up and fight with Leshem, and capture it, and smite it by the mouth of the sword, and possess it, and dwell in it, and call Leshem, Dan, according to the name of Dan their father.
This [is] the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Dan, for their families, these cities and their villages.
And they finish to give the land in inheritance, by its borders, and the sons of Israel give an inheritance to Joshua son of Nun in their midst;
by the command of Jehovah they have given to him the city which he asked, Timnath-Serah, in the hill-country of Ephraim, and he buildeth the city and dwelleth in it.
These [are] the inheritances which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the sons of Israel, have caused to inherit by lot, in Shiloh, before Jehovah, at the opening of the tent of meeting; and they finish to apportion the land.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Joshua, saying,
'Speak unto the sons of Israel, saying, Give for you cities of refuge, as I have spoken unto you by the hand of Moses,
for the fleeing thither of a man-slayer smiting life inadvertently, without knowledge; and they have been to you for a refuge from the redeemer of blood.
'When [one] hath fled unto one of these cities, and hath stood [at] the opening of the gate of the city, and hath spoken in the ears of the elders of that city his matter, then they have gathered him into the city unto them, and have given to him a place, and he hath dwelt with them.
'And when the redeemer of blood doth pursue after him, then they do not shut up the man-slayer into his hand, for without knowledge he hath smitten his neighbour, and is not hating him hitherto;
and he hath dwelt in that city till his standing before the company for judgment, till the death of the chief priest who is in those days — then doth the man-slayer turn back and hath come unto his city, and unto his house, unto the city whence he fled.'
And they sanctify Kedesh in Galilee, in the hill-country of Naphtali, and Shechem in the hill-country of Ephraim, and Kirjath-Arba (it [is] Hebron), in the hill-country of Judah;
and beyond the Jordan, [at] Jericho eastward, they have given Bezer in the wilderness, in the plain, out of the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan out of the tribe of Manasseh.
These have been cities of meeting for all the sons of Israel, and for a sojourner who is sojourning in their midst, for the fleeing thither of any one smiting life inadvertently, and he doth not die by the hand of the redeemer of blood till his standing before the company.
And the heads of the fathers of the Levites draw nigh unto Eleazar the priest, and unto Joshua son of Nun, and unto the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the sons of Israel,
and they speak unto them in Shiloh, in the land of Canaan, saying, 'Jehovah commanded by the hand of Moses to give to us cities to dwell in, and their suburbs for our cattle.'
And the sons of Israel give to the Levites, out of their inheritance, at the command of Jehovah, these cities and their suburbs:
And the lot goeth out for the families of the Kohathite, and there are for the sons of Aaron the priest (of the Levites), out of the tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe of Simeon, and out of the tribe of Benjamin, by lot thirteen cities,
and for the sons of Kohath who are left, out of the families of the tribe of Ephraim, and out of the tribe of Dan, and out of the half of the tribe of Manasseh, by lot ten cities:
And for the sons of Gershon [are], out of the families of the tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the half tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, by lot, thirteen cities.
For the sons of Merari, for their families, [are], out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities.
And the sons of Israel give to the Levites these cities and their suburbs, as Jehovah commanded by the hand of Moses, by lot.
And they give out of the tribe of the sons of Judah, and out of the tribe of the sons of Simeon, these cities which are called by name;
and they are for the sons of Aaron, of the families of the Kohathite, of the sons of Levi, for theirs hath been the first lot;
and they give to them the city of Arba father of Anak (it [is] Hebron), in the hill-country of Judah, and its suburbs round about it;
and the field of the city and its villages they have given to Caleb son of Jephunneh for his possession.
And to the sons of Aaron the priest they have given the city of refuge [for] the man-slayer, Hebron and its suburbs, and Libnah and its suburbs,
and Jattir and its suburbs, and Eshtemoa and its suburbs,
and Holon and its suburbs, and Debir and its suburbs,
and Ain and its suburbs, and Juttah and its suburbs, Beth-Shemesh and its suburbs; nine cities out of these two tribes.
And out of the tribe of Benjamin, Gibeon and its suburbs, Geba and its suburbs,
Anathoth and its suburbs, and Almon and its suburbs — four cities;
all the cities of the sons of Aaron the priests, [are] thirteen cities and their suburbs.
And for the families of the sons of Kohath, the Levites, who are left of the sons of Kohath, even the cities of their lot are of the tribe of Ephraim;
and they give to them the city of refuge [for] the man-slayer, Shechem and its suburbs, in the hill-country of Ephraim, and Gezer and its suburbs,
and Kibzaim and its suburbs, and Beth-Horon and its suburbs — four cities.
And out of the tribe of Dan, Eltekeh and its suburbs, Gibbethon and its suburbs,
Aijalon and its suburbs, Gath-Rimmon and its suburbs — four cities.
And out of the half of the tribe of Manasseh, Taanach and its suburbs, and Gath-Rimmon and its suburbs — two cities;
all the cities [are] ten and their suburbs, for the families of the sons of Kohath who are left.
And for the sons of Gershon, of the families of the Levites, out of the half of the tribe of Manasseh, the city of refuge [for] the man-slayer, Golan in Bashan and its suburbs, and Beeshterah and its suburbs — two cities.
And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kishon and its suburbs, Dabarath and its suburbs,
Jarmuth and its suburbs, En-Gannim and its suburbs — four cities.
And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal and its suburbs, Abdon and its suburbs,
Helkath and its suburbs, and Rehob and its suburbs — four cities.
And out of the tribe of Naphtali, the city of refuge [for] the man-slayer, Kedesh in Galilee and its suburbs, and Hammoth-Dor and its suburbs, and Kartan and its suburbs — three cities;
all the cities of the Gershonite, for their families, [are] thirteen cities and their suburbs.
And for the families of the sons of Merari, the Levites, who are left, [are,] out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam and its suburbs, Kartah and its suburbs,
Dimnah and its suburbs, Nahalal and its suburbs — four cities.
And out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer and its suburbs, and Jahazah and its suburbs,
Kedemoth and its suburbs, and Mephaath and its suburbs — four cities.
And out of the tribe of Gad, the city of refuge [for] the man-slayer, Ramoth in Gilead and its suburbs, and Mahanaim and its suburbs,
Heshbon and its suburbs, Jazer and its suburbs — [in] all four cities.
All the cities for the sons of Merari, for their families, who are left of the families of the Levites — their lot is twelve cities.
All the cities of the Levites in the midst of the possession of the sons of Israel [are] forty and eight cities, and their suburbs.
These cities are each city and its suburbs round about it; so to all these cities.
And Jehovah giveth to Israel the whole of the land which He hath sworn to give to their fathers, and they possess it, and dwell in it;
and Jehovah giveth rest to them round about, according to all that which He hath sworn to their fathers, and there hath not stood a man in their presence of all their enemies, the whole of their enemies hath Jehovah given into their hand;
there hath not fallen a thing of all the good thing which Jehovah spake unto the house of Israel — the whole hath come.
Then Joshua calleth for the Reubenite, and for the Gadite, and for the half of the tribe of Manasseh,
and saith unto them, 'Ye — ye have kept the whole of that which Moses, servant of Jehovah, commanded you, and ye hearken to my voice, to all that I have commanded you;
ye have not left your brethren these many days unto this day, and have kept the charge — the command of Jehovah your God.
'And, now, Jehovah your God hath given rest to your brethren, as He spake to them; and now, turn ye, and go for yourselves to your tents, unto the land of your possession, which Moses, servant of Jehovah, hath given to you beyond the Jordan.
Only, be very watchful to do the command and the law which Moses, servant of Jehovah, commanded you, to love Jehovah your God, and to walk in all His ways, and to keep His commands, and to cleave to Him, and to serve Him, with all your heart, and with all your soul.'
And Joshua blesseth them, and sendeth them away, and they go unto their tents.
And to the half of the tribe of Manasseh hath Moses given, in Bashan, and to its [other] half hath Joshua given with their brethren beyond the Jordan westward; and also when Joshua hath sent them away unto their tents, then he doth bless them,
and speak unto them, saying, 'With great riches turn ye back unto your tents, and with very much cattle, with silver, and with gold, and with brass, and with iron, and with very much raiment; divide the spoil of your enemies with your brethren.'
And the sons of Reuben, and the sons of Gad, and the half of the tribe of Manasseh, turn back and go from the sons of Israel out of Shiloh, which [is] in the land of Canaan, to go unto the land of Gilead, unto the land of their possession, in which they have possession, according to the command of Jehovah, by the hand of Moses;
and they come in unto the districts of the Jordan, which [are] in the land of Canaan, and the sons of Reuben, and the sons of Gad, and the half of the tribe of Manasseh, build there an altar by the Jordan — a great altar for appearance.
And the sons of Israel hear, saying, 'Lo, the sons of Reuben, and the sons of Gad, and the half of the tribe of Manasseh, have built the altar over-against the land of Canaan, on the districts of the Jordan, at the passage of the sons of Israel.'
And the sons of Israel hear, and all the company of the sons of Israel is assembled at Shiloh, to go up against them to war;
and the sons of Israel send unto the sons of Reuben, and unto the sons of Gad, and unto the half of the tribe of Manasseh — unto the land of Gilead — Phinehas son of Eleazar the priest,
and ten princes with him, one prince, one prince, for a house of a father, for all the tribes of Israel, and each of them a head of a house of their fathers, for the thousands of Israel.
And they come in unto the sons of Reuben, and unto the sons of Gad, and unto the half of the tribe of Manasseh, unto the land of Gilead, and speak with them, saying,
'Thus said all the company of Jehovah, What [is] this trespass which ye have trespassed against the God of Israel, to turn back to-day from after Jehovah, by your building for you an altar, for your rebelling to-day against Jehovah?
Is the iniquity of Peor little to us, from which we have not been cleansed till this day — and the plague is in the company of Jehovah,
that ye turn back to-day from after Jehovah? and it hath been — ye rebel to-day against Jehovah — and to-morrow against all the company of Israel He is wroth.
'And surely, if the land of your possession is unclean, pass over for you unto the land of the possession of Jehovah, where the tabernacle of Jehovah hath tabernacled, and have possession in our midst; and against Jehovah rebel not, and against us rebel not, by your building for you an altar, besides the altar of Jehovah our God.
Did not Achan son of Zerah commit a trespass in the devoted thing, and on all the company of Israel there was wrath? and he alone expired not in his iniquity.'
And the sons of Reuben, and the sons of Gad, and the half of the tribe of Manasseh, answer and speak with the heads of the thousands of Israel:
'The God of gods — Jehovah, the God of gods — Jehovah, He is knowing, and Israel, he doth know, if in rebellion, and if in trespass against Jehovah (Thou dost not save us this day!)
[we are] building for ourselves an altar to turn back from after Jehovah, and if to cause to go up on it burnt-offering and present, and if to make on it peace-offerings — Jehovah Himself doth require [it].
'And if not, from fear of [this] thing we have done it, saying, Hereafter your sons do speak to ours sons, saying, What to you and to Jehovah God of Israel?
for a border hath Jehovah put between us and you, O sons of Reuben, and sons of Gad — Jordan; ye have no portion in Jehovah — and your sons have caused our sons to cease, not to fear Jehovah.
'And we say, Pray let us prepare for ourselves to build the altar — not for burnt-offering nor for sacrifice —
but a witness it [is] between us and you, and between our generations after us, to do the service of Jehovah before Him with our burnt-offerings, and with our sacrifices, and with our peace-offerings, and your sons do not say hereafter to our sons, Ye have no portion in Jehovah.
'And we say, And it hath been, when they say [so] unto us, and unto our generations hereafter, that we have said, See the pattern of the altar of Jehovah, which our fathers made — not for burnt-offering nor for sacrifice — but a witness it [is] between us and you.
'Far be it from us to rebel against Jehovah, and to turn back to-day from after Jehovah, to build an altar for burnt-offering, for present, and for sacrifice, apart from the altar of Jehovah our God, which [is] before His tabernacle.'
And Phinehas the priest, and the princes of the company, and the heads of the thousands of Israel, who [are] with him, hear the words which the sons of Reuben, and the sons of Gad, and the sons of Manasseh have spoken, and it is good in their eyes.
And Phinehas son of Eleazar the priest saith unto the sons of Reuben, and unto the sons of Gad, and unto the sons of Manasseh, 'To-day we have known that Jehovah [is] in our midst, because ye have not committed against Jehovah this trespass — then ye have delivered the sons of Israel out of the hand of Jehovah.'
And Phinehas son of Eleazar the priest, and the princes, turn back from the sons of Reuben, and from the sons of Gad, out of the land of Gilead, unto the land of Canaan, unto the sons of Israel, and bring them back word;
and the thing is good in the eyes of the sons of Israel, and the sons of Israel bless God, and have not said to go up against them to war, to destroy the land which the sons of Reuben, and the sons of Gad, are dwelling in.
And the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad proclaim concerning the altar, that 'it [is] a witness between us that Jehovah [is] God.'
And it cometh to pass, many days after that Jehovah hath given rest to Israel from all their enemies round about, that Joshua is old, entering into days,
and Joshua calleth for all Israel, for its elders, and for its heads, and for its judges, and for its authorities, and saith unto them, 'I have become old; I have entered into days;
and ye — ye have seen all that Jehovah your God hath done to all these nations because of you, for Jehovah your God [is] He who is fighting for you;
see, I have caused to fall to you these nations who are left for an inheritance to your tribes, from the Jordan, (and all the nations which I cut off), and the great sea, the going in of the sun.
'As to Jehovah your God, He doth thrust them from your presence, and hath dispossessed them from before you, and ye have possessed their land, as Jehovah your God hath spoken to you,
and ye have been very strong to keep and to do the whole that is written in the Book of the Law of Moses, so as not to turn aside from it right or left,
so as not to go in among these nations, these who are left with you; and of the name of their gods ye do not make mention, nor do ye swear, nor do ye serve them, nor do ye bow yourselves to them;
but to Jehovah your God ye do cleave, as ye have done till this day.
And Jehovah is dispossessing from before you nations great and mighty; as for you, none hath stood in your presence till this day;
one man of you doth pursue a thousand, for Jehovah your God [is] He who is fighting for you, as He hath spoken to you;
and ye have been very watchful for yourselves to love Jehovah your God.
'But — if ye at all turn back and have cleaved to the remnant of these nations, these who are left with you, and intermarried with them, and gone in to them, and they to you,
know certainly that Jehovah your God is not continuing to dispossess these nations from before you, and they have been to you for a gin, and for a snare, and for a scourge, in your sides, and for thorns in your eyes, till ye perish from off this good ground which Jehovah your God hath given to you.
'And lo, I am going, to-day, in the way of all the earth, and ye have known — with all your heart, and with all your soul — that there hath not fallen one thing of all the good things which Jehovah your God hath spoken concerning you; the whole have come to you; there hath not failed of it one thing.
'And it hath been, as there hath come upon you all the good thing which Jehovah your God hath spoken unto you, so doth Jehovah bring upon you the whole of the evil thing, till His destroying you from off this good ground which Jehovah your God hath given to you;
in your transgressing the covenant of Jehovah your God which He commanded you, and ye have gone and served other gods, and bowed yourselves to them, then hath the anger of Jehovah burned against you, and ye have perished hastily from off the good land which He hath given to you.'
And Joshua gathereth all the tribes of Israel to Shechem, and calleth for the elders of Israel, and for its heads, and for its judges, and for its authorities, and they station themselves before God.
And Joshua saith unto all the people, 'Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, Beyond the River have your fathers dwelt of old — Terah father of Abraham and father of Nachor — and they serve other gods;
and I take your father Abraham from beyond the River, and cause him to go through all the land of Canaan, and multiply his seed, and give to him Isaac.
And I give to Isaac, Jacob and Esau; and I give to Esau mount Seir, to possess it; and Jacob and his sons have gone down to Egypt.
And I send Moses and Aaron, and plague Egypt, as I have done in its midst, and afterwards I have brought you out.
And I bring out your fathers from Egypt, and ye go into the sea, and the Egyptians pursue after your fathers, with chariot and with horsemen, to the Red Sea;
and they cry unto Jehovah, and He setteth thick darkness between you and the Egyptians, and bringeth on them the sea, and covereth them, and your eyes see that which I have done in Egypt; and ye dwell in a wilderness many days.
'And I bring you in unto the land of the Amorite who is dwelling beyond the Jordan, and they fight with you, and I give them into your hand, and ye possess their land, and I destroy them out of your presence.
'And Balak son of Zippor, king of Moab, riseth and fighteth against Israel, and sendeth and calleth for Balaam son of Beor, to revile you,
and I have not been willing to hearken to Balaam, and he doth greatly bless you, and I deliver you out of his hand.
'And ye pass over the Jordan, and come in unto Jericho, and fight against you do the possessors of Jericho — the Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Girgashite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite — and I give them into your hand.
And I send before you the hornet, and it casteth them out from your presence — two kings of the Amorite — not by thy sword, nor by thy bow.
'And I give to you a land for which thou hast not laboured, and cities which ye have not built, and ye dwell in them; of vineyards and olive-yards which ye have not planted ye are eating.
'And now, fear ye Jehovah, and serve Him, in perfection and in truth, and turn aside the gods which your fathers served beyond the River, and in Egypt, and serve ye Jehovah;
and if wrong in your eyes to serve Jehovah — choose for you to-day whom ye do serve; — whether the gods whom your fathers served, which [are] beyond the River, or the gods of the Amorite in whose land ye are dwelling; and I and my house — we serve Jehovah.'
And the people answer and say, 'Far be it from us to forsake Jehovah, to serve other gods;
for Jehovah our God [is] He who is bringing us and our fathers up out of the land of Egypt, out of a house of servants, and who hath done before our eyes these great signs, and doth keep us in all the way in which we have gone, and among all the peoples through whose midst we passed;
and Jehovah casteth out the whole of the peoples, even the Amorite inhabiting the land, from our presence; we also do serve Jehovah, for He [is] our God.'
And Joshua saith unto the people, 'Ye are not able to serve Jehovah, for a God most holy He [is]; a zealous God He [is]; He doth not bear with your transgression and with your sins.
When ye forsake Jehovah, and have served gods of a stranger, then He hath turned back and done evil to you, and consumed you, after that He hath done good to you.'
And the people saith unto Joshua, 'No, but Jehovah we do serve.'
And Joshua saith unto the people, 'Witnesses ye are against yourselves, that ye have chosen for you Jehovah to serve Him (and they say, 'Witnesses!')
and, now, turn aside the gods of the stranger which [are] in your midst, and incline your heart unto Jehovah, God of Israel.'
And the people say unto Joshua, 'Jehovah our God we serve, and to His voice we hearken.'
And Joshua maketh a covenant with the people on that day, and layeth on it a statute and an ordinance, in Shechem.
And Joshua writeth these words in the Book of the Law of God, and taketh a great stone, and raiseth it up there under the oak which [is] in the sanctuary of Jehovah.
And Joshua saith unto all the people, 'Lo, this stone is against us for a witness, for it hath heard all the sayings of Jehovah which He hath spoken with us, and it hath been against you for a witness, lest ye lie against your God.'
And Joshua sendeth the people away, each to his inheritance.
And it cometh to pass, after these things, that Joshua son of Nun, servant of Jehovah, dieth, a son of a hundred and ten years,
and they bury him in the border of his inheritance, in Timnath-Serah, which [is] in the hill-country of Ephraim, on the north of the hill of Gaash.
And Israel serveth Jehovah all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders who prolonged days after Joshua, and who knew all the work of Jehovah which He did to Israel.
And the bones of Joseph, which the sons of Israel brought up out of Egypt, they buried in Shechem, in the portion of the field which Jacob bought from the sons of Hamor father of Shechem, with a hundred kesitah; and they are to the sons of Joseph for an inheritance.
And Eleazar son of Aaron died, and they bury him in the hill of Phinehas his son, which was given to him in the hill-country of Ephraim.
And it cometh to pass, after the death of Joshua, that the sons of Israel ask at Jehovah, saying, 'Who doth go up for us unto the Canaanite, at the commencement, to fight against it?'
And Jehovah saith, 'Judah doth go up; lo, I have given the land into his hand.'
And Judah saith to Simeon his brother, 'Go up with me into my lot, and we fight against the Canaanite — and I have gone, even I, with thee into thy lot;' and Simeon goeth with him.
And Judah goeth up, and Jehovah giveth the Canaanite and the Perizzite into their hand, and they smite them in Bezek — ten thousand men;
and they find Adoni-Bezek in Bezek, and fight against him, and smite the Canaanite and the Perizzite.
And Adoni-Bezek fleeth, and they pursue after him, and seize him, and cut off his thumbs and his great toes,
and Adoni-Bezek saith, 'Seventy kings — their thumbs and their great toes cut off — have been gathering under my table; as I have done so hath God repaid to me;' and they bring him in to Jerusalem, and he dieth there.
And the sons of Judah fight against Jerusalem, and capture it, and smite it by the mouth of the sword, and the city they have sent into fire;
and afterwards have the sons of Judah gone down to fight against the Canaanite, inhabiting the hill-country, and the south, and the low country;
and Judah goeth unto the Canaanite who is dwelling in Hebron (and the name of Hebron formerly [is] Kirjath-Arba), and they smite Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai.
And he goeth thence unto the inhabitants of Debir (and the name of Debir formerly [is] Kirjath-Sepher),
and Caleb saith, 'He who smiteth Kirjath-Sepher — and hath captured it — then I have given to him Achsah my daughter for a wife.'
And Othniel son of Kenaz, younger brother of Caleb, doth capture it, and he giveth to him Achsah his daughter for a wife.
And it cometh to pass in her coming in, that she persuadeth him to ask from her father the field, and she lighteth from off the ass, and Caleb saith to her, 'What — to thee?'
And she saith to him, 'Give to me a blessing; when the south land thou hast given me — then thou hast given to me springs of water; and Caleb giveth to her the upper springs and the lower springs.
And the sons of the Kenite, father-in-law of Moses, have gone up out of the city of palms with the sons of Judah [to] the wilderness of Judah, which [is] in the south of Arad, and they go and dwell with the people.
And Judah goeth with Simeon his brother, and they smite the Canaanite inhabiting Zephath, and devote it; and [one] calleth the name of the city Hormah.
And Judah captureth Gaza and its border, and Askelon and its border, and Ekron and its border;
and Jehovah is with Judah, and he occupieth the hill-country, but not to dispossess the inhabitants of the valley, for they have chariots of iron.
And they give to Caleb Hebron, as Moses hath spoken, and he dispossesseth thence the three sons of Anak.
And the Jebusite, inhabiting Jerusalem, the sons of Benjamin have not dispossessed; and the Jebusite dwelleth with the sons of Benjamin, in Jerusalem, till this day.
And the house of Joseph go up — even they — to Beth-El, and Jehovah [is] with them;
and the house of Joseph cause [men] to spy about Beth-El (and the name of the city formerly is Luz),
and the watchers see a man coming out from the city, and say to him, 'Shew us, we pray thee, the entrance of the city, and we have done with thee kindness.'
And he sheweth them the entrance of the city, and they smite the city by the mouth of the sword, and the man and all his family they have sent away;
and the man goeth to the land of the Hittites, and buildeth a city, and calleth its name Luz — it [is] its name unto this day.
And Manasseh hath not occupied Beth-Shean and its towns, and Taanach and its towns, and the inhabitants of Dor and its towns, and the inhabitants of Iblaim and its towns, and the inhabitants of Megiddo and its towns, and the Canaanite is desirous to dwell in that land;
and it cometh to pass, when Israel hath been strong, that he setteth the Canaanite to tribute, and hath not utterly dispossessed it.
And Ephraim hath not dispossessed the Canaanite who is dwelling in Gezer, and the Canaanite dwelleth in its midst, in Gezer.
Zebulun hath not dispossessed the inhabitants of Kitron, and the inhabitants of Nahalol, and the Canaanite dwelleth in its midst, and they become tributary.
Asher hath not dispossessed the inhabitants of Accho, and the inhabitants of Zidon, and Ahlab, and Achzib, and Helbah, and Aphik, and Rehob;
and the Asherite dwelleth in the midst of the Canaanite, the inhabitants of the land, for it hath not dispossessed them.
Naphtali hath not dispossessed the inhabitants of Beth-Shemesh, and the inhabitants of Beth-Anath, and he dwelleth in the midst of the Canaanite, the inhabitants of the land; and the inhabitants of Beth-Shemesh and of Beth-Anath have become tributary to them.
And the Amorites press the sons of Dan to the mountain, for they have not suffered them to go down to the valley;
and the Amorite is desirous to dwell in mount Heres, in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim, and the hand of the house of Joseph is heavy, and they become tributary;
and the border of the Amorite [is] from the ascent of Akrabbim, from the rock and upward.
And a messenger of Jehovah goeth up from Gilgal unto Bochim,
and saith, 'I cause you to come up out of Egypt, and bring you in unto the land which I have sworn to your fathers, and say, I do not break My covenant with you to the age; and ye — ye make no covenant with the inhabitants of this land — their altars ye break down; and ye have not hearkened to My voice — what [is] this ye have done?
And I also have said, I do not cast them out from your presence, and they have been to you for adversaries, and their gods are to you for a snare.'
And it cometh to pass, when the messenger of Jehovah speaketh these words unto all the sons of Israel, that the people lift up their voice and weep,
and they call the name of that place Bochim, and sacrifice there to Jehovah.
And Joshua sendeth the people away, and the sons of Israel go, each to his inheritance, to possess the land;
and the people serve Jehovah all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders who prolonged days after Joshua, who saw all the great work of Jehovah which He did to Israel.
And Joshua son of Nun, servant of Jehovah, dieth, a son of a hundred and ten years,
and they bury him in the border of his inheritance, in Timnath-Heres, in the hill-country of Ephraim, on the north of mount Gaash;
and also all that generation have been gathered unto their fathers, and another generation riseth after them who have not known Jehovah, and even the work which He hath done to Israel.
And the sons of Israel do the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, and serve the Baalim,
and forsake Jehovah, God of their fathers, who bringeth them out from the land of Egypt, and go after other gods (of the gods of the peoples who [are] round about them), and bow themselves to them, and provoke Jehovah,
yea, they forsake Jehovah, and do service to Baal and to Ashtaroth.
And the anger of Jehovah burneth against Israel, and He giveth them into the hand of spoilers, and they spoil them, and He selleth them into the hand of their enemies round about, and they have not been able any more to stand before their enemies;
in every [place] where they have gone out, the hand of Jehovah hath been against them for evil, as Jehovah hath spoken, and as Jehovah hath sworn to them, and they are distressed — greatly.
And Jehovah raiseth up judges, and they save them from the hand of their spoilers;
and also unto their judges they have not hearkened, but have gone a-whoring after other gods, and bow themselves to them; they have turned aside [with] haste out of the way [in] which their fathers walked to obey the commands of Jehovah — they have not done so.
And when Jehovah raised up to them judges — then was Jehovah with the judge, and saved them out of the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge; for it repenteth Jehovah, because of their groaning from the presence of their oppressors, and of those thrusting them away.
And it hath come to pass, at the death of the judge — they turn back and have done corruptly above their fathers, to go after other gods, to serve them, and to bow themselves to them; they have not fallen from their doings, and from their stiff way.
And the anger of Jehovah doth burn against Israel, and He saith, 'Because that this nation have transgressed My covenant which I commanded their fathers, and have not hearkened to My voice —
I also continue not to dispossess any from before them of the nations which Joshua hath left when he dieth,
in order to try Israel by them, whether they are keeping the way of Jehovah, to go in it, as their fathers kept [it] or not.'
And Jehovah leaveth these nations, so as not to dispossess them hastily, and did not give them into the hand of Joshua.
And these [are] the nations which Jehovah left, to try Israel by them, all who have not known all the wars of Canaan;
(only for the sake of the generations of the sons of Israel's knowing, to teach them war, only those who formerly have not known them) —
five princes of the Philistines, and all the Canaanite, and the Zidonian, and the Hivite inhabiting mount Lebanon, from mount Baal-Hermon unto the entering in of Hamath;
and they are to prove Israel by them, to know whether they obey the commands of Jehovah that He commanded their fathers by the hand of Moses.
And the sons of Israel have dwelt in the midst of the Canaanite, the Hittite, and the Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite,
and take their daughters to them for wives, and their daughters have given to their sons, and they serve their gods;
and the sons of Israel do the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, and forget Jehovah their God, and serve the Baalim and the shrines.
And the anger of Jehovah burneth against Israel, and He selleth them into the hand of Chushan-Rishathaim king of Aram-Naharaim, and the sons of Israel serve Chushan-Rishathaim eight years;
and the sons of Israel cry unto Jehovah, and Jehovah raiseth a saviour to the sons of Israel, and he saveth them — Othniel son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother;
and the Spirit of Jehovah is upon him, and he judgeth Israel, and goeth out to battle, and Jehovah giveth unto his hand Chushan-Rishathaim king of Aram, and strong is his hand against Chushan-Rishathaim;
and the land resteth forty years. And Othniel son of Kenaz dieth,
and the sons of Israel add to do the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah; and Jehovah strengtheneth Eglon king of Moab against Israel, because that they have done the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah;
and he gathereth unto him the Bene-Ammon and Amalek, and goeth and smiteth Israel, and they possess the city of palms;
and the sons of Israel serve Eglon king of Moab eighteen years.
And the sons of Israel cry unto Jehovah, and Jehovah raiseth to them a saviour, Ehud son of Gera, a Benjamite (a man — shut of his right hand), and the sons of Israel send by his hand a present to Eglon king of Moab;
and Ehud maketh for himself a sword, and it hath two mouths (a cubit [is] its length), and he girdeth it under his long robe on his right thigh;
and he bringeth near the present to Eglon king of Moab, and Eglon [is] a very fat man.
And it cometh to pass, when he hath finished to bring near the present, that he sendeth away the people bearing the present,
and he himself hath turned back from the graven images which [are] at Gilgal, and saith, 'A secret word I have unto thee, O king;' and he saith, 'Hush!' and go out from him do all those standing by him.
And Ehud hath come unto him, and he is sitting in the upper chamber of the wall which he hath for himself, and Ehud saith, 'A word of God I have unto thee;' and he riseth from off the throne;
and Ehud putteth forth his left hand, and taketh the sword from off his right thigh, and striketh it into his belly;
and the haft also goeth in after the blade, and the fat shutteth on the blade, that he hath not drawn the sword out of his belly, and it goeth out at the fundament.
And Ehud goeth out at the porch, and shutteth the doors of the upper chamber upon him, and hath bolted [it];
and he hath gone out, and his servants have come in, and look, and lo, the doors of the upper chamber are bolted, and they say, 'He is only covering his feet in the inner chamber of the wall.'
And they stay till confounded, and lo, he is not opening the doors of the upper chamber, and they take the key, and open, and lo, their lord is fallen to the earth — dead.
And Ehud escaped during their tarrying, and hath passed by the images, and is escaped to Seirath.
And it cometh to pass, in his coming in, that he bloweth with a trumpet in the hill-country of Ephraim, and go down with him do the sons of Israel from the hill-country, and he before them;
and he saith unto them, 'Pursue after me, for Jehovah hath given your enemies, the Moabites, into your hand;' and they go down after him, and capture the passages of the Jordan towards Moab, and have not permitted a man to pass over.
And they smite Moab at that time, about ten thousand men, all robust, and every one a man of valour, and not a man hath escaped,
and Moab is humbled in that day under the hand of Israel; and the land resteth eighty years.
And after him hath been Shamgar son of Anath, and he smiteth the Philistines — six hundred men — with an ox-goad, and he saveth — he also — Israel.
And the sons of Israel add to do the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah when Ehud is dead,
and Jehovah selleth them into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan, who hath reigned in Hazor, and the head of his host [is] Sisera, and he is dwelling in Harosheth of the Goyim;
and the sons of Israel cry unto Jehovah, for he hath nine hundred chariots of iron, and he hath oppressed the sons of Israel mightily twenty years.
And Deborah, a woman inspired, wife of Lapidoth, she is judging Israel at that time,
and she is dwelling under the palm-tree of Deborah, between Ramah and Beth-El, in the hill-country of Ephraim, and the sons of Israel go up unto her for judgment.
And she sendeth and calleth for Barak son of Abinoam, out of Kedesh-Naphtali, and saith unto him, 'Hath not Jehovah, God of Israel, commanded? go, and thou hast drawn towards mount Tabor, and hast taken with thee ten thousand men, out of the sons of Naphtali, and out of the sons of Zebulun,
and I have drawn unto thee, unto the brook Kishon, Sisera, head of the host of Jabin, and his chariot, and his multitude, and have given him into thy hand.'
And Barak saith unto her, 'If thou dost go with me, then I have gone; and if thou dost not go with me, I do not go;'
and she saith, 'I do certainly go with thee; only, surely thy glory is not on the way which thou art going, for into the hand of a woman doth Jehovah sell Sisera;' and Deborah riseth and goeth with Barak to Kedesh.
And Barak calleth Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh, and he goeth up — at his feet [are] ten thousand men — and Deborah goeth up with him.
And Heber the Kenite hath been separated from the Kenite, from the sons of Hobab father-in-law of Moses, and he stretcheth out his tent unto the oak in Zaanaim, which [is] by Kedesh.
And they declare to Sisera that Barak son of Abinoam hath gone up to mount Tabor,
and Sisera calleth all his chariots, nine hundred chariots of iron, and all the people who [are] with him, from Harosheth of the Goyim, unto the brook Kishon.
And Deborah saith unto Barak, 'Rise, for this [is] the day in which Jehovah hath given Sisera into thy hand; hath not Jehovah gone out before thee?' And Barak goeth down from mount Tabor, and ten thousand men after him.
And Jehovah destroyeth Sisera, and all the chariots, and all the camp, by the mouth of the sword, before Barak, and Sisera cometh down from off the chariot, and fleeth on his feet.
And Barak hath pursued after the chariots and after the camp, unto Harosheth of the Goyim, and all the camp of Sisera falleth by the mouth of the sword — there hath not been left even one.
And Sisera hath fled on his feet unto the tent of Jael wife of Heber the Kenite, for peace [is] between Jabin king of Hazor and the house of Heber the Kenite;
and Jael goeth out to meet Sisera, and saith unto him, 'Turn aside, my lord, turn aside unto me, fear not;' and he turneth aside unto her, into the tent, and she covereth him with a coverlet.
And he saith unto her, 'Give me to drink, I pray thee, a little water, for I am thirsty;' and she openeth the bottle of milk, and giveth him to drink, and covereth him.
And he saith unto her, 'Stand at the opening of the tent, and it hath been, if any doth come in, and hath asked thee, and said, Is there a man here? that thou hast said, There is not.'
And Jael wife of Heber taketh the pin of the tent, and taketh the hammer in her hand, and goeth unto him gently, and striketh the pin into his temples, and it fasteneth in the earth — and he hath been fast asleep, and is weary — and he dieth.
And lo, Barak is pursuing Sisera, and Jael cometh out to meet him, and saith to him, 'Come, and I shew thee the man whom thou art seeking;' and he cometh in unto her, and lo, Sisera is fallen — dead, and the pin in his temples.
And God humbleth on that day Jabin king of Canaan before the sons of Israel,
and the hand of the sons of Israel goeth, going on and becoming hard on Jabin king of Canaan, till that they have cut off Jabin king of Canaan.
And Deborah singeth — also Barak son of Abinoam — on that day, saying: —
'For freeing freemen in Israel, For a people willingly offering themselves Bless ye Jehovah.
Hear, ye kings; give ear, ye princes, I, to Jehovah, I — I do sing, I sing praise to Jehovah, God of Israel.
Jehovah, in Thy going forth out of Seir, In Thy stepping out of the field of Edom, Earth trembled, also the heavens dropped, Also thick clouds dropped water.
Hills flowed from the face of Jehovah, This one — Sinai — From the face of Jehovah, God of Israel.
In the days of Shamgar son of Anath — In the days of Jael — The ways have ceased, And those going in the paths go [in] crooked ways.
Villages ceased in Israel — they ceased, Till that I arose — Deborah, That I arose, a mother in Israel.
He chooseth new gods, Then war [is] at the gates! A shield is not seen — and a spear Among forty thousand in Israel.
My heart [is] to the lawgivers of Israel, Who are offering themselves willingly among the people, Bless ye Jehovah!
Riders on white asses — Sitters on a long robe — And walkers by the way — meditate!
By the voice of shouters Between the places of drawing water, There they give out righteous acts of Jehovah, Righteous acts of His villages in Israel, Then ruled in the gates have the people of Jehovah.
Awake, awake, Deborah; Awake, awake, utter a song; Rise, Barak, and take captive thy captivity, Son of Abinoam.
Then him who is left of the honourable ones He caused to rule the people of Jehovah, He caused me to rule among the mighty.
Out of Ephraim their root [is] against Amalek. After thee, Benjamin, among thy peoples. Out of Machir came down lawgivers, And out of Zebulun those drawing with the reed of a writer.
And princes in Issachar [are] with Deborah, Yea, Issachar [is] right with Barak, Into the valley he was sent on his feet. In the divisions of Reuben, Great [are] the decrees of heart!
Why hast thou abode between the boundaries, To hear lowings of herds? For the divisions of Reuben, Great [are] the searchings of heart!
Gilead beyond the Jordan did tabernacle, And Dan — why doth he sojourn [in] ships? Asher hath abode at the haven of the seas, And by his creeks doth tabernacle.
Zebulun [is] a people who exposed its soul to death, Naphtali also — on high places of the field.
Kings came — they fought; Then fought kings of Canaan, In Taanach, by the waters of Megiddo; Gain of money they took not!
From the heavens they fought: The stars from their highways fought with Sisera.
The brook Kishon swept them away, The brook most ancient — the brook Kishon. Thou dost tread down strength, O my soul!
Then broken were the horse-heels, By pransings — pransings of its mighty ones.
Curse Meroz — said a messenger of Jehovah, Cursing, curse ye its inhabitants, For they came not to the help of Jehovah, To the help of Jehovah among the mighty!
Blessed above women is Jael, Wife of Heber the Kenite, Above women in the tent she is blessed.
Water he asked — milk she gave; In a lordly dish she brought near butter.
Her hand to the pin she sendeth forth, And her right hand to the labourers' hammer, And she hammered Sisera — she smote his head, Yea, she smote, and it passed through his temple.
Between her feet he bowed — He fell, he lay down; Between her feet he bowed, he fell; Where he bowed, there he fell — destroyed.
Through the window she hath looked out — Yea, she crieth out — the mother of Sisera, Through the lattice: Wherefore is his chariot delaying to come? Wherefore tarried have the steps of his chariot?
The wise ones, her princesses, answer her, Yea, she returneth her sayings to herself:
Do they not find? — they apportion spoil, A female — two females — for every head, Spoil of finger-work for Sisera, Spoil of embroidered finger-work, Finger-work — a pair of embroidered things, For the necks of the spoil!
So do all Thine enemies perish, O Jehovah, And those loving Him [are] As the going out of the sun in its might!' and the land resteth forty years.
And the sons of Israel do the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, and Jehovah giveth them into the hand of Midian seven years,
and the hand of Midian is strong against Israel, from the presence of Midian have the sons of Israel made for themselves the flowings which [are] in the mountains, and the caves, and the strongholds.
And it hath been, if Israel hath sowed, that Midian hath come up, and Amalek, and the sons of the east, yea, they have come up against him,
and encamp against them, and destroy the increase of the land till thine entering Gaza; and they leave no sustenance in Israel, either sheep, or ox, or ass;
for they and their cattle come up, with their tents; they come in as the fulness of the locust for multitude, and of them and of their cattle there is no number, and they come into the land to destroy it.
And Israel is very weak from the presence of Midian, and the sons of Israel cry unto Jehovah.
And it cometh to pass when the sons of Israel have cried unto Jehovah, concerning Midian,
that Jehovah sendeth a man, a prophet, unto the sons of Israel, and he saith to them, 'Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, I — I have brought you up out of Egypt, and I bring you out from a house of servants,
and I deliver you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all your oppressors, and I cast them out from your presence, and I give to you their land,
and I say to you, I [am] Jehovah your God, ye do not fear the gods of the Amorite in whose land ye are dwelling: — and ye have not hearkened to My voice.'
And the messenger of Jehovah cometh and sitteth under the oak which [is] in Ophrah, which [is] to Joash the Abi-Ezrite, and Gideon his son is beating out wheat in the wine-press, to remove [it] from the presence of the Midianites;
and the messenger of Jehovah appeareth unto him, and saith unto him, 'Jehovah [is] with thee, O mighty one of valour.'
And Gideon saith unto him, 'O, my lord — and Jehovah is with us! — and why hath all this found us? and where [are] all His wonders which our fathers recounted to us, saying, Hath not Jehovah brought us up out of Egypt? and now Jehovah hath left us, and doth give us into the hand of Midian.'
And Jehovah turneth unto him and saith, 'Go in this — thy power; and thou hast saved Israel out of the hand of Midian — have not I sent thee.'
And he saith unto him, 'O, my lord, wherewith do I save Israel? lo, my chief [is] weak in Manasseh, and I the least in the house of my father.'
And Jehovah saith unto him, 'Because I am with thee — thou hast smitten the Midianites as one man.'
And he saith unto Him, 'If, I pray Thee, I have found grace in Thine eyes, then Thou hast done for me a sign that Thou art speaking with me.
Move not, I pray Thee, from this, till my coming in unto Thee, and I have brought out my present, and put it before Thee;' and he saith, 'I — I do abide till thy return.'
And Gideon hath gone in, and prepareth a kid of the goats, and of an ephah of flour unleavened things; the flesh he hath put in a basket, and the broth he hath put in a pot, and he bringeth out unto Him, unto the place of the oak, and bringeth [it] nigh.
And the messenger of God saith unto him, 'Take the flesh and the unleavened things, and place on this rock — and the broth pour out;' and he doth so.
And the messenger of Jehovah putteth forth the end of the staff which [is] in His hand, and cometh against the flesh, and against the unleavened things, and the fire goeth up out of the rock and consumeth the flesh and the unleavened things — and the messenger of Jehovah hath gone from his eyes.
And Gideon seeth that He [is] a messenger of Jehovah, and Gideon saith, 'Alas, Lord Jehovah! because that I have seen a messenger of Jehovah face to face!'
And Jehovah saith to him, 'Peace to thee; fear not; thou dost not die.'
And Gideon buildeth there an altar to Jehovah, and calleth it Jehovah-Shalom, unto this day it [is] yet in Ophrah of the Abi-Ezrites.
And it cometh to pass, on that night, that Jehovah saith to him, 'Take the young ox which [is] to thy father, and the second bullock of seven years, and thou hast thrown down the altar of Baal which [is] to thy father, and the shrine which [is] by it thou dost cut down,
and thou hast built an altar to Jehovah thy God on the top of this stronghold, by the arrangement, and hast taken the second bullock, and caused to ascend a burnt-offering with the wood of the shrine which thou cuttest down.'
And Gideon taketh ten men of his servants, and doth as Jehovah hath spoken unto him, and it cometh to pass, because he hath been afraid of the house of his father, and the men of the city, to do [it] by day, that he doth [it] by night.
And the men of the city rise early in the morning, and lo, broken down hath been the altar of Baal, and the shrine which is by it hath been cut down, and the second bullock hath been offered on the altar which is built.
And they say one to another, 'Who hath done this thing?' and they inquire and seek, and they say, 'Gideon son of Joash hath done this thing.'
And the men of the city say unto Joash, 'Bring out thy son, and he dieth, because he hath broken down the altar of Baal, and because he hath cut down the shrine which [is] by it.'
And Joash saith to all who have stood against him, 'Ye, do ye plead for Baal? ye — do ye save him? he who pleadeth for him is put to death during the morning; if he [is] a god he himself doth plead against him, because he hath broken down his altar.'
And he calleth him, on that day, Jerubbaal, saying, 'The Baal doth plead against him, because he hath broken down his altar.'
And all Midian and Amalek and the sons of the east have been gathered together, and pass over, and encamp in the valley of Jezreel,
and the Spirit of Jehovah hath clothed Gideon, and he bloweth with a trumpet, and Abi-Ezer is called after him;
and messengers he hath sent into all Manasseh, and it also is called after him; and messengers he hath sent into Asher, and into Zebulun, and into Naphtali, and they come up to meet them.
And Gideon saith unto God, 'If Thou art Saviour of Israel by my hand, as Thou hast spoken,
lo, I am placing the fleece of wool in the threshing-floor: if dew is on the fleece alone, and on all the earth drought — then I have known that Thou dost save Israel by my hand, as Thou hast spoken;'
and it is so, and he riseth early on the morrow, and presseth the fleece, and wringeth dew out of the fleece — the fulness of the bowl, of water.
And Gideon saith unto God, 'Let not Thine anger burn against me, and I speak only this time; let me try, I pray Thee, only this time with the fleece — let there be, I pray Thee, drought on the fleece alone, and on all the earth let there be dew.'
And God doth so on that night, and there is drought on the fleece alone, and on all the earth there hath been dew.
And Jerubbaal (he [is] Gideon) riseth early, and all the people who [are] with him, and they encamp by the well of Harod, and the camp of Midian hath been on the south of him, on the height of Moreh, in the valley.
And Jehovah saith unto Gideon, 'Too many [are] the people who [are] with thee for My giving Midian into their hand, lest Israel beautify itself against Me, saying, My hand hath given salvation to me;
and now, call, I pray thee, in the ears of the people, saying, Whoso [is] afraid and trembling, let him turn back and go early from mount Gilead;' and there turn back of the people twenty and two thousand, and ten thousand have been left.
And Jehovah saith unto Gideon, 'Yet [are] the people too many; bring them down unto the water, and I refine it for thee there; and it hath been, he of whom I say unto thee, This doth go with thee — he doth go with thee; and any of whom I say unto thee, This doth not go with thee — he doth not go.'
And he bringeth down the people unto the water, and Jehovah saith unto Gideon, 'Every one who lappeth with his tongue of the water as the dog lappeth — thou dost set him apart; also every one who boweth on his knees to drink.'
And the number of those lapping with their hand unto their mouth is three hundred men, and all the rest of the people have bowed down on their knees to drink water.
And Jehovah saith unto Gideon, 'By the three hundred men who are lapping I save you, and have given Midian into thy hand, and all the people go, each to his place.'
And the people take the provision in their hand, and their trumpets, and every man of Israel he hath sent away, each to his tents; and on the three hundred men he hath kept hold, and the camp of Midian hath been by him at the lower part of the valley.
And it cometh to pass, on that night, that Jehovah saith unto him, 'Rise, go down into the camp, for I have given it into thy hand;
and if thou art afraid to go down — go down, thou and Phurah thy young man, unto the camp,
and thou hast heard what they speak, and afterwards are thy hands strengthened, and thou hast gone down against the camp.' And he goeth down, he and Phurah his young man, unto the extremity of the fifties who [are] in the camp;
and Midian and Amalek, and all the sons of the east are lying in the valley, as the locust for multitude, and of their camels there is no number, as sand which [is] on the sea-shore for multitude.
And Gideon cometh in, and lo, a man is recounting to his companion a dream, and saith, 'Lo, a dream I have dreamed, and lo, a cake of barley-bread is turning itself over into the camp of Midian, and it cometh in unto the tent, and smiteth it, and it falleth, and turneth it upwards, and the tent hath fallen.'
And his companion answereth and saith, 'This is nothing save the sword of Gideon son of Joash, a man of Israel; God hath given into his hand Midian and all the camp.'
And it cometh to pass, when Gideon heareth the narration of the dream and its interpretation, that he boweth himself, and turneth back unto the camp of Israel, and saith, 'Rise ye, for Jehovah hath given into your hand the camp of Midian.'
And he divideth the three hundred men [into] three detachments, and putteth trumpets into the hand of all of them, and empty pitchers, and lamps within the pitchers.
And he saith unto them, 'Look at me, and thus do; and lo, I am coming into the extremity of the camp — and it hath been — as I do so ye do;
and I have blown with a trumpet — I and all who [are] with me, and ye have blown with trumpets, even ye, round about all the camp, and have said, For Jehovah and for Gideon.'
And Gideon cometh — and the hundred men who [are] with him — into the extremity of the camp, [at] the beginning of the middle watch (it hath only just confirmed the watchmen), and they blow with trumpets — dashing in pieces also the pitchers which [are] in their hand;
and the three detachments blow with trumpets, and break the pitchers, and keep hold with their left hand on the lamps, and with their right hand on the trumpets to blow, and they cry, 'The sword of Jehovah and of Gideon.'
And they stand each in his place, round about the camp, and all the camp runneth, and they shout, and flee;
and the three hundred blow the trumpets, and Jehovah setteth the sword of each against his companion, even through all the camp; and the camp fleeth unto Beth-Shittah, at Zererath, unto the border of Abel-Meholah, by Tabbath.
And the men of Israel are called from Naphtali, and from Asher, and from all Manasseh, and pursue after Midian.
And messengers hath sent Gideon into all the hill-country of Ephraim, saying, 'Come down to meet Midian, and capture before them the waters unto Beth-Barah, and the Jordan;' and every man of Ephraim is called, and they capture the waters unto Beth-Barah, and the Jordan,
and they capture two of the heads of Midian, Oreb, and Zeeb, and slay Oreb at the rock of Oreb, and Zeeb they have slain at the wine-vat of Zeeb, and they pursue unto Midian; and the heads of Oreb and Zeeb they have brought in unto Gideon beyond the Jordan.
And the men of Ephraim say unto him, 'What [is] this thing thou hast done to us — not to call for us when thou didst go to fight with Midian?' and they strive with him severely;
and he saith unto them, 'What have I done now like you? are not the gleanings of Ephraim better than the harvest of Abi-Ezer?
Into your hand hath God given the heads of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb; and what have I been able to do like you?' Then their temper desisted from off him in his speaking this thing.
And Gideon cometh in unto the Jordan, passing over, he and the three hundred men who [are] with him — wearied, and pursuing,
and he saith to the men of Succoth, 'Give, I pray you, cakes of bread to the people who [are] at my feet, for they [are] wearied, and I am pursuing after Zebah and Zalmunna kings of Midian.'
And the heads of Succoth say, 'Is the hand of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thy hand, that we give to thy host bread?'
And Gideon saith, 'Therefore — in Jehovah's giving Zebah and Zalmunna into my hand — I have threshed your flesh with the thorns of the wilderness, and with the threshing instruments.'
And he goeth up thence [to] Penuel, and speaketh unto them thus; and the men of Penuel answer him as the men of Succoth answered.
And he speaketh also to the men of Penuel, saying, 'In my turning back in peace, I break down this tower.'
And Zebah and Zalmunna [are] in Karkor, and their camps with them, about fifteen thousand, all who are left of all the camp of the sons of the east; and those falling [are] a hundred and twenty thousand men, drawing sword.
And Gideon goeth up the way of those who tabernacle in tents, on the east of Nobah and Jogbehah, and smiteth the camp, and the camp was confident;
and Zebab and Zalmunna flee, and he pursueth after them, and captureth the two kings of Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna, and all the camp he hath caused to tremble.
And Gideon son of Joash turneth back from the battle, at the going up of the sun,
and captureth a young man of the men of Succoth, and asketh him, and he describeth unto him the heads of Succoth, and its elders — seventy and seven men.
And he cometh in unto the men of Succoth, and saith, 'Lo Zebah and Zalmunna, with whom ye reproached me, saying, Is the hand of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thy hand that we give to thy men who [are] wearied bread?'
And he taketh the elders of the city, and the thorns of the wilderness, and the threshing instruments, and teacheth by them the men of Succoth,
and the tower of Penuel he hath broken down, and slayeth the men of the city.
And he saith unto Zebah and unto Zalmunna, 'How — the men whom ye slew in Tabor?' and they say, 'As thou — so they, one — as the form of the king's sons.'
And he saith, 'My brethren — sons of my mother — they; Jehovah liveth, if ye had kept them alive — I had not slain you.'
And he saith to Jether his first-born, 'Rise, slay them;' and the young man hath not drawn his sword, for he hath been afraid, for he [is] yet a youth.
And Zebah saith — also Zalmunna — 'Rise thou, and fall upon us; for as the man — his might;' and Gideon riseth, and slayeth Zebah and Zalmunna, and taketh their round ornaments which [are] on the necks of their camels.
And the men of Israel say unto Gideon, 'Rule over us, both thou, and thy son, and thy son's son, for thou hast saved us from the hand of Midian.'
And Gideon saith unto them, 'I do not rule over you, nor doth my son rule over you; Jehovah doth rule over you.'
And Gideon saith unto them, 'Let me ask of you a petition, and give ye to me each the ring of his prey, for they have rings of gold, for they [are] Ishmaelites.'
And they say, 'We certainly give;' and they spread out the garment, and cast thither each the ring of his prey;
and the weight of the rings of gold which he asked is a thousand and seven hundred [shekels] of gold, apart from the round ornaments, and the drops, and the purple garments, which [are] on the kings of Midian, and apart from the chains which [are] on the necks of their camels,
and Gideon maketh it into an ephod, and setteth it up in his city, in Ophrah, and all Israel go a-whoring after it there, and it is to Gideon and to his house for a snare.
And Midian is humbled before the sons of Israel, and have not added to lift up their head; and the land resteth forty years in the days of Gideon.
And Jerubbaal son of Joash goeth and dwelleth in his own house,
and to Gideon there have been seventy sons, coming out of his loin, for he had many wives;
and his concubine, who [is] in Shechem, hath born to him — even she — a son, and he appointeth his name Abimelech.
And Gideon son of Joash dieth, in a good old age, and is buried in the burying-place of Joash his father, in Ophrah of the Abi-Ezrite.
And it cometh to pass, when Gideon [is] dead, that the sons of Israel turn back and go a-whoring after the Baalim, and set over them Baal-Berith for a god;
and the sons of Israel have not remembered Jehovah their God, who is delivering them out of the hand of all their enemies round about,
neither have they done kindness with the house of Jerubbaal — Gideon — according to all the good which he did with Israel.
and Abimelech son of Jerubbaal goeth to Shechem, unto his mother's brethren, and speaketh unto them, and unto all the family of the house of his mother's father, saying,
'Speak, I pray you, in the ears of all the masters of Shechem, Which [is] good for you — the ruling over you of seventy men (all the sons of Jerubbaal), or the ruling over you of one man? — and ye have remembered that I [am] your bone and your flesh.'
And his mother's brethren speak concerning him, in the ears of all the masters of Shechem, all these words, and their heart inclineth after Abimelech, for they said, 'He [is] our brother;'
and they give to him seventy silverings out of the house of Baal-Berith, and Abimelech hireth with them men, vain and unstable, and they go after him;
and he goeth into the house of his father at Ophrah, and slayeth his brethren, sons of Jerubbaal, seventy men, on one stone; and Jotham, youngest son of Jerubbaal, is left, for he was hidden.
And all the masters of Shechem are gathered together, and all the house of Millo, and come and cause Abimelech to reign for king at the oak of the camp which [is] in Shechem;
and they declare [it] to Jotham, and he goeth and standeth on the top of mount Gerizim, and lifteth up his voice, and calleth, and saith to them, 'Hearken unto me, O masters of Shechem, and God doth hearken unto you:
'The trees have diligently gone to anoint over them a king, and they say to the olive, Reign thou over us.
And the olive saith to them, Have I ceased from my fatness, by which they honour gods and men, that I have gone to stagger over the trees?
And the trees say to the fig, Come thou, reign over us.
And the fig saith to them, Have I ceased from my sweetness, and my good increase, that I have gone to stagger over the trees?
'And the trees say to the vine, Come thou, reign over us.
And the vine saith to them, Have I ceased from my new wine, which is rejoicing gods and men, that I have gone to stagger over the trees?
And all the trees say unto the bramble, Come thou, reign over us.
And the bramble saith unto the trees, If in truth ye are anointing me for king over you, come, take refuge in my shadow; and if not — fire cometh out from the bramble, and devoureth the cedars of Lebanon.
'And, now, if in truth and in sincerity ye have acted, when ye make Abimelech king; and if ye have done good with Jerubbaal, and with his house; and if according to the deed of his hands ye have done to him —
because my father hath fought for you, and doth cast away his life from [him], and deliver you from the hand of Midian;
and ye have risen against the house of my father to-day, and slay his sons, seventy men, on one stone, and cause Abimelech son of his handmaid to reign over the masters of Shechem, because he [is] your brother —
yea, if in truth and in sincerity ye have acted with Jerubbaal and with his house this day, rejoice ye in Abimelech, and he doth rejoice — even he — in you;
and if not — fire cometh out from Abimelech and devoureth the masters of Shechem and the house of Millo, and fire cometh out from the masters of Shechem and from the house of Millo, and devoureth Abimelech.'
And Jotham hasteth, and fleeth, and goeth to Beer, and dwelleth there, from the face of Abimelech his brother.
And Abimelech is prince over Israel three years,
and God sendeth an evil spirit between Abimelech and the masters of Shechem, and the masters of Shechem deal treacherously with Abimelech,
for the coming in of the violence [to] the seventy sons of Jerubbaal, and of their blood to place [it] on Abimelech their brother, who slew them, and on the masters of Shechem, who strengthened his hands to slay his brethren.
And the masters of Shechem set for him ambushes on the top of the hills, and rob every one who passeth over by them in the way, and it is declared to Abimelech.
And Gaal son of Ebed cometh — also his brethren — and they pass over into Shechem, and the masters of Shechem trust in him,
and go out into the field, and gather their vineyards, and tread, and make praises, and go into the house of their god, and eat and drink, and revile Abimelech.
And Gaal son of Ebed saith, 'Who [is] Abimelech, and who [is] Shechem, that we serve him? is [he] not son of Jerubbaal? and Zebul his commander? Serve ye the men of Hamor father of Shechem, and wherefore do we serve him — we?
and oh that this people were in my hand — then I turn Abimelech aside;' and he saith to Abimelech, 'Increase thy host, and come out.'
And Zebul, prince of the city, heareth the words of Gaal son of Ebed, and his anger burneth,
and he sendeth messengers unto Abimelech deceitfully, saying, 'Lo, Gaal son of Ebed and his brethren are coming into Shechem, and lo, they are fortifying the city against thee;
and, now, rise by night, thou and the people who [are] with thee, and lay wait in the field,
and it hath been, in the morning, about the rising of the sun, thou dost rise early, and hast pushed against the city; and lo, he and the people who [are] with him are going out unto thee — and thou hast done to him as thy hand doth find.'
And Abimelech riseth, and all the people who [are] with him, by night, and they lay wait against Shechem — four detachments;
and Gaal son of Ebed goeth out, and standeth at the opening of the gate of the city, and Abimelech riseth — also the people who [are] with him — from the ambush,
and Gaal seeth the people, and saith unto Zebul, 'Lo, people are coming down from the top of the hills;' and Zebul saith unto him, 'The shadow of the hills thou art seeing like men.'
And Gaal addeth yet to speak, and saith, 'Lo, people are coming down from the high part of the land, and another detachment is coming by the way of the oak of Meonenim.'
And Zebul saith unto him, 'Where [is] now thy mouth, in that thou sayest, Who [is] Abimelech that we serve him? is not this the people against which thou hast kicked? go out, I pray thee now, and fight against it.'
And Gaal goeth out before the masters of Shechem, and fighteth against Abimelech,
and Abimelech pursueth him, and he fleeth from his presence, and many fall wounded — unto the opening of the gate.
And Abimelech abideth in Arumah, and Zebul casteth out Gaal and his brethren from dwelling in Shechem.
And it cometh to pass, on the morrow, that the people go out to the field, and they declare [it] to Abimelech,
and he taketh the people, and divideth them into three detachments, and layeth wait in a field, and looketh, and lo, the people are coming out from the city, and he riseth against them, and smiteth them.
And Abimelech and the detachments who [are] with him have pushed on, and stand at the opening of the gate of the city, and the two detachments have pushed against all who are in the field, and smite them,
and Abimelech hath fought against the city all that day, and captureth the city, and the people who [are] in it he hath slain, and he breaketh down the city, and soweth it [with] salt.
And all the masters of the tower of Shechem hear, and go in unto the high place of the house of the god Berith,
and it is declared to Abimelech that all the masters of the tower of Shechem have gathered themselves together,
and Abimelech goeth up to mount Zalmon, he and all the people who [are] with him, and Abimelech taketh the great axe in his hand, and cutteth off a bough of the trees, and lifteth it up, and setteth [it] on his shoulder, and saith unto the people who [are] with him, 'What ye have seen I have done — haste, do ye like it.'
And all the people also cut down each one his bough, and go after Abimelech, and set [them] at the high place, and burn by these the high place with fire, and also all the men of the tower of Shechem die, about a thousand men and women.
And Abimelech goeth unto Thebez, and encampeth against Thebez, and captureth it,
and a strong tower hath been in the midst of the city, and thither flee do all the men and the women, and all the masters of the city, and they shut [it] behind them, and go up on the roof of the tower.
And Abimelech cometh unto the tower, and fighteth against it, and draweth nigh unto the opening of the tower to burn it with fire,
and a certain woman doth cast a piece of a rider on the head of Abimelech, and breaketh his skull,
and he calleth hastily unto the young man bearing his weapons, and saith to him, 'Draw thy sword, and thou hast put me to death, lest they say of me — A woman slew him;' and his young man pierced him through, and he dieth.
And the men of Israel see that Abimelech [is] dead, and go each one to his place;
and God turneth back the evil of Abimelech which he did to his father to slay his seventy brethren;
and all the evil of the men of Shechem hath God turned back on their head, and come unto them doth the cursing of Jotham son of Jerubbaal.
And there riseth after Abimelech, to save Israel, Tola son of Puah, son of Dodo, a man of Issachar, and he is dwelling in Shamir, in the hill-country of Ephraim,
and he judgeth Israel twenty and three years, and he dieth, and is buried in Shamir.
And there riseth after him Jair the Gileadite, and he judgeth Israel twenty and two years,
and he hath thirty sons riding on thirty ass-colts, and they have thirty cities, (they call them Havoth-Jair unto this day), which [are] in the land of Gilead;
and Jair dieth, and is buried in Kamon.
And the sons of Israel add to do the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, and serve the Baalim, and Ashtaroth, and the gods of Aram, and the gods of Zidon, and the gods of Moab, and the gods of the Bene-Ammon, and the gods of the Philistines, and forsake Jehovah, and have not served Him;
and the anger of Jehovah burneth against Israel, and He selleth them into the hand of the Philistines, and into the hand of the Bene-Ammon,
and they crush and oppress the sons of Israel in that year — eighteen years all the sons of Israel [who] are beyond the Jordan, in the land of the Amorite, which [is] in Gilead.
And the Bene-Ammon pass over the Jordan to fight also against Judah, and against Benjamin, and against the house of Ephraim, and Israel hath great distress.
And the sons of Israel cry unto Jehovah, saying, 'We have sinned against Thee, even because we have forsaken our God, and serve the Baalim.'
And Jehovah saith unto the sons of Israel, '[Have I] not [saved you] from the Egyptians, and from the Amorite, from the Bene-Ammon, and from the Philistines?
And the Zidonians, and Amalek, and Maon have oppressed you, and ye cry unto Me, and I save you out of their hand;
and ye — ye have forsaken Me, and serve other gods, therefore I add not to save you.
Go and cry unto the gods on which ye have fixed; they — they save you in the time of your adversity.'
And the sons of Israel say unto Jehovah, 'We have sinned, do Thou to us according to all that is good in Thine eyes; only deliver us, we pray Thee, this day.'
And they turn aside the gods of the stranger out of their midst, and serve Jehovah, and His soul is grieved with the misery of Israel.
And the Bene-Ammon are called together, and encamp in Gilead, and the sons of Israel are gathered together, and encamp in Mizpah.
And the people — heads of Gilead — say one unto another, 'Who [is] the man that doth begin to fight against the Bene-Ammon? he is for head to all inhabitants of Gilead.'
And Jephthah the Gileadite hath been a mighty man of valour, and he [is] son of a woman, a harlot; and Gilead begetteth Jephthah,
and the wife of Gilead beareth to him sons, and the wife's sons grow up and cast out Jephthah, and say to him, 'Thou dost not inherit in the house of our father; for son of another woman [art] thou.'
And Jephthah fleeth from the face of his brethren, and dwelleth in the land of Tob; and vain men gather themselves together unto Jephthah, and they go out with him.
And it cometh to pass, after a time, that the Bene-Ammon fight with Israel,
and it cometh to pass, when the Bene-Ammon have fought with Israel, that the elders of Gilead go to take Jephthah from the land of Tob;
and they say unto Jephthah, 'Come, and thou hast been to us for captain, and we fight against the Bene-Ammon.'
And Jephthah saith to the elders of Gilead, 'Have not ye hated me? and ye cast me out from the house of my father, and wherefore have ye come unto me now when ye are in distress?'
and the elders of Gilead say unto Jephthah, 'Therefore, now, we have turned back unto thee; and thou hast gone with us, and fought against the Bene-Ammon, and thou hast been to us for head — to all the inhabitants of Gilead.'
And Jephthah saith unto the elders of Gilead, 'If ye are taking me back to fight against the Bene-Ammon, and Jehovah hath given them before me — I, am I to you for a head?'
And the elders of Gilead say unto Jephthah, 'Jehovah is hearkening between us — if according to thy word we do not so.'
And Jephthah goeth with the elders of Gilead, and the people set him over them for head and for captain, and Jephthah speaketh all his words before Jehovah in Mizpeh.
And Jephthah sendeth messengers unto the king of the Bene-Ammon, saying, 'What — to me and to thee, that thou hast come in unto me, to fight in my land.'
And the king of the Bene-Ammon saith unto the messengers of Jephthah, 'Because Israel took my land in his coming up out of Egypt, from Arnon, and unto the Jabbok, and unto the Jordan; and now, restore them in peace.'
And Jephthah addeth yet and sendeth messengers unto the king of the Bene-Ammon,
and saith to him, 'Thus said Jephthah, Israel took not the land of Moab, and the land of the Bene-Ammon,
for in their coming up out of Egypt, Israel goeth in the wilderness unto the Red Sea, and cometh in to Kadesh,
and Israel sendeth messengers unto the king of Edom, saying, Let me pass over, I pray thee, through thy land, and the king of Edom hearkened not; and also unto the king of Moab hath [Israel] sent, and he hath not been willing; and Israel abideth in Kadesh,
and he goeth through the wilderness, and compasseth the land of Edom and the land of Moab, and cometh in at the rising of the sun of the land of Moab, and they encamp beyond Arnon, and have not come into the border of Moab, for Arnon [is] the border of Moab.
'And Israel sendeth messengers unto Sihon, king of the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and Israel saith to him, Let us pass over, we pray thee, through thy land, unto my place,
and Sihon hath not trusted Israel to pass over through his border, and Sihon gathereth all his people, and they encamp in Jahaz, and fight with Israel;
and Jehovah, God of Israel, giveth Sihon and all his people into the hand of Israel, and they smite them, and Israel possesseth all the land of the Amorite, the inhabitant of that land,
and they possess all the border of the Amorite from Arnon, and unto the Jabbok, and from the wilderness, and unto the Jordan.
'And now, Jehovah, God of Israel, hath dispossessed the Amorite from the presence of His people Israel, and thou wouldest possess it!
That which Chemosh thy god causeth thee to possess — dost thou not possess it? and all that which Jehovah our God hath dispossessed from our presence, — it we do possess.
'And now, [art] thou at all better than Balak son of Zippor, king of Moab? did he at all strive with Israel? did he at all fight against them?
In Israel's dwelling in Heshbon and in its towns, and in Aroer and in its towns, and in all the cities which [are] by the sides of Arnon three hundred years — and wherefore have ye not delivered them in that time?
And I — I have not sinned against thee, and thou art doing with me evil — to fight against me. Jehovah, the Judge, doth judge to-day between the sons of Israel and the sons of Ammon.'
And the king of the Bene-Ammon hath not hearkened unto the words of Jephthah which he sent unto him,
and the Spirit of Jehovah is on Jephthah, and he passeth over Gilead and Manasseh, and passeth over Mizpeh of Gilead, and from Mizpeh of Gilead he hath passed over to the Bene-Ammon.
And Jephthah voweth a vow to Jehovah, and saith, 'If Thou dost at all give the Bene-Ammon into my hand —
then it hath been, that which at all cometh out from the doors of my house to meet me in my turning back in peace from the Bene-Ammon — it hath been to Jehovah, or I have offered up for it — a burnt-offering.'
And Jephthah passeth over unto the Bene-Ammon to fight against them, and Jehovah giveth them into his hand,
and he smiteth them from Aroer, and unto thy going in to Minnith, twenty cities, and unto the meadow of the vineyards — a very great smiting; and the Bene-Ammon are humbled at the presence of the sons of Israel.
And Jephthah cometh into Mizpeh, unto his house, and lo, his daughter is coming out to meet him with timbrels, and with choruses, and save her alone, he hath none, son or daughter.
And it cometh to pass, when he seeth her, that he rendeth his garments, and saith, 'Alas, my daughter, thou hast caused me greatly to bend, and thou hast been among those troubling me; and I — I have opened my mouth unto Jehovah, and I am not able to turn back.'
And she saith unto him, 'My father — thou hast opened thy mouth unto Jehovah, do to me as it hath gone out from thy mouth, after that Jehovah hath done for thee vengeance on thine enemies, on the Bene-Ammon.'
And she saith unto her father, 'Let this thing be done to me; desist from me two months, and I go on, and have gone down on the hills, and I weep for my virginity — I and my friends.'
And he saith, 'Go;' and he sendeth her away two months, and she goeth, she and her friends, and she weepeth for her virginity on the hills;
and it cometh to pass at the end of two months that she turneth back unto her father, and he doth to her his vow which he hath vowed, and she knew not a man; and it is a statute in Israel:
from time to time the daughters of Israel go to talk to the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite, four days in a year.
And the men of Ephraim are called together, and pass over northward, and say to Jephthah, 'Wherefore has thou passed over to fight against the Bene-Ammon, and on us hast not called to go with thee? thy house we burn over thee with fire.'
And Jephthah saith unto them, 'A man of great strife I have been (I and my people) with the Bene-Ammon, and I call you, and ye have not saved me out of their hand,
and I see that thou art not a saviour, and I put my life in my hand, and pass over unto the Bene-Ammon, and Jehovah giveth them into my hand — and why have ye come up unto me this day to fight against me?'
And Jephthah gathered all the men of Gilead, and fighteth with Ephraim, and the men of Gilead smite Ephraim, because they said, 'Fugitives of Ephraim [are] ye Gileadites, in the midst of Ephraim — in the midst of Manasseh.'
And Gilead captureth the passages of the Jordan to Ephraim, and it hath been, when [any of] the fugitives of Ephraim say, 'Let me pass over,' and the men of Gilead say to him, 'An Ephramite thou?' and he saith, 'No;'
that they say to him, 'Say, I pray thee, Shibboleth;' and he saith, 'Sibboleth,' and is not prepared to speak right — and they seize him, and slaughter him at the passages of the Jordan, and there fall at that time, of Ephraim, forty and two chiefs.
And Jephthah judged Israel six years, and Jephthah the Gileadite dieth, and is buried in [one of] the cities of Gilead.
And after him Ibzan of Beth-Lehem judgeth Israel,
and he hath thirty sons and thirty daughters, he hath sent without and thirty daughters hath brought in to his sons from without; and he judgeth Israel seven years.
And Ibzan dieth, and is buried in Beth-Lehem.
And after him Elon the Zebulunite judgeth Israel, and he judgeth Israel ten years,
and Elon the Zebulunite dieth, and is buried in Aijalon, in the land of Zebulun.
And after him, Abdon son of Hillel, the Pirathonite, judgeth Israel,
and he hath forty sons, and thirty grandsons, riding on seventy ass-colts, and he judgeth Israel eight years.
And Abdon son of Hillel, the Pirathonite, dieth, and is buried in Pirathon, in the land of Ephraim, in the hill-country of the Amalekite.
And the sons of Israel add to do the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, and Jehovah giveth them into the hand of the Philistines forty years.
And there is a certain man of Zorah, of the family of the Danite, and his name [is] Manoah, his wife [is] barren, and hath not borne;
and a messenger of Jehovah appeareth unto the woman, and saith unto her, 'Lo, I pray thee, thou [art] barren, and hast not borne; when thou hast conceived, then thou hast borne a son.
And, now, take heed, I pray thee, and do not drink wine, and strong drink, and do not eat any unclean thing,
for, lo, thou art conceiving and bearing a son, and a razor doth not go up on his head, for a Nazarite to God is the youth from the womb, and he doth begin to save Israel out of the hand of the Philistines.'
And the woman cometh and speaketh to her husband, saying, 'A man of God hath come unto me, and his appearance [is] as the appearance of a messenger of God, very fearful, and I have not asked him whence he [is], and his name he hath not declared to me;
and he saith to me, Lo, thou art pregnant, and bearing a son, and now do not drink wine and strong drink, and do not eat any unclean thing, for a Nazarite to God is the youth from the womb till the day of his death.'
And Manoah maketh entreaty unto Jehovah, and saith, 'O, my Lord, the man of God whom Thou didst send, let him come in, I pray thee, again unto us, and direct us what we do to the youth who is born.'
And God hearkeneth to the voice of Manoah, and the messenger of God cometh again unto the woman, and she [is] sitting in a field, and Manoah her husband is not with her,
and the woman hasteth, and runneth, and declareth to her husband, and saith unto him, 'Lo, he hath appeared unto me — the man who came on [that] day unto me.'
And Manoah riseth, and goeth after his wife, and cometh unto the man, and saith to him, 'Art thou the man who spake unto the woman?' and he saith, 'I [am].'
And Manoah saith, 'Now let thy words come to pass; what is the custom of the youth — and his work?'
And the messenger of Jehovah saith unto Manoah, 'Of all that I said unto the woman let her take heed;
of anything which cometh out from the wine-vine she doth not eat, and wine and strong drink she doth not drink, and any unclean thing she doth not eat; all that I have commanded her she doth observe.'
And Manoah saith unto the messenger of Jehovah, 'Let us detain thee, we pray thee, and prepare before thee a kid of the goats.'
And the messenger of Jehovah saith unto Manoah, 'If thou detain me — I do not eat of thy bread; and if thou prepare a burnt-offering — to Jehovah thou dost offer it;' for Manoah hath not known that He [is] a messenger of Jehovah.
And Manoah saith unto the messenger of Jehovah, 'What [is] thy name? when thy words come to pass, then we have honoured thee.'
And the messenger of Jehovah saith to him, 'Why [is] this — thou dost ask for My name? — and it [is] Wonderful.'
And Manoah taketh the kid of the goats, and the present, and offereth on the rock to Jehovah, and He is doing wonderfully, and Manoah and his wife are looking on,
and it cometh to pass, in the going up of the flame from off the altar toward the heavens, that the messenger of Jehovah goeth up in the flame of the altar, and Manoah and his wife are looking on, and they fall on their faces to the earth,
and the messenger of Jehovah hath not added again to appear unto Manoah, and unto his wife, then hath Manoah known that He [is] a messenger of Jehovah.
And Manoah saith unto his wife, 'We certainly die, for we have seen God.'
And his wife saith to him, 'If Jehovah were desirous to put us to death, He had not received from our hands burnt-offering and present, nor shewed us all these things, nor as [at this] time caused us to hear [anything] like this.'
And the woman beareth a son, and calleth his name Samson, and the youth groweth, and Jehovah doth bless him,
and the Spirit of Jehovah beginneth to move him in the camp of Dan, between Zorah and Eshtaol.
And Samson goeth down to Timnath, and seeth a woman in Timnath of the daughters of the Philistines,
and cometh up and declareth to his father, and to his mother, and saith, 'A woman I have seen in Timnath, of the daughters of the Philistines; and now, take her for me for a wife.'
And his father saith to him — also his mother, 'Is there not among the daughters of thy brethren, and among all my people, a woman, that thou art going to take a woman from the uncircumcised Philistines?' and Samson saith unto his father, 'Take her for me, for she is right in mine eyes.'
And his father and his mother have not known that from Jehovah it [is], that a meeting he is seeking of the Philistines; and at that time the Philistines are ruling over Israel.
And Samson goeth down — also his father and his mother, to Timnath, and they come unto the vineyards of Timnath, and lo, a lion's whelp roareth at meeting him,
and the Spirit of Jehovah prospereth over him, and he rendeth it as the rending of a kid, and there is nothing in his hand, and he hath not declared to his father and to his mother that which he hath done.
And he goeth down and speaketh to the woman, and she is right in the eyes of Samson;
and he turneth back after [some] days to take her, and turneth aside to see the carcase of the lion, and lo, a company of bees [are] in the body of the lion — and honey.
And he taketh it down on to his hands, and goeth on, going and eating; and he goeth unto his father, and unto his mother, and giveth to them, and they eat, and he hath not declared to them that from the body of the lion he took down the honey.
And his father goeth down unto the woman, and Samson maketh there a banquet, for so the young men do;
and it cometh to pass when they see him, that they take thirty companions, and they are with him.
And Samson saith to them, 'Let me, I pray you, put forth to you a riddle; if ye certainly declare it to me [in] the seven days of the banquet, and have found [it] out, then I have given to you thirty linen shirts, and thirty changes of garments;
and if ye are not able to declare [it] to me, then ye have given to me thirty linen shirts, and thirty changes of garments.' And they say to him, 'Put forth thy riddle, and we hear it!'
And he saith to them: 'Out of the eater came forth meat, And out of the strong came forth sweetness;' and they were not able to declare the riddle [in] three days.
And it cometh to pass, on the seventh day, that they say to Samson's wife, 'Entice thy husband, that he declare to us the riddle, lest we burn thee and the house of thy father with fire; to possess us have ye called for us? is it not?'
And Samson's wife weepeth for it, and saith, 'Thou hast only hated me, and hast not loved me; the riddle thou hast put forth to the sons of my people — and to me thou hast not declared it;' and he saith to her, 'Lo, to my father and to my mother I have not declared [it] — and to thee I declare [it]!'
And she weepeth for it the seven days [in] which their banquet hath been, and it cometh to pass on the seventh day that he declareth [it] to her, for she hath distressed him; and she declareth the riddle to the sons of her people.
And the men of the city say to him on the seventh day, before the sun goeth in: — 'What [is] sweeter than honey? And what stronger than a lion?' And he saith to them: 'Unless ye had ploughed with my heifer, Ye had not found out my riddle.'
And the Spirit of Jehovah prospereth over him, and he goeth down to Ashkelon, and smiteth of them thirty men, and taketh their armour, and giveth the changes to those declaring the riddle; and his anger burneth, and he goeth up to the house of his father;
and Samson's wife becometh his companion's, who [is] his friend.
And it cometh to pass, after [some] days, in the days of wheat-harvest, that Samson looketh after his wife, with a kid of the goats, and saith, 'I go in unto my wife, to the inner chamber;' and her father hath not permitted him to go in,
and her father saith, I certainly said, that thou didst certainly hate her, and I give her to thy companion; is not her sister — the young one — better than she? Let her be, I pray thee, to thee, instead of her.'
And Samson saith of them, 'I am more innocent this time than the Philistines, though I am doing with them evil.'
And Samson goeth and catcheth three hundred foxes, and taketh torches, and turneth tail unto tail, and putteth a torch between the two tails, in the midst,
and kindleth fire in the torches, and sendeth [them] out into the standing corn of the Philistines, and burneth [it] from heap even unto standing corn, even unto vineyard — olive-yard.
And the Philistines say, 'Who hath done this?' And they say, 'Samson, son-in-law of the Timnite, because he hath taken away his wife, and giveth her to his companion;' and the Philistines go up, and burn her and her father with fire.
And Samson saith to them, 'Though ye do thus, nevertheless I am avenged on you, and afterwards I cease!'
And he smiteth them hip and thigh — a great smiting, and goeth down and dwelleth in the cleft of the rock Etam.
And the Philistines go up, and encamp in Judah, and are spread out in Lehi,
and the men of Judah say, 'Why have ye come up against us?' and they say, 'To bind Samson we have come up, to do to him as he hath done to us.'
And three thousand men of Judah go down unto the cleft of the rock Etam, and say to Samson, 'Hast thou now known that the Philistines are rulers over us? and what [is] this thou hast done to us?' And he saith to them, 'As they did to me, so I did to them.'
And they say to him, 'To bind thee we have come down — to give thee into the hand of the Philistines.' And Samson saith to them, 'Swear to me, lest ye fall upon me yourselves.'
And they speak to him, saying, No, but we certainly bind thee, and have given thee into their hand, and we certainly do not put thee to death;' and they bind him with two thick bands, new ones, and bring him up from the rock.
He hath come unto Lehi — and the Philistines have shouted at meeting him — and the Spirit of Jehovah prospereth over him, and the thick bands which [are] on his arms are as flax which they burn with fire, and his bands are wasted from off his hands,
and he findeth a fresh jaw-bone of an ass, and putteth forth his hand and taketh it, and smiteth with it — a thousand men.
And Samson saith, 'With a jaw-bone of the ass — an ass upon asses — with a jaw-bone of the ass I have smitten a thousand men.'
And it cometh to pass when he finisheth speaking, that he casteth away the jaw-bone out of his hand, and calleth that place Ramath-Lehi;
and he thirsteth exceedingly, and calleth unto Jehovah, and saith, 'Thou — Thou hast given by the hand of Thy servant this great salvation; and now, I die with thirst, and have fallen into the hand of the uncircumcised.'
And God cleaveth the hollow place which [is] in Lehi, and waters come out of it, and he drinketh, and his spirit cometh back, and he reviveth; therefore hath [one] called its name 'The fountain of him who is calling,' which [is] in Lehi unto this day.
And he judgeth Israel in the days of the Philistines twenty years.
And Samson goeth to Gaza, and seeth there a woman, a harlot, and goeth in unto her;
[it is told] to the Gazathites, saying, 'Samson hath come in hither;' and they go round and lay wait for him all the night at the gate of the city, and keep themselves silent all the night, saying, 'Till the light of the morning — then we have slain him.'
And Samson lieth down till the middle of the night, and riseth in the middle of the night, and layeth hold on the doors of the gate of the city, and on the two side posts, and removeth them with the bar, and putteth on his shoulders, and taketh them up unto the top of the hill, which [is] on the front of Hebron.
And it cometh to pass afterwards that he loveth a woman in the valley of Sorek, and her name [is] Delilah,
and the princes of the Philistines come up unto her, and say to her, 'Entice him, and see wherein his great power [is], and wherein we are able for him — and we have bound him to afflict him, and we — we give to thee, each one, eleven hundred silverlings.'
And Delilah saith unto Samson, 'Declare, I pray thee, to me, wherein thy great power [is], and wherewith thou art bound, to afflict thee.'
And Samson saith unto her, 'If they bind me with seven green withs which have not been dried, then I have been weak, and have been as one of the human race.'
And the princes of the Philistines bring up to her seven green withs which have not been dried, and she bindeth him with them.
And the ambush is abiding with her in an inner chamber, and she saith unto him, 'Philistines [are] upon thee, Samson;' and he breaketh the withs as a thread of tow is broken in its smelling fire, and his power hath not been known.
And Delilah saith unto Samson, 'Lo, thou hast played upon me, and speakest unto me lies; now, declare, I pray thee, to me, wherewith thou art bound.'
And he saith unto her, 'If they certainly bind me with thick bands, new ones, by which work hath not been done, then I have been weak, and have been as one of the human race.'
And Delilah taketh thick bands, new ones, and bindeth him with them, and saith unto him, 'Philistines [are] upon thee, Samson;' and the ambush is abiding in an inner chamber, and he breaketh them from off his arms as a thread.
And Delilah saith unto Samson, 'Hitherto thou hast played upon me, and dost speak unto me lies; declare to me wherewith thou art bound.' And he saith unto her, 'If thou weavest the seven locks of my head with the web.'
And she fixeth [it] with the pin, and saith unto him, 'Philistines [are] upon thee, Samson;' and he awaketh out of his sleep, and journeyeth with the pin of the weaving machine, and with the web.
And she saith unto him, 'How dost thou say, I have loved thee, and thy heart is not with me? these three times thou hast played upon me, and hast not declared to me wherein thy great power [is].'
And it cometh to pass, because she distressed him with her words all the days, and doth urge him, and his soul is grieved to death,
that he declareth to her all his heart, and saith to her, 'A razor hath not gone up on my head, for a Nazarite to God I [am] from the womb of my mother; if I have been shaven, then hath my power turned aside from me, and I have been weak, and have been as any of the human race.'
And Delilah seeth that he hath declared to her all his heart, and she sendeth and calleth for the princes of the Philistines, saying, 'Come up this time, for he hath declared to me all his heart;' and the princes of the Philistines have come up unto her, and bring up the money in their hand.
and she maketh him sleep on her knees, and calleth for a man, and shaveth the seven locks of his head, and beginneth to afflict him, and his power turneth aside from off him;
and she saith, 'Philistines [are] upon thee, Samson;' and he awaketh out of his sleep, and saith, 'I go out as time by time, and shake myself;' and he hath not known that Jehovah hath turned aside from off him.
And the Philistines seize him, and pick out his eyes, and bring him down to Gaza, and bind him with two brazen fetters; and he is grinding in the prison-house.
And the hair of his head beginneth to shoot up, when he hath been shaven,
and the princes of the Philistines have been gathered together to sacrifice a great sacrifice to Dagon their god, and to rejoice; and they say, 'Our god hath given into our hand Samson our enemy.'
And the people see him, and praise their god, for they said, 'Our god hath given in our hand our enemy, and he who is laying waste our land, and who multiplied our wounded.'
And it cometh to pass, when their heart [is] glad, that they say, 'Call for Samson, and he doth play before us;' and they call for Samson out of the prison-house, and he playeth before them, and they cause him to stand between the pillars.
And Samson saith unto the young man who is keeping hold on his hand, 'Let me alone, and let me feel the pillars on which the house is established, and I lean upon them.'
And the house hath been full of men and of women, and thither [are] all the princes of the Philistines, and on the roof [are] about three thousand men and women, who are looking on the playing of Samson.
And Samson calleth unto Jehovah, and saith, 'Lord Jehovah, remember me, I pray Thee, and strengthen me, I pray Thee, only this time, O God; and I am avenged — vengeance at once — because of my two eyes, on the Philistines.'
And Samson turneth aside [to] the two middle pillars, on which the house is established, and on which it is supported, [to] the one with his right hand, and one with his left;
and Samson saith, 'Let me die with the Philistines,' and he inclineth himself powerfully, and the house falleth on the princes, and on all the people who [are] in it, and the dead whom he hath put to death in his death are more than those whom he put to death in his life.
And his brethren come down, and all the house of his father, and lift him up, and bring him up, and bury him between Zorah and Eshtaol, in the burying-place of Manoah his father; and he hath judged Israel twenty years.
And there is a man of the hill-country of Ephraim, and his name [is] Micah,
and he saith to his mother, 'The eleven hundred silverlings which have been taken of thine, and [of which] thou hast sworn, and also spoken in mine ears; lo, the silver [is] with me, I have taken it;' and his mother saith, 'Blessed [is] my son of Jehovah.'
And he giveth back the eleven hundred silverlings to his mother, and his mother saith, 'I had certainly sanctified the silver to Jehovah, from my hand, for my son, to make a graven image, and a molten image; and now, I give it back to thee.'
And he giveth back the money to his mother, and his mother taketh two hundred silverlings, and giveth them to a refiner, and he maketh them a graven image, and a molten image, and it is in the house of Micah.
As to the man Micah, he hath a house of gods, and he maketh an ephod, and teraphim, and consecrateth the hand of one of his sons, and he is to him for a priest;
in those days there is no king in Israel, each that which is right in his own eyes doth.
And there is a young man of Beth-Lehem-Judah, of the family of Judah, and he [is] a Levite, and he [is] a sojourner there.
And the man goeth out of the city, out of Beth-Lehem-Judah, to sojourn where he doth find, and cometh to the hill-country of Ephraim, unto the house of Micah, to work his way.
And Micah saith to him, 'Whence comest thou?' and he saith unto him, 'A Levite [am] I, of Beth-Lehem-Judah, and I am going to sojourn where I do find.'
And Micah saith to him, 'Dwell with me, and be to me for a father and for a priest, and I give to thee ten silverlings for the days, and a suit of garments, and thy sustenance;' and the Levite goeth [in].
And the Levite is willing to dwell with the man, and the young man is to him as one of his sons.
And Micah consecrateth the hand of the Levite, and the young man is to him for a priest, and he is in the house of Micah,
and Micah saith, 'Now I have known that Jehovah doth good to me, for the Levite hath been to me for a priest.'
In those days there is no king in Israel, and in those days the tribe of the Danite is seeking for itself an inheritance to inhabit, for [that] hath not fallen to it unto that day in the midst of the tribes of Israel by inheritance.
And the sons of Dan send, out of their family, five men of them, men, sons of valour, from Zorah, and from Eshtaol, to traverse the land, and to search it, and they say unto them, 'Go, search the land;' and they come into the hill-country of Ephraim, unto the house of Micah, and lodge there.
They [are] with the household of Micah, and they have discerned the voice of the young man, the Levite, and turn aside there, and say to him, 'Who hath brought thee hither? and what art thou doing in this [place?] and what to thee here?'
And he saith unto them, 'Thus and thus hath Micah done to me; and he hireth me, and I am to him for a priest.'
And they say to him, 'Ask, we pray thee, at God, and we know whether our way is prosperous on which we are going.'
And the priest saith to them, 'Go in peace; over-against Jehovah [is] your way in which ye go.'
And the five men go, and come in to Laish, and see the people which [is] in its midst, dwelling confidently, according to the custom of Zidonians, quiet and confident; and there is none putting to shame in the land in [any] thing, possessing restraint, and they [are] far off from the Zidonians, and have no word with [any] man.
And they come in unto their brethren, at Zorah and Eshtaol, and their brethren say to them, 'What — ye?'
And they say, 'Rise, and we go up against them, for we have seen the land, and lo, very good; and ye are keeping silent! be not slothful to go — to enter to possess the land.
When ye go, ye come in unto a people confident, and the land [is] large on both hands, for God hath given it into your hand, a place where there is no lack of anything which [is] in the land.'
And there journey thence, of the family of the Danite, from Zorah, and from Eshtaol, six hundred men girded with weapons of war.
And they go up and encamp in Kirjath-Jearim, in Judah, therefore they have called that place, 'Camp of Dan,' till this day; lo, behind Kirjath-Jearim.
And they pass over thence [to] the hill-country of Ephraim, and come in unto the house of Micah.
And the five men, those going to traverse the land of Laish, answer and say unto their brethren, 'Have ye known that there is in these houses an ephod, and teraphim, and graven image, and molten image? and now, know what ye do.'
And they turn aside thither, and come in unto the house of the young man the Levite, the house of Micah, and ask of him of welfare, —
(and the six hundred men girded with their weapons of war, who [are] of the sons of Dan, are standing at the opening of the gate), —
yea, the five men, those going to traverse the land, go up — they have come in thither — they have taken the graven image, and the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image — and the priest is standing at the opening of the gate, and the six hundred men who are girded with weapons of war —
yea, these have entered the house of Micah, and take the graven image, the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image; and the priest saith unto them, 'What are ye doing?'
and they say to him, 'Keep silent, lay thy hand on thy mouth, and go with us, and be to us for a father and for a priest: is it better thy being a priest to the house of one man, or thy being priest to a tribe and to a family in Israel?'
And the heart of the priest is glad, and he taketh the ephod, and the teraphim, and the graven image, and goeth into the midst of the people,
and they turn and go, and put the infants, and the cattle, and the baggage, before them.
They have been far off from the house of Micah — and the men who [are] in the houses which [are] near the house of Micah have been called together, and overtake the sons of Dan,
and call unto the sons of Dan, and they turn round their faces, and say to Micah, 'What — to thee that thou hast been called together?'
And he saith, 'My gods which I made ye have taken, and the priest, and ye go; and what to me more? and what [is] this ye say unto me, What — to thee!'
And the sons of Dan say unto him, 'Let not thy voice be heard with us, lest men bitter in soul fall upon you, and thou hast gathered thy life, and the life of thy household;'
and the sons of Dan go on their way, and Micah seeth that they are stronger than he, and turneth, and goeth back unto his house.
And they have taken that which Micah had made, and the priest whom he had, and come in against Laish, against a people quiet and confident, and smite them by the mouth of the sword, and the city have burnt with fire,
and there is no deliverer, for it [is] far off from Zidon, and they have no word with [any] man, and it [is] in the valley which [is] by Beth-Rehob; and they build the city, and dwell in it,
and call the name of the city Dan, by the name of Dan their father, who was born to Israel; and yet Laish [is] the name of the city at the first.
And the sons of Dan raise up for themselves the graven image, and Jonathan son of Gershom, son of Manasseh, he and his sons have been priests to the tribe of the Danite, till the day of the removal of [the people] of the land.
And they appoint for them the graven image of Micah, which he had made, all the days of the house of God being in Shiloh.
And it cometh to pass, in those days, when there is no king in Israel, that there is a man a Levite, a sojourner in the sides of the hill-country of Ephraim, and he taketh to him a wife, a concubine, out of Beth-Lehem-Judah;
and commit whoredom against him doth his concubine, and she goeth from him unto the house of her father, unto Beth-Lehem-Judah, and is there days — four months.
And her husband riseth and goeth after her, to speak unto her heart, to bring her back, and his young man [is] with him, and a couple of asses; and she bringeth him into the house of her father, and the father of the young woman seeth him, and rejoiceth to meet him.
And keep hold on him doth his father-in-law, father of the young woman, and he abideth with him three days, and they eat and drink, and lodge there.
And it cometh to pass, on the fourth day, that they rise early in the morning, and he riseth to go, and the father of the young woman saith unto his son-in-law, 'Support thy heart with a morsel of bread, and afterward ye go on.'
And they sit and eat both of them together, and drink, and the father of the young woman saith unto the man, 'Be willing, I pray thee, and lodge all night, and let thy heart be glad.'
And the man riseth to go, and his father-in-law presseth on him, and he turneth back and lodgeth there.
And he riseth early in the morning, on the fifth day, to go, and the father of the young woman saith, 'Support, I pray thee, thy heart;' and they have tarried till the turning of the day, and they eat, both of them.
And the man riseth to go, he and his concubine, and his young man, and his father-in-law, father of the young woman, saith to him, 'Lo, I pray thee, the day hath fallen toward evening, lodge all night, I pray thee; lo, the declining of the day! lodge here, and let thine heart be glad — and ye have risen early to-morrow for your journey, and thou hast gone to thy tent.'
And the man hath not been willing to lodge all night, and he riseth, and goeth, and cometh in till over-against Jebus (It [is] Jerusalem), and with him [are] a couple of asses saddled; and his concubine [is] with him.
They [are] near Jebus, and the day hath gone greatly down, and the young man saith unto his lord, 'Come, I pray thee, and we turn aside unto this city of the Jebusite, and lodge in it.'
And his lord saith unto him, 'Let us not turn aside unto the city of a stranger, that is not of the sons of Israel, thither, but we have passed over unto Gibeah.'
And he saith to his young man, 'Come, and we draw near to one of the places, and have lodged in Gibeah, or in Ramah.'
And they pass over, and go on, and the sun goeth in upon them near Gibeah, which is to Benjamin;
and they turn aside there to go in to lodge in Gibeah, and he goeth in and sitteth in a broad place of the city, and there is no man gathering them into the house to lodge.
And lo, a man, an aged one, hath come from his work from the field in the evening, and the man [is] of the hill-country of Ephraim, and he [is] a sojourner in Gibeah, and the men of the place [are] Benjamites.
And he lifteth up his eyes, and seeth the man, the traveller, in a broad place of the city, and the aged man saith, 'Whither goest thou? and whence comest thou?'
And he saith unto him, 'We are passing over from Beth-Lehem-Judah unto the sides of the hill-country of Ephraim — thence I [am], and I go unto Beth-Lehem-Judah; and to the house of Jehovah I am going, and there is no man gathering me into the house,
and both straw and provender are for our asses, and also bread and wine there are for me, and for thy handmaid, and for the young man with thy servants; there is no lack of anything.'
And the old man saith, 'Peace to thee; only, all thy lack [is] on me, only in the broad place lodge not.'
And he bringeth him in to his house, and mixeth [food] for the asses, and they wash their feet, and eat and drink.
They are making their heart glad, and lo, men of the city, men — sons of worthlessness — have gone round about the house, beating on the door, and they speak unto the old man, the master of the house, saying, 'Bring out the man who hath come unto thine house, and we know him.'
And the man, the master of the house, goeth out unto them, and saith unto them, 'Nay, my brethren, do not evil, I pray you, after that this man hath come in unto my house, do not this folly;
lo, my daughter, the virgin, and his concubine, let me bring them out, I pray you, and humble ye them, and do to them that which is good in your eyes, and to this man do not this foolish thing.'
And the men have not been willing to hearken to him, and the man taketh hold on his concubine, and bringeth [her] out unto them without, and they know her, and roll themselves upon her all the night, till the morning, and send her away in the ascending of the dawn;
and the woman cometh in at the turning of the morning, and falleth at the opening of the man's house, where her lord [is], till the light.
And her lord riseth in the morning, and openeth the doors of the house, and goeth out to go on his way, and lo, the woman, his concubine, is fallen at the opening of the house, and her hands [are] on the threshold,
and he saith unto her, 'Rise, and we go;' and there is none answering, and he taketh her on the ass, and the man riseth and goeth to his place,
and cometh in unto his house, and taketh the knife, and layeth hold on his concubine, and cutteth her in pieces to her bones — into twelve pieces, and sendeth her into all the border of Israel.
And it hath come to pass, every one who seeth hath said, 'There hath not been — yea, there hath not been seen like this, from the day of the coming up of the sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt till this day; set your [heart] upon it, take counsel, and speak.'
And all the sons of Israel go out, and the company is assembled as one man, from Dan even unto Beer-Sheba, and the land of Gilead, unto Jehovah, at Mizpeh.
And the chiefs of all the people, of all the tribes of Israel, station themselves in the assembly of the people of God, four hundred thousand footmen drawing sword.
And the sons of Benjamin hear that the sons of Israel have gone up to Mizpeh. And the sons of Israel say, 'Speak ye, how hath this evil been?'
And the man, the Levite, husband of the woman who hath been murdered, answereth and saith, 'Into Gibeah (which [is] to Benjamin) I have come, I and my concubine, to lodge;
and rise against me do the masters of Gibeah — and they go round the house against me by night — me they thought to slay, and my concubine they have humbled, and she dieth;
and I lay hold on my concubine, and cut her in pieces, and send her into all the country of the inheritance of Israel; for they have done wickedness and folly in Israel;
lo, ye [are] all sons of Israel; give for you a word and counsel here.'
And all the people rise as one man, saying, 'None of us doth go to his tent, and none of us doth turn aside to his house;
and now, this [is] the thing which we do to Gibeah — against it by lot!
and we have taken ten men of a hundred, of all the tribes of Israel, and a hundred of a thousand, and a thousand of a myriad, to receive provision for the people, to do, at their coming to Gibeah of Benjamin, according to all the folly which it hath done in Israel.'
And every man of Israel is gathered unto the city, as one man — companions.
And the tribes of Israel send men among all the tribes of Benjamin, saying, 'What [is] this evil which hath been among you?
And now, give up the men — sons of worthlessness — which [are] in Gibeah, and we put them to death, and we put away evil from Israel.' And [the sons of] Benjamin have not been willing to hearken to the voice of their brethren, the sons of Israel;
and the sons of Benjamin are gathered out of the cities to Gibeah, to go out to battle with the sons of Israel.
And the sons of Benjamin number themselves on that day; out of the cities [are] twenty and six thousand men drawing sword, apart from the inhabitants of Gibeah, [who] numbered themselves, seven hundred chosen men;
among all this people [are] seven hundred chosen men, bound of their right hand, each of these slinging with a stone at the hair, and he doth not err.
And the men of Israel numbered themselves, apart from Benjamin, four hundred thousand men, drawing sword, each of these a man of war.
And they rise and go up to Beth-El, and ask of God, and the sons of Israel say, 'Who doth go up for us at the commencement to battle with the sons of Benjamin?' and Jehovah saith, 'Judah — at the commencement.'
And the sons of Israel rise in the morning, and encamp against Gibeah,
and the men of Israel go out to battle with Benjamin, and the men of Israel set themselves in array with them, [for] battle against Gibeah,
and the sons of Benjamin come out from Gibeah, and destroy in Israel on that day two and twenty thousand men — to the earth.
And the people, the men of Israel, strengthen themselves, and add to set the battle in array in the place where they arranged themselves on the first day.
And the sons of Israel go up and weep before Jehovah till the evening, and ask of Jehovah, saying, 'Do I add to draw nigh to battle with the sons of Benjamin, my brother?' And Jehovah saith, 'Go up against him.'
And the sons of Israel draw near unto the sons of Benjamin on the second day,
and Benjamin cometh out to meet them from Gibeah on the second day, and destroy among the sons of Israel again eighteen thousand men — to the earth; all these are drawing sword.
And all the sons of Israel go up, even all the people, and come in to Beth-El, and weep, and sit there before Jehovah, and fast on that day till the evening, and cause to ascend burnt-offerings and peace-offerings before Jehovah.
And the sons of Israel ask of Jehovah, — and there [is] the ark of the covenant of God in those days,
and Phinehas son of Eleazar, son of Aaron, is standing before it in those days — saying, 'Do I add again to go out to battle with the sons of Benjamin, my brother, or do I cease?' And Jehovah saith, 'Go up, for to-morrow I give him into thy hand.'
And Israel setteth liers in wait against Gibeah, round about,
and the sons of Israel go up against the sons of Benjamin, on the third day, and arrange themselves against Gibeah, as time by time.
And the sons of Benjamin come out to meet the people; they have been drawn away out of the city, and begin to smite [some] of the people — wounded as time by time, in the highways (of which one is going up to Beth-El, and the other to Gibeah in the field), [are] about thirty men of Israel.
And the sons of Benjamin say, 'They are smitten before us as at the beginning;' but the sons of Israel said, 'Let us flee, and draw them away out of the city, unto the highways.'
And all the men of Israel have risen from their place, and arrange themselves at Baal-Tamar, and the ambush of Israel is coming forth out of its place, out of the meadow of Gibeah.
And they come in over against Gibeah — ten thousand chosen men out of all Israel — and the battle [is] grievous, and they have not known that the evil is striking against them.
And Jehovah smiteth Benjamin before Israel, and the sons of Israel destroy in Benjamin, on that day, twenty and five thousand, and a hundred men; all these [are] drawing sword.
And the sons of Benjamin see that they have been smitten — and the men of Israel give place to Benjamin, for they have trusted unto the ambush which they had set against Gibeah,
and the ambush have hasted, and push against Gibeah, and the ambush draweth itself out, and smiteth the whole of the city by the mouth of the sword.
And there was the appointed sign to the men of Israel with the ambush — their causing to go up a great volume of smoke from the city.
And the men of Israel turn in battle, and Benjamin hath begun to smite the wounded among the men of Israel, about thirty men, for they said, 'Surely they are utterly smitten before us, as [at] the first battle;
and the volume hath begun to go up from the city — a pillar of smoke — and Benjamin turneth behind, and lo, gone up hath the perfection of the city toward the heavens.
And the men of Israel have turned, and the men of Benjamin are troubled, for they have seen that the evil hath stricken against them —
and they turn before the men of Israel unto the way of the wilderness, and the battle hath followed them; and those who [are] from the city are destroying them in their midst;
they have compassed the Benjamites — they have pursued them — with ease they have trodden them down till over-against Gibeah, at the sun-rising.
And there fall of Benjamin eighteen thousand men — the whole of these [are] men of valour;
and they turn and flee toward the wilderness, unto the rock of Rimmon; and they glean of them in the highways five thousand men, and follow after them unto Gidom, and smite of them two thousand men.
And all those falling of Benjamin are twenty and five thousand men drawing sword, on that day — the whole of these [are] men of valour;
and there turn and flee into the wilderness, unto the rock of Rimmon six hundred men, and they dwell in the rock Rimmon four months.
And the men of Israel have turned back unto the sons of Benjamin, and smite them by the mouth of the sword out of the city, — men unto cattle, unto all that is found; also all the cities which are found they have sent into fire.
And the men of Israel have sworn in Mizpeh, saying, 'None of us doth give his daughter to Benjamin for a wife.'
And the people come in to Beth-El, and sit there till the evening before God, and lift up their voice, and weep — a great weeping,
and say, 'Why, O Jehovah, God of Israel, hath this been in Israel — to be lacking to-day, from Israel, one tribe?'
And it cometh to pass on the morrow, that the people rise early, and build there an altar, and cause to ascend burnt-offerings and peace-offerings.
And the sons of Israel say, 'Who [is] he that hath not come up in the assembly out of all the tribes of Israel unto Jehovah?' for the great oath hath been concerning him who hath not come up unto Jehovah to Mizpeh, saying, 'He is surely put to death.'
And the sons of Israel repent concerning Benjamin their brother, and say, 'There hath been to-day cut off one tribe from Israel,
what do we do for them — for those who are left — for wives, and we — we have sworn by Jehovah not to give to them of our daughters for wives?'
And they say, 'Who is [that] one out of the tribes of Israel who hath not come up unto Jehovah to Mizpeh?' and lo, none hath come in unto the camp from Jabesh-Gilead — unto the assembly.
And the people numbered themselves, and lo, there is not there a man of the inhabitants of Jabesh-Gilead.
And the company send there twelve thousand men of the sons of valour, and command them, saying, 'Go — and ye have smitten the inhabitants of Jabesh-Gilead by the mouth of the sword, even the women and the infants.
And this [is] the thing which ye do; every male, and every woman knowing the lying of a male, ye devote.'
And they find out of the inhabitants of Jabesh-Gilead four hundred young women, virgins, who have not known man by the lying of a male, and they bring them in unto the camp at Shiloh, which [is] in the land of Canaan.
And all the company send, and speak, unto the sons of Benjamin who [are] in the rock Rimmon, and proclaim to them peace;
and Benjamin turneth back at that time, and they give to them the women whom they have kept alive of the women of Jabesh-Gilead, and they have not found for [all of] them so.
And the people repented concerning Benjamin, for Jehovah had made a breach among the tribes of Israel.
And the elders of the company say, 'What do we do to the remnant for wives — for the women have been destroyed out of Benjamin?'
And they say, 'A possession of an escaped party [is] to Benjamin, and a tribe is not blotted out from Israel;
and we — we are not able to give to them wives out of our daughters, for the sons of Israel have sworn, saying, Cursed [is] he who is giving a wife to Benjamin.'
And they say, 'Lo, a festival of Jehovah [is] in Shiloh, from time to time, which [is] on the north of Beth-El, at the rising of the sun, by the highway which is going up from Beth-El to Shechem, and on the south of Lebonah.'
And they command the sons of Benjamin, saying, 'Go — and ye have laid wait in the vineyards,
and have seen, and lo, if the daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in dances — then ye have gone out from the vineyards, and caught for you each his wife out of the daughters of Shiloh, and gone to the land of Benjamin;
and it hath been, when their fathers or their brethren come in to plead unto us, that we have said unto them, Favour us [by] them, for we have not taken [to] each his wife in battle, for ye — ye have not given to them at this time [that] ye are guilty.'
And the sons of Benjamin do so, and take women according to their number, out of the dancers whom they have taken violently away; and they go, and turn back unto their inheritance, and build the cities, and dwell in them.
And the sons of Israel go up and down thence at that time, each to his tribe, and to his family; and they go out thence each to his inheritance.
In those days there is no king in Israel; each doth that which is right in his own eyes.
And it cometh to pass, in the days of the judging of the judges, that there is a famine in the land, and there goeth a man from Beth-Lehem-Judah to sojourn in the fields of Moab, he, and his wife, and his two sons.
And the name of the man [is] Elimelech, and the name of his wife Naomi, and the name of his two sons Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites from Beth-Lehem-Judah; and they come into the fields of Moab, and are there.
And Elimelech husband of Naomi dieth, and she is left, she and her two sons;
and they take to them wives, Moabitesses: the name of the one [is] Orpah, and the name of the second Ruth; and they dwell there about ten years.
And they die also, both of them — Mahlon and Chilion — and the woman is left of her two children and of her husband.
And she riseth, she and her daughters-in-law, and turneth back from the fields of Moab, for she hath heard in the fields of Moab that God hath looked after His people, — to give to them bread.
And she goeth out from the place where she hath been, and her two daughters-in-law with her, and they go in the way to turn back unto the land of Judah.
And Naomi saith to her two daughters-in-law, 'Go, turn back, each to the house of her mother; Jehovah doth with you kindness as ye have done with the dead, and with me;
Jehovah doth grant to you, and find ye rest each in the house of her husband;' and she kisseth them, and they lift up their voice and weep.
And they say to her, 'Surely with thee we go back to thy people.'
And Naomi saith, 'Turn back, my daughters; why do ye go with me? are there yet to me sons in my bowels that they have been to you for husbands?
Turn back, my daughters, go, for I am too aged to be to a husband; though I had said, There is for me hope, also, I have been to-night to a husband, and also I have borne sons:
for them do ye wait till that they grow up? for them do ye shut yourselves up, not to be to a husband? nay, my daughters, for more bitter to me than to you, for the hand of Jehovah hath gone out against me.'
And they lift up their voice, and weep again, and Orpah kisseth her mother-in-law, and Ruth hath cleaved to her.
And she saith, 'Lo, thy sister-in-law hath turned back unto her people, and unto her god, turn thou back after thy sister-in-law.'
And Ruth saith, 'Urge me not to leave thee — to turn back from after thee; for whither thou goest I go, and where thou lodgest I lodge; thy people [is] my people, and thy God my God.
Where thou diest I die, and there I am buried; thus doth Jehovah to me, and thus doth He add — for death itself doth part between me and thee.'
And she seeth that she is strengthening herself to go with her, and she ceaseth to speak unto her;
and they go both of them till their coming in to Beth-Lehem; and it cometh to pass at their coming in to Beth-Lehem, that all the city is moved at them, and they say, 'Is this Naomi?'
And she saith unto them, 'Call me not Naomi; call me Mara, for the Almighty hath dealt very bitterly to me,
I went out full, and empty hath Jehovah brought me back, why do ye call me Naomi, and Jehovah hath testified against me, and the Almighty hath done evil to me?'
And Naomi turneth back, and Ruth the Moabitess her daughter-in-law with her, who hath turned back from the fields of Moab, and they have come in to Beth-Lehem at the commencement of barley-harvest.
And Naomi hath an acquaintance of her husband's, a man mighty in wealth, of the family of Elimelech, and his name [is] Boaz.
And Ruth the Moabitess saith unto Naomi, 'Let me go, I pray thee, into the field, and I gather among the ears of corn after him in whose eyes I find grace;' and she saith to her, 'Go, my daughter.'
And she goeth and cometh and gathereth in a field after the reapers, and her chance happeneth — the portion of the field is Boaz's who [is] of the family of Elimelech.
And lo, Boaz hath come from Beth-Lehem, and saith to the reapers, 'Jehovah [is] with you;' and they say to him, 'Jehovah doth bless thee.'
And Boaz saith to his young man who is set over the reapers, 'Whose [is] this young person?'
And the young man who is set over the reapers answereth and saith, 'A young woman — Moabitess — she [is], who came back with Naomi from the fields of Moab,
and she saith, Let me glean, I pray thee — and I have gathered among the sheaves after the reapers; and she cometh and remaineth since the morning and till now; she sat in the house a little.
And Boaz saith unto Ruth, 'Hast thou not heard, my daughter? go not to glean in another field, and also, pass not over from this, and thus thou dost cleave to my young women:
thine eyes [are] on the field which they reap, and thou hast gone after them; have not I charged the young men not to touch thee? when thou art athirst then thou hast gone unto the vessels, and hast drunk from that which the young men draw.'
And she falleth on her face, and boweth herself to the earth, and saith unto him, 'Wherefore have I found grace in thine eyes, to discern me, and I a stranger?'
And Boaz answereth and saith to her, 'It hath thoroughly been declared to me all that thou hast done with thy mother-in-law, after the death of thy husband, and thou dost leave thy father, and thy mother, and the land of thy birth, and dost come in unto a people which thou hast not known heretofore.
Jehovah doth recompense thy work, and thy reward is complete from Jehovah, God of Israel, under whose wings thou hast come to take refuge.'
And she saith, 'Let me find grace in thine eyes, my lord, because thou hast comforted me, and because thou hast spoken unto the heart of thy maid-servant, and I — I am not as one of thy maid-servants.'
And Boaz saith to her, 'At meal-time come nigh hither, and thou hast eaten of the bread, and dipped thy morsel in the vinegar.' And she sitteth at the side of the reapers, and he reacheth to her roasted corn, and she eateth, and is satisfied, and leaveth.
And she riseth to glean, and Boaz chargeth his young men, saying, 'Even between the sheaves she doth glean, and ye do not cause her to blush;
and also ye do surely cast to her of the handfuls — and have left, and she hath gleaned, and ye do not push against her.'
And she gleaneth in the field till the evening, and beateth out that which she hath gleaned, and it is about an ephah of barley;
and she taketh [it] up, and goeth into the city, and her mother-in-law seeth that which she hath gleaned, and she bringeth out and giveth to her that which she left from her satiety.
And her mother-in-law saith to her, 'Where hast thou gleaned to-day? and where hast thou wrought? may he who is discerning thee be blessed.' And she declareth to her mother-in-law with whom she hath wrought, and saith, 'The name of the man with whom I have wrought to-day [is] Boaz.'
And Naomi saith to her daughter-in-law, 'Blessed [is] he of Jehovah who hath not forsaken His kindness with the living and with the dead;' and Naomi saith to her, 'The man is a relation of ours; he [is] of our redeemers.'
And Ruth the Moabitess saith, 'Also he surely said unto me, Near the young people whom I have thou dost cleave till they have completed the whole of the harvest which I have.'
And Naomi saith unto Ruth her daughter-in-law, 'Good, my daughter, that thou goest out with his young women, and they come not against thee in another field.'
And she cleaveth to the young women of Boaz to glean, till the completion of the barley-harvest, and of the wheat-harvest, and she dwelleth with her mother-in-law.
And Naomi her mother-in-law saith to her, 'My daughter, do not I seek for thee rest, that it may be well with thee?
and now, is not Boaz of our acquaintance, with whose young women thou hast been? lo, he is winnowing the threshing-floor of barley to-night,
and thou hast bathed, and anointed thyself, and put thy garments upon thee, and gone down to the threshing-floor; let not thyself be known to the man till he complete to eat and to drink;
and it cometh to pass when he lieth down, that thou hast known the place where he lieth down, and hast gone in, and uncovered his feet, and lain down, — and he doth declare to thee that which thou dost do.'
And she saith unto her, 'All that thou sayest — I do.'
And she goeth down [to] the threshing-floor, and doth according to all that her mother-in-law commanded her
And Boaz eateth and drinketh, and his heart is glad; and he goeth in to lie down at the end of the heap; and she cometh in gently, and uncovereth his feet, and lieth down.
And it cometh to pass, at the middle of the night, that the man trembleth, and turneth himself, and lo, a woman is lying at his feet.
And he saith, 'Who [art] thou?' and she saith, 'I [am] Ruth thy handmaid, and thou hast spread thy skirt over thy handmaid, for thou [art] a redeemer.'
And he saith, 'Blessed [art] thou of Jehovah, my daughter; thou hast dealt more kindly at the latter end than at the beginning — not to go after the young men, either poor or rich.
And now, my daughter, fear not, all that thou sayest I do to thee, for all the gate of my people doth know that thou [art] a virtuous woman.
And now, surely, true, that I [am] a redeemer, but also there is a redeemer nearer than I.
Lodge to night, and it hath been in the morning, if he doth redeem thee, well: he redeemeth; and if he delight not to redeem thee, then I have redeemed thee — I; Jehovah liveth! lie down till the morning.'
And she lieth down at his feet till the morning, and riseth before one doth discern another; and he saith, 'Let it not be known that the woman hath come into the floor.'
And he saith, 'Give the covering which [is] on thee, and keep hold on it;' and she keepeth hold on it, and he measureth six [measures] of barley, and layeth [it] on her; and he goeth into the city.
And she cometh in unto her mother-in-law, and she saith, 'Who [art] thou, my daughter?' and she declareth to her all that the man hath done to her.
And she saith, 'These six [measures] of barley he hath given to me, for he said, Thou dost not go in empty unto thy mother-in-law.'
And she saith, 'Sit still, my daughter, till thou dost know how the matter falleth, for the man doth not rest except he hath completed the matter to-day.'
And Boaz hath gone up to the gate, and sitteth there, and lo, the redeemer is passing by of whom Boaz had spoken, and he saith, 'Turn aside, sit down here, such a one, such a one;' and he turneth aside and sitteth down.
And he taketh ten men of the elders of the city, and saith, 'Sit down here;' and they sit down.
And he saith to the redeemer, 'A portion of the field which [is] to our brother, to Elimelech, hath Naomi sold, who hath come back from the fields of Moab;
and I said, I uncover thine ear, saying, Buy before the inhabitants, and before the elders of my people; if thou dost redeem — redeem, and if none doth redeem — declare to me, and I know, for there is none save thee to redeem, and I after thee.' And he saith, I redeem [it].'
And Boaz saith, 'In the day of thy buying the field from the hand of Naomi, then from Ruth the Moabitess, wife of the dead, thou hast bought [it], to raise up the name of the dead over his inheritance.'
And the redeemer saith, 'I am not able to redeem [it] for myself, lest I destroy mine inheritance; redeem for thyself — thou — my right of redemption, for I am not able to redeem.'
And this [is] formerly in Israel for redemption and for changing, to establish anything: a man hath drawn off his sandal, and given [it] to his neighbour, and this [is] the testimony in Israel.
And the redeemer saith to Boaz, 'Buy [it] for thyself,' and draweth off his sandal.
And Boaz saith to the elders, and [to] all the people, 'Witnesses [are] ye to-day that I have bought all that [is] to Elimelech, and all that [is] to Chilion and Mahlon, from the hand of Naomi;
and also Ruth the Moabitess, wife of Mahlon, I have bought to myself for a wife, to raise up the name of the dead over his inheritance; and the name of the dead is not cut off from among his brethren, and from the gate of his place; witnesses ye [are] to-day.'
And all the people who [are] in the gate say — also the elders — 'Witnesses! Jehovah make the woman who is coming in unto thy house as Rachel and as Leah, both of whom built the house of Israel; and do thou virtuously in Ephrathah, and proclaim the Name in Beth-Lehem;
and let thy house be as the house of Pharez (whom Tamar bare to Judah), of the seed which Jehovah doth give to thee of this young woman.'
And Boaz taketh Ruth, and she becometh his wife, and he goeth in unto her, and Jehovah giveth to her conception, and she beareth a son.
And the women say unto Naomi, 'Blessed [is] Jehovah who hath not let a redeemer cease to thee to-day, and his name is proclaimed in Israel,
and he hath been to thee for a restorer of life, and for a nourisher of thine old age, for thy daughter-in-law who hath loved thee — who is better to thee than seven sons — hath borne him.'
And Naomi taketh the lad, and layeth him in her bosom, and is to him for a nurse;
and the neighbouring women give to him a name, saying, 'There hath been a son born to Naomi,' and they call his name Obed; he [is] father of Jesse, father of David.
And these are genealogies of Pharez: Pharez begat Hezron,
and Hezron begat Ram, and Ram begat Amminidab,
and Amminidab begat Nahshon, and Nahshon begat Salmon,
and Salmon begat Boaz, and Boaz begat Obed,
and Obed begat Jesse, and Jesse begat David.
And there is a certain man of Ramathaim-Zophim, of the hill-country of Ephraim, and his name [is] Elkanah, son of Jeroham, son of Elihu, son of Tohu, son of Zuph, and Ephrathite,
and he hath two wives, the name of the one [is] Hannah, and the name of the second Peninnah, and Peninnah hath children, and Hannah hath no children.
And that man hath gone up out of his city from time to time, to bow himself, and to sacrifice, before Jehovah of Hosts, in Shiloh, and there [are] two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, priests to Jehovah.
And the day cometh, and Elkanah sacrificeth, and he hath given to Peninnah his wife, and to all her sons and her daughters, portions,
and to Hannah he giveth a certain portion — double, for he hath loved Hannah, and Jehovah hath shut her womb;
and her adversity hath also provoked her greatly, so as to make her tremble, for Jehovah hath shut up her womb.
And so he doth year by year, from the time of her going up into the house of Jehovah, so it provoketh her, and she weepeth, and doth not eat.
And Elkanah her husband saith to her, 'Hannah, why weepest thou? and why dost thou not eat? and why is thy heart afflicted? am I not better to thee than ten sons?'
And Hannah riseth after eating in Shiloh, and after drinking, and Eli the priest is sitting on the throne by the side-post of the temple of Jehovah.
And she is bitter in soul, and prayeth unto Jehovah, and weepeth greatly,
and voweth a vow, and saith, 'Jehovah of Hosts, if Thou dost certainly look on the affliction of Thy handmaid, and hast remembered me, and dost not forget Thy handmaid, and hast given to Thy handmaid seed of men — then I have given him to Jehovah all days of his life, and a razor doth not go up upon his head.'
And it hath been, when she multiplied praying before Jehovah, that Eli is watching her mouth,
and Hannah, she is speaking to her heart, only her lips are moving, and her voice is not heard, and Eli reckoneth her to be drunken.
And Eli saith unto her, 'Until when are thou drunken? turn aside thy wine from thee.'
And Hannah answereth and saith, 'No, my lord, A woman sharply pained in spirit I [am], and wine and strong drink I have not drunk, and I pour out my soul before Jehovah;
put not thy handmaid before a daughter of worthlessness, for from the abundance of my meditation, and of my provocation, I have spoken hitherto.'
And Eli answereth and saith, 'Go in peace, and the God of Israel doth give thy petition which thou hast asked of Him.'
And she saith, 'Let thy handmaid find grace in thine eyes;' and the woman goeth on her way, and eateth, and her countenance hath not been [sad] for it any more.
And they rise early in the morning, and bow themselves before Jehovah, and turn back, and come in unto their house in Ramah, and Elkanah knoweth Hannah his wife, and Jehovah remembereth her;
and it cometh to pass, at the revolution of the days, that Hannah conceiveth, and beareth a son, and calleth his name Samuel, 'for, from Jehovah I have asked him.'
And the man Elkanah goeth up, and all his house, to sacrifice to Jehovah the sacrifice of the days, and his vow.
And Hannah hath not gone up, for she said to her husband, 'Till the youth is weaned — then I have brought him in, and he hath appeared before the face of Jehovah, and dwelt there — unto the age.'
And Elkanah her husband saith to her, 'Do that which is good in thine eyes; abide till thy weaning him; only, Jehovah establish His word;' and the woman abideth and suckleth her son till she hath weaned him,
and she causeth him to go up with her when she hath weaned him, with three bullocks, and one ephah of flour, and a bottle of wine, and she bringeth him into the house of Jehovah at Shiloh, and the youth [is but] a youth.
And they slaughter the bullock, and bring in the youth unto Eli,
and she saith, 'O, my lord, thy soul liveth! my lord, I [am] the woman who stood with thee in this [place], to pray unto Jehovah;
for this youth I prayed, and Jehovah doth give to me my petition which I asked of Him;
and also I have caused him to be asked for Jehovah, all the days that he hath lived — he is asked for Jehovah;' and he boweth himself there before Jehovah.
And Hannah prayeth, and saith: 'My heart hath exulted in Jehovah, My horn hath been high in Jehovah, My mouth hath been large over mine enemies, For I have rejoiced in Thy salvation.
There is none holy like Jehovah, For there is none save Thee, And there is no rock like our God.
Ye multiply not — ye speak haughtily — The old saying goeth out from your mouth, For a God of knowledge [is] Jehovah, And by Him actions are weighed.
Bows of the mighty are broken, And the stumbling have girded on strength.
The satiated for bread hired themselves, And the hungry have ceased. While the barren hath borne seven, And she abounding with sons hath languished.
Jehovah putteth to death, and keepeth alive, He bringeth down to Sheol, and bringeth up.
Jehovah dispossesseth, and He maketh rich, He maketh low, yea, He maketh high.
He raiseth from the dust the poor, From a dunghill He lifteth up the needy, To cause [them] to sit with nobles, Yea, a throne of honour He doth cause them to inherit, For to Jehovah [are] the fixtures of earth, And He setteth on them the habitable world.
The feet of His saints He keepeth, And the wicked in darkness are silent, For not by power doth man become mighty.
Jehovah — broken down are His adversaries, Against them in the heavens He thundereth: Jehovah judgeth the ends of earth, And giveth strength to His king, And exalteth the horn of His anointed.'
And Elkanah goeth to Ramath, unto his house, and the youth hath been serving Jehovah, [in] the presence of Eli the priest;
and the sons of Eli [are] sons of worthlessness, they have not known Jehovah.
And the custom of the priests with the people [is]: any man sacrificing a sacrifice — then hath the servant of the priest come in when the flesh is boiling, and the hook of three teeth in his hand,
and hath struck [it] into the pan, or kettle, or caldron, or pot; all that the hook bringeth up doth the priest take for himself; thus they do to all Israel who are coming in, there, in Shiloh.
Also before they make perfume with the fat — then hath the priest's servant come in, and said to the man who is sacrificing, 'Give flesh to roast for the priest, and he doth not take of thee flesh boiled, but raw;'
and the man saith unto him, 'Let them surely make a perfume (as to-day) with the fat, then take to thee as thy soul desireth;' and he hath said to him, 'Surely now thou dost give; and if not — I have taken by strength.'
And the sin of the young men is very great [in] the presence of Jehovah, for the men have despised the offering of Jehovah.
And Samuel is ministering [in] the presence of Jehovah, a youth girt [with] an ephod of linen;
and a small upper coat doth his mother make to him, and she hath brought it up to him from time to time, in her coming up with her husband to sacrifice the sacrifice of the time.
And Eli blessed Elkanah, and his wife, and said, 'Jehovah doth appoint for thee seed of this woman, for the petition which she asked for Jehovah;' and they have gone to their place.
When Jehovah hath looked after Hannah, then she conceiveth and beareth three sons and two daughters; and the youth Samuel groweth up with Jehovah.
And Eli [is] very old, and hath heard all that his sons do to all Israel, and how that they lie with the women who are assembling [at] the opening of the tent of meeting,
and he saith to them, 'Why do ye things like these? for I am hearing of your evil words from all the people — these!
Nay, my sons; for the report which I am hearing is not good causing the people of Jehovah to transgress. —
If a man sin against a man, then hath God judged him; but if against Jehovah a man sin, who doth pray for him?' and they hearken not to the voice of their father, though Jehovah hath delighted to put them to death.
And the youth Samuel is going on and growing up, and [is] good both with Jehovah, and also with men.
And there cometh a man of God unto Eli, and saith unto him, 'Thus said Jehovah, Was I really revealed unto the house of thy father in their being in Egypt, before Pharaoh's house,
even to choose him out of all the tribes of Israel to Me for a priest, to go up on Mine altar, to make a perfume, to bear an ephod before Me, and I give to the house of thy father all the fire-offerings of the sons of Israel?
Why do ye kick at My sacrifice, and at Mine offering which I commanded [in] My habitation, and dost honour thy sons above Me, to make yourselves fat from the first part of every offering of Israel, of My people?
'Therefore — the affirmation of Jehovah, God of Israel — I certainly said, Thy house and the house of thy father, do walk up and down before Me to the age; and now — the affirmation of Jehovah — Far be it from Me! for he who is honouring Me, I honour, and those despising Me, are lightly esteemed.
'Lo, days [are] coming, and I have cut off thine arm, and the arm of the house of thy father, that an old man is not in thy house;
and thou hast beheld an adversary [in My] habitation, in all that He doth good with Israel, and there is not an old man in thy house all the days.
'And the man I cut not off of thine from Mine altar, [is] to consume thine eyes, and to grieve thy soul; and all the increase of thy house do die men;
and this [is] to thee the sign that cometh unto thy two sons, unto Hophni and Phinehas — in one day they die both of them;
and I have raised up for Me a stedfast priest; as in My heart and in My soul he doth do; and I have built for him a stedfast house, and he hath walked up and down before Mine anointed all the days;
and it hath been, every one who is left in thy house doth come in to bow himself to him, for a wage of silver, and a cake of bread, and hath said, Admit me, I pray thee, unto one of the priest's offices, to eat a morsel of bread.'
And the youth Samuel is serving Jehovah before Eli, and the word of Jehovah hath been precious in those days — there is no vision broken forth.
And it cometh to pass, at that time, that Eli is lying down in his place, and his eyes have begun to be dim — he is not able to see.
And the lamp of God is not yet extinguished, and Samuel is lying down in the temple of Jehovah, where the ark of God [is],
and Jehovah calleth unto Samuel, and he saith, 'Here [am] I.'
And he runneth unto Eli, and saith, 'Here [am] I, for thou hast called for me;' and he saith, 'I called not; turn back, lie down;' and he goeth and lieth down.
And Jehovah addeth to call again Samuel, and Samuel riseth and goeth unto Eli, and saith, 'Here [am] I, for thou hast called for me;' and he saith, 'I have not called, my son, turn back, lie down.'
And Samuel hath not yet known Jehovah, and the word of Jehovah is not yet revealed unto him.
And Jehovah addeth to call Samuel the third time, and he riseth and goeth unto Eli, and saith, 'Here [am] I, for thou hast called for me;' and Eli understandeth that Jehovah is calling to the youth.
And Eli saith to Samuel, 'Go, lie down, and it hath been, if He doth call unto thee, that thou hast said, Speak, Jehovah, for Thy servant is hearing;' and Samuel goeth and lieth down in his place.
And Jehovah cometh, and stationeth Himself, and calleth as time by time, 'Samuel, Samuel;' and Samuel saith, 'Speak, for Thy servant is hearing.'
And Jehovah saith unto Samuel, 'Lo, I am doing a thing in Israel, at which the two ears of every one hearing it do tingle.
In that day I establish unto Eli all that I have spoken unto his house, beginning and completing;
and I have declared to him that I am judging his house — to the age, for the iniquity which he hath known, for his sons are making themselves vile, and he hath not restrained them,
and therefore I have sworn to the house of Eli: the iniquity of the house of Eli is not atoned for, by sacrifice, and by offering — unto the age.'
And Samuel lieth till the morning, and openeth the doors of the house of Jehovah, and Samuel is afraid of declaring the vision unto Eli.
And Eli calleth Samuel, and saith, 'Samuel, my son;' and he saith, 'Here [am] I.'
And he saith, 'What [is] the word which He hath spoken unto thee? I pray thee, hide it not from me; so doth God do to thee, and so doth He add, if thou hidest from me a word of all the words that He hath spoken unto thee.'
And Samuel declareth to him the whole of the words, and hath not hid from him; and he saith, 'It [is] Jehovah; that which is good in His eyes He doth.'
And Samuel groweth up, and Jehovah hath been with him, and hath not let fall any of his words to the earth;
and all Israel know, from Dan even unto Beer-Sheba, that Samuel is established for a prophet to Jehovah.
And Jehovah addeth to appear in Shiloh, for Jehovah hath been revealed unto Samuel, in Shiloh, by the word of Jehovah.
And the word of Samuel is to all Israel, and Israel goeth out to meet the Philistines for battle, and they encamp by Eben-Ezer, and the Philistines have encamped in Aphek,
and the Philistines set themselves in array to meet Israel, and the battle spreadeth itself, and Israel is smitten before the Philistines, and they smite among the ranks in the field about four thousand men.
And the people cometh in unto the camp, and the elders of Israel say, 'Why hath Jehovah smitten us to-day before the Philistines? we take unto us from Shiloh the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, and it cometh into our midst, and He doth save us out of the hand of our enemies.'
And the people sendeth to Shiloh, and they take up thence the ark of the covenant of Jehovah of Hosts, inhabiting the cherubs, and there [are] two sons of Eli, with the ark of the covenant of God, Hophni and Phinehas.
And it cometh to pass, at the coming in of the ark of the covenant of Jehovah unto the camp, that all Israel shout — a great shout — and the earth is moved.
And the Philistines hear the noise of the shouting, and say, 'What [is] the noise of this great shout in the camp of the Hebrews?' and they perceive that the ark of Jehovah hath come in unto the camp.
And the Philistines are afraid, for they said, 'God hath come in unto the camp;' and they say, 'Woe to us, for there hath not been like this heretofore.
Woe to us, who doth deliver us out of the hand of these honourable gods? these [are] the gods who are smiting the Egyptians with every plague in the wilderness.
Strengthen yourselves, and become men, O Philistines, lest ye do service to Hebrews, as they have done to you — then ye have become men, and have fought.'
And the Philistines fight, and Israel is smitten, and they flee each to his tents, and the blow is very great, and there fall of Israel thirty thousand footmen;
and the ark of God hath been taken, and the two sons of Eli have died, Hophni and Phinehas.
And a man of Benjamin runneth out of the ranks, and cometh into Shiloh, on that day, and his long robes [are] rent, and earth on his head;
and he cometh in, and lo, Eli is sitting on the throne by the side of the way, watching, for his heart hath been trembling for the ark of God, and the man hath come in to declare [it] in the city, and all the city crieth out.
And Eli heareth the noise of the cry, and saith, 'What — the noise of this tumult!' And the man hasted, and cometh in, and declareth to Eli.
And Eli is a son of ninety and eight years, and his eyes have stood, and he hath not been able to see.
And the man saith unto Eli, 'I [am] he who hath come out of the ranks, and I out of the ranks have fled to-day;' and he saith, 'What hath been the matter, my son?'
And he who is bearing tidings answereth and saith, 'Israel hath fled before the Philistines, and also a great slaughter hath been among the people, and also thy two sons have died — Hophni and Phinehas — and the ark of God hath been captured.'
And it cometh to pass, at his mentioning the ark of God, that he falleth from off the throne backward, by the side of the gate, and his neck is broken, and he dieth, for the man [is] old and heavy, and he hath judged Israel forty years.
And his daughter-in-law, wife of Phinehas, [is] pregnant, about to bear, and she heareth the report of the taking of the ark of God, that her father-in-law and her husband have died, and she boweth, and beareth, for her pains have turned upon her.
And at the time of her death, when the women who are standing by her say, 'Fear not, for a son thou hast borne,' she hath not answered, nor set her heart [to it];
and she calleth the youth I-Chabod, saying, 'Honour hath removed from Israel,' because of the taking of the ark of God, and because of her father-in-law and her husband.
And she saith, 'Honour hath removed from Israel, for the ark of God hath been taken.'
And the Philistines have taken the ark of God, and bring it in from Eben-Ezer to Ashdod,
and the Philistines take the ark of God and bring it into the house of Dagon, and set it near Dagon.
And the Ashdodites rise early on the morrow, and lo, Dagon is fallen on its face to the earth, before the ark of Jehovah; and they take Dagon, and put it back to its place.
And they rise early in the morning on the morrow, and lo, Dagon is fallen on its face to the earth, before the ark of Jehovah, and the head of Dagon, and the two palms of its hands are cut off at the threshold, only the fishy part hath been left to him;
therefore the priests of Dagon, and all those coming into the house of Dagon, tread not on the threshold of Dagon, in Ashdod, till this day.
And the hand of Jehovah is heavy on the Ashdodites, and He maketh them desolate, and smiteth them with emerods, Ashdod and its borders.
And the men of Ashdod see that [it is] so, and have said, 'The ark of the God of Israel doth not abide with us, for hard hath been His hand upon us, and upon Dagon our god.'
And they send and gather all the princes of the Philistines unto them, and say, 'What do we do to the ark of the God of Israel?' and they say, 'To Gath let the ark of the God of Israel be brought round;' and they bring round the ark of the God of Israel;
and it cometh to pass after they have brought it round, that the hand of Jehovah is against the city — a very great destruction; and He smiteth the men of the city, from small even unto great; and break forth on them do emerods.
And they send the ark of God to Ekron, and it cometh to pass, at the coming in of the ark of God to Ekron, that the Ekronites cry out, saying, 'They have brought round unto us the ark of the God of Israel, to put us to death — and our people.'
And they send and gather all the princes of the Philistines, and say, 'Send away the ark of the God of Israel, and it turneth back to its place, and it doth not put us to death — and our people;' for there hath been a deadly destruction throughout all the city, very heavy hath the hand of God been there,
and the men who have not died have been smitten with emerods, and the cry of the city goeth up into the heavens.
And the ark of Jehovah is in the field of the Philistines seven months,
and the Philistines call for priests and for diviners, saying, 'What do we do to the ark of Jehovah? let us know wherewith we send it to its place?'
And they say, 'If ye are sending away the ark of the God of Israel, ye do not send it away empty; for ye do certainly send back to Him a guilt-offering; then ye are healed, and it hath been known to you why His hand doth not turn aside from you.'
And they say, 'What [is] the guilt-offering which we send back to Him?' and they say, 'The number of the princes of the Philistines — five golden emerods, and five golden mice — for one plague [is] to you all, and to your princes,
and ye have made images of your emerods, and images of your mice that are corrupting the land, and have given honour to the God of Israel; it may be He doth lighten His hand from off you, and from off your gods, and from off your land;
and why do ye harden your heart as the Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened their heart? do they not — when He hath rolled Himself upon them — send them away, and they go?
'And now, take and make one new cart, and two suckling kine, on which a yoke hath not gone up, and ye have bound the kine in the cart, and caused their young ones to turn back from after them to the house,
and ye have taken the ark of Jehovah, and put it on the cart, and the vessels of gold which ye have returned to Him — a guilt-offering — ye put in a coffer on its side, and have sent it away, and it hath gone;
and ye have seen, if the way of its own border it goeth up to Beth-Shemesh — He hath done to us this great evil; and if not, then we have known that His hand hath not come against us; an accident it hath been to us.'
And the men do so, and take two suckling kine, and bind them in the cart, and their young ones they have shut up in the house;
and they place the ark of Jehovah upon the cart, and the coffer, and the golden mice, and the images of their emerods.
And the kine go straight in the way, on the way to Beth-Shemesh, in one highway they have gone, going and lowing, and have not turned aside right or left; and the princes of the Philistines are going after them unto the border of Beth-Shemesh.
And the Beth-Shemeshites are reaping their wheat-harvest in the valley, and they lift up their eyes, and see the ark, and rejoice to see [it].
And the cart hath come in unto the field of Joshua the Beth-Shemeshite, and standeth there, and there [is] a great stone, and they cleave the wood of the cart, and the kine they have caused to ascend — a burnt-offering to Jehovah.
And the Levites have taken down the ark of Jehovah, and the coffer which [is] with it, in which [are] the vessels of gold, and place [them] on the great stone; and the men of Beth-Shemesh have caused to ascend burnt-offerings and sacrifice sacrifices in that day to Jehovah;
and the five princes of the Philistines have seen [it], and turn back [to] Ekron, on that day.
And these [are] the golden emerods which the Philistines have sent back — a guilt-offering to Jehovah: for Ashdod one, for Gaza one, for Ashkelon one, for Gath one, for Ekron one;
and the golden mice — the number of all the cities of the Philistines — for the five princes, from the fenced city even unto the hamlet of the villages, even unto the great meadow on which they placed the ark of Jehovah — [are] unto this day in the field of Joshua the Beth-Shemeshite.
And He smiteth among the men of Beth-Shemesh, for they looked into the ark of Jehovah, yea, He smiteth among the people seventy men — fifty chief men; and the people mourn, because Jehovah smote among the people — a great smiting.
And the men of Beth-Shemesh say, 'Who is able to stand before Jehovah, this holy God? and unto whom doth He go up from us?'
And they send messengers unto the inhabitants of Kirjath-Jearim, saying, 'The Philistines have sent back the ark of Jehovah; come down, take it up unto you.'
And the men of Kirjath-Jearim come and bring up the ark of Jehovah, and bring it in unto the house of Abinadab, in the height, and Eleazar his son they have sanctified to keep the ark of Jehovah.
And it cometh to pass, from the day of the dwelling of the ark in Kirjath-Jearim, that the days are multiplied — yea, they are twenty years — and wail do all the house of Israel after Jehovah.
And Samuel speaketh unto all the house of Israel, saying, 'If with all your heart ye are turning back unto Jehovah — turn aside the gods of the stranger from your midst, and Ashtaroth; and prepare your heart unto Jehovah, and serve Him only, and He doth deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines.'
And the sons of Israel turn aside the Baalim and Ashtaroth, and serve Jehovah alone;
and Samuel saith, 'Gather all Israel to Mizpeh, and I pray for you unto Jehovah.'
And they are gathered to Mizpeh, and draw water, and pour out before Jehovah, and fast on that day, and say there, 'We have sinned against Jehovah;' and Samuel judgeth the sons of Israel in Mizpeh.
And the Philistines hear that the sons of Israel have gathered themselves to Mizpeh; and the princes of the Philistines go up against Israel, and the sons of Israel hear, and are afraid of the presence of the Philistines.
And the sons of Israel say unto Samuel, 'Keep not silent for us from crying unto Jehovah our God, and He doth save us out of the hand of the Philistines.'
And Samuel taketh a fat lamb, and causeth it to go up — a burnt-offering whole to Jehovah; and Samuel crieth unto Jehovah for Israel, and Jehovah answereth him;
and Samuel is causing the burnt-offering to go up — and the Philistines have drawn nigh to battle against Israel — and Jehovah doth thunder with a great noise, on that day, upon the Philistines, and troubleth them, and they are smitten before Israel.
And the men of Israel go out from Mizpeh, and pursue the Philistines, and smite them unto the place of Beth-Car.
And Samuel taketh a stone, and setteth [it] between Mizpeh and Shen, and calleth its name Eben-Ezer, saying, 'Hitherto hath Jehovah helped us.'
And the Philistines are humbled, and have not added any more to come into the border of Israel, and the hand of Jehovah is on the Philistines all the days of Samuel.
And the cities which the Philistines have taken from Israel are restored to Israel — from Ekron even unto Gath — and their border hath Israel delivered out of the hand of the Philistines; and there is peace between Israel and the Amorite.
And Samuel judgeth Israel all the days of his life,
and he hath gone from year to year, and gone round Beth-El, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and judged Israel [in] all these places;
and his returning [is] to Ramath, for there [is] his house, and there he hath judged Israel, and he buildeth there an altar to Jehovah.
And it cometh to pass, when Samuel [is] aged, that he maketh his sons judges over Israel.
And the name of his first-born son is Joel, and the name of his second Abiah, judges in Beer-Sheba:
and his sons have not walked in his ways, and turn aside after the dishonest gain, and take a bribe, and turn aside judgment.
And all the elders of Israel gather themselves together, and come in unto Samuel to Ramath,
and say unto him, 'Lo, thou hast become aged, and thy sons have not walked in thy ways; now, appoint to us a king, to judge us, like all the nations.'
And the thing is evil in the eyes of Samuel, when they have said, 'Give to us a king to judge us;' and Samuel prayeth unto Jehovah.
And Jehovah saith unto Samuel, 'Hearken to the voice of the people, to all that they say unto thee, for thee they have not rejected, but Me they have rejected, from reigning over them.
According to all the works that they have done from the day of My bringing them up out of Egypt, even unto this day, when they forsake Me, and serve other gods — so they are doing also to thee.
And now, hearken to their voice; only, surely thou dost certainly protest to them, and hast declared to them the custom of the king who doth reign over them.'
And Samuel speaketh all the words of Jehovah unto the people who are asking from him a king,
and saith, 'This is the custom of the king who doth reign over you: Your sons he doth take, and hath appointed for himself among his chariots, and among his horsemen, and they have run before his chariots;
also to appoint for himself heads of thousands, and heads of fifties; also to plow his plowing, and to reap his reaping; and to make instruments of his war, and instruments of his charioteer.
'And your daughters he doth take for perfumers, and for cooks, and for bakers;
and your fields, and your vineyards, and your olive-yards — the best — he doth take, and hath given to his servants.
And your seed and your vineyards he doth tithe, and hath given to his eunuchs, and to his servants.
And your men-servants, and your maid-servants, and your young men — the best, and your asses, he doth take, and hath prepared for his own work;
your flock he doth tithe, and ye are to him for servants.
And ye have cried out in that day because of the king whom ye have chosen for yourselves, and Jehovah doth not answer you in that day.'
And the people refuse to hearken to the voice of Samuel, and say, 'Nay, but a king is over us,
and we have been, even we, like all the nations; and our king hath judged us, and gone out before us, and fought our battles.'
And Samuel heareth all the words of the people, and speaketh them in the ears of Jehovah;
and Jehovah saith unto Samuel, 'Hearken to their voice, and thou hast caused to reign over them a king.' And Samuel saith unto the men of Israel, 'Go ye each to his city.'
And there is a man of Benjamin, and his name [is] Kish, son of Abiel, son of Zeror, son of Bechorath, son of Aphiah, a Benjamite, mighty of valour,
and he hath a son, and his name [is] Saul, a choice youth and goodly, and there is not a man among the sons of Israel goodlier than he — from his shoulder and upward, higher than any of the people.
And the asses of Kish, father of Saul, are lost, and Kish saith unto Saul his son, 'Take, I pray thee, with thee, one of the young men, and rise, go, seek the asses.'
And he passeth over through the hill-country of Ephraim, and passeth over through the land of Shalisha, and they have not found; and they pass over through the land of Shaalim, and they are not; and he passeth over through the land of Benjamin, and they have not found.
They have come in unto the land of Zuph, and Saul hath said to his young man who [is] with him, 'Come, and we turn back, lest my father leave off from the asses, and hath been sorrowful for us.'
And he saith to him, 'Lo, I pray thee, a man of God [is] in this city, and the man is honoured; all that he speaketh doth certainly come; now, we go there, it may be he doth declare to us our way on which we have gone.'
And Saul saith to his young man, 'And lo, we go, and what do we bring in to the man? for the bread hath gone from our vessels, and a present there is not to bring in to the man of God — what [is] with us?'
And the young man addeth to answer Saul, and saith, 'Lo, there is found with me a fourth of a shekel of silver: and I have given to the man of God, and he hath declared to us our way.'
Formerly in Israel, thus said the man in his going to seek God, 'Come and we go unto the seer,' for the 'prophet' of to-day is called formerly 'the seer.'
And Saul saith to his young man, 'Thy word [is] good; come, we go;' and they go unto the city where the man of God [is].
They are going up in the ascent of the city, and have found young women going out to draw water, and say to them, 'Is the seer in this [place]?'
And they answer them and say, 'He is; lo, before thee! haste, now, for to-day he hath come in to the city, for the people hath a stated sacrifice in a high place.
At your going in to the city so ye do find him, before he doth go up in to the high place to eat; for the people do not eat till his coming, for he doth bless the sacrifice; afterwards they eat, who are called, and now, go up, for at this time ye find him.'
And they go up in to the city; they are coming in to the midst of the city, and lo, Samuel is coming out to meet them, to go up to the high place;
and Jehovah had uncovered the ear of Samuel one day before the coming of Saul, saying,
'At this time tomorrow, I send unto thee a man out of the land of Benjamin — and thou hast anointed him for leader over My people Israel, and he hath saved My people out of the hand of the Philistines; for I have seen My people, for its cry hath come in unto Me.'
When Samuel hath seen Saul, then hath Jehovah answered him, 'Lo, the man of whom I have spoken unto thee; this [one] doth restrain My people.'
And Saul draweth nigh to Samuel in the midst of the gate, and saith, 'Declare, I pray thee, to me, where [is] this — the seer's house?'
And Samuel answereth Saul and saith, 'I [am] the seer; go up before me into the high place, and ye have eaten with me to-day, and I have sent thee away in the morning, and all that [is] in thy heart I declare to thee.
As to the asses which are lost to thee this day three days, set not thy heart to them, for they have been found; and to whom [is] all the desire of Israel?' is it not to thee and to all thy father's house?'
And Saul answereth and saith, 'Am not I a Benjamite — of the smallest of the tribes of Israel? and my family the least of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? and why hast thou spoken unto me according to this word?'
And Samuel taketh Saul, and his young man, and bringeth them in to the chamber, and giveth to them a place at the head of those called; and they [are] about thirty men.
And Samuel saith to the cook, 'Give the portion which I gave to thee, of which I said unto thee, 'Set it by thee?'
(and the cook lifteth up the leg, and that which [is] on it, and setteth before Saul), and he saith, 'Lo, that which is left; set [it] before thee — eat, for to this appointed season it is kept for thee, saying, The people I have called;' and Saul eateth with Samuel on that day.
And they come down from the high place to the city, and he speaketh with Saul on the roof.
And they rise early, and it cometh to pass, at the ascending of the dawn, that Samuel calleth unto Saul, on the roof, saying, 'Rise, and I send thee away;' and Saul riseth, and they go out, both of them — he and Samuel, without.
They are going down in the extremity of the city, and Samuel hath said unto Saul, 'Say to the young man that he pass on before us (and he passeth on), and thou, stand at this time, and I cause thee to hear the word of God.'
And Samuel taketh the vial of the oil, and poureth on his head, and kisseth him, and saith, 'Is it not because Jehovah hath appointed thee over His inheritance for leader?
In thy going to-day from me — then thou hast found two men by the grave of Rachel, in the border of Benjamin, at Zelzah, and they have said unto thee, The asses have been found which thou hast gone to seek; and lo, thy father hath left the matter of the asses, and hath sorrowed for you, saying, What do I do for my son?
'And thou hast passed on thence, and beyond, and hast come in unto the oak of Tabor, and found thee there have three men going up unto God to Beth-El, one bearing three kids, and one bearing three cakes of bread, and one bearing a bottle of wine,
and they have asked of thee of welfare, and given to thee two loaves, and thou hast received from their hand.
'Afterwards thou dost come unto the hill of God, where the garrison of the Philistines [is], and it cometh to pass, at thy coming in thither to the city, that thou hast met a band of prophets coming down from the high place, and before them psaltery, and tabret, and pipe, and harp, and they are prophesying;
and prospered over thee hath the Spirit of Jehovah, and thou hast prophesied with them, and hast been turned to another man;
and it hath been, when these signs come to thee — do for thyself as thy hand findeth, for God [is] with thee.
'And thou hast gone down before me to Gilgal, and lo, I am going down unto thee, to cause to ascend burnt-offerings, to sacrifice sacrifices of peace-offerings; seven days thou dost wait till my coming in unto thee, and I have made known to thee that which thou dost do.'
And it hath been, at his turning his shoulder to go from Samuel, that God turneth to him another heart, and all these signs come on that day,
and they come in thither to the height, and lo, a band of prophets — to meet him, and prosper over him doth the Spirit of God, and he prophesieth in their midst.
And it cometh to pass, all his acquaintance heretofore, see, and lo, with prophets he hath prophesied, and the people say one unto another, 'What [is] this hath happened to the son of Kish? is Saul also among the prophets?'
And a man thence answereth and saith, 'And who [is] their father?' therefore it hath been for a simile, 'Is Saul also among the prophets?'
And he ceaseth from prophesying, and cometh in to the high place,
and the uncle of Saul saith unto him, and unto his young man, 'Whither went ye?' and he saith, 'To seek the asses; and we see that they are not, and we come in unto Samuel.'
And the uncle of Saul saith, 'Declare, I pray thee, to me, what Samuel said to you?'
And Saul saith unto his uncle, 'He certainly declared to us that the asses were found;' and of the matter of the kingdom he hath not declared to him that which Samuel said.
And Samuel calleth the people unto Jehovah to Mizpeh,
and saith unto the sons of Israel, 'Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, I have brought up Israel out of Egypt, and I deliver you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all the kingdoms who are oppressing you;
and ye to-day have rejected your God, who [is] Himself your saviour out of all your evils and your distresses, and ye say, 'Nay, but — a king thou dost set over us; and now, station yourselves before Jehovah, by your tribes, and by your thousands.'
And Samuel bringeth near the whole tribes of Israel, and the tribe of Benjamin is captured,
and he bringeth near the tribe of Benjamin by its families, and the family of Matri is captured, and Saul son of Kish is captured, and they seek him, and he hath not been found.
And they ask again at Jehovah, 'Hath the man yet come hither?' and Jehovah saith, 'Lo, he hath been hidden near the vessels.'
And they run and bring him thence, and he stationed himself in the midst of the people, and he is higher than any of the people from his shoulder and upward.
And Samuel saith unto all the people, 'Have ye seen him on whom Jehovah hath fixed, for there is none like him among all the people?' And all the people shout, and say, 'Let the king live!'
And Samuel speaketh unto the people the right of the kingdom, and writeth in a book, and placeth before Jehovah; and Samuel sendeth all the people away, each to his house.
And also Saul hath gone to his house, to Gibeah, and the force go with him whose heart God hath touched;
and the sons of worthlessness have said, 'What! this one doth save us!' and they despise him, and have not brought to him a present; and he is as one deaf.
And Nahash the Ammonite cometh up, and encampeth against Jabesh-Gilead, and all the men of Jabesh say unto Nahash, 'Make with us a covenant, and we serve thee.'
And Nahash the Ammonite saith unto them, 'For this I covenant with you, by picking out to you every right eye — and I have put it a reproach on all Israel.'
And the elders of Jabesh say to him, 'Let us alone seven days, and we send messengers into all the border of Israel: and if there is none saving us — then we have come out unto thee.'
And the messengers come to Gibeah of Saul, and speak the words in the ears of the people, and all the people lift up their voice and weep;
and lo, Saul hath come after the herd out of the field, and Saul saith, 'What — to the people, that they weep?' and they recount to him the words of the men of Jabesh.
And the Spirit of God doth prosper over Saul, in his hearing these words, and his anger burneth greatly,
and he taketh a couple of oxen, and cutteth them in pieces, and sendeth through all the border of Israel, by the hand of the messengers, saying, 'He who is not coming out after Saul and after Samuel — thus it is done to his oxen;' and the fear of Jehovah falleth on the people, and they come out as one man.
And he inspecteth them in Bezek, and the sons of Israel are three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah thirty thousand.
And they say to the messengers who are coming, 'Thus do ye say to the men of Jabesh-Gilead: To-morrow ye have safety — by the heat of the sun;' and the messengers come and declare to the men of Jabesh, and they rejoice;
and the men of Jabesh say [to the Ammonites], 'To-morrow we come out unto you, and ye have done to us according to all that [is] good in your eyes.'
And it cometh to pass, on the morrow, that Saul putteth the people in three detachments, and they come into the midst of the camp in the morning-watch, and smite Ammon till the heat of the day; and it cometh to pass that those left are scattered, and there have not been left of them two together.
And the people say unto Samuel, 'Who is he that saith, Saul doth reign over us! give ye up the men, and we put them to death.'
And Saul saith, 'There is no man put to death on this day, for to-day hath Jehovah wrought salvation in Israel.'
And Samuel saith unto the people, 'Come and we go to Gilgal, and renew the kingdom there;'
and all the people go to Gilgal, and cause Saul to reign there before Jehovah in Gilgal, and sacrifice there sacrifices of peace-offerings before Jehovah, and there Saul rejoiceth — and all the men of Israel — very greatly.
And Samuel saith unto all Israel, 'Lo, I have hearkened to your voice, to all that ye said to me, and I cause to reign over you a king,
and now, lo, the king is walking habitually before you, and I have become aged and gray-headed, and my sons, lo, they [are] with you, and I have walked habitually before you from my youth till this day.
'Lo, here [am] I; testify against me, over-against Jehovah, and over-against His anointed; whose ox have I taken, and whose ass have I taken, and whom have I oppressed; whom have I bruised, and of whose hand have I taken a ransom, and hide mine eyes with it? — and I restore to you.'
And they say, 'Thou hast not oppressed us, nor hast thou crushed us, nor hast thou taken from the hand of any one anything.'
And he saith unto them, 'A witness [is] Jehovah against you: and a witness [is] His anointed this day, that ye have not found anything in my hand;' and they say, 'A witness.'
And Samuel saith unto the people, 'Jehovah — He who made Moses and Aaron, and who brought up your fathers out of the land of Egypt!
and, now, station yourselves, and I judge you before Jehovah, with all the righteous acts of Jehovah, which He did with you, and with your fathers.
'When Jacob hath come in to Egypt, and your fathers cry unto Jehovah, then Jehovah sendeth Moses and Aaron, and they bring out your fathers from Egypt, and cause them to dwell in this place,
and they forget Jehovah their God, and He selleth them into the hand of Sisera, head of the host of Hazor, and into the hand of the Philistines, and into the hand of the king of Moab, and they fight against them,
and they cry unto Jehovah, and say, We have sinned, because we have forsaken Jehovah, and serve the Baalim, and Ashtaroth, and now, deliver us out of the hand of our enemies, and we serve Thee.
'And Jehovah sendeth Jerubbaal, and Bedan, and Jephthah, and Samuel, and delivereth you out of the hand of your enemies round about, and ye dwell confidently.
'And ye see that Nahash king of the Bene-Ammon hath come against you, and ye say to me, Nay, but a king doth reign over us; and Jehovah your God [is] your king!
And, now, lo, the king whom ye have chosen — whom ye have asked! and lo, Jehovah hath placed over you a king.
'If ye fear Jehovah, and have served Him, and hearkened to His voice, then ye do not provoke the mouth of Jehovah, and ye have been — both ye and the king who hath reigned over you — after Jehovah your God.
'And if ye do not hearken to the voice of Jehovah — then ye have provoked the mouth of Jehovah, and the hand of Jehovah hath been against you, and against your fathers.
'Also now, station yourselves and see this great thing which Jehovah is doing before your eyes;
is it not wheat-harvest to-day? I call unto Jehovah, and He doth give voices and rain; and know ye and see that your evil is great which ye have done in the eyes of Jehovah, to ask for you a king.'
And Samuel calleth unto Jehovah, and Jehovah giveth voices and rain, on that day, and all the people greatly fear Jehovah and Samuel;
and all the people say unto Samuel, 'Pray for thy servants unto Jehovah thy God, and we do not die, for we have added to all our sins evil to ask for us a king.'
And Samuel saith unto the people, 'Fear not; ye have done all this evil; only, turn not aside from after Jehovah — and ye have served Jehovah with all your heart,
and ye do not turn aside after the vain things which do not profit nor deliver, for they [are] vain,
for Jehovah doth not leave His people, on account of His great name; for Jehovah hath been pleased to make you to Him for a people.
'I, also, far be it from me to sin against Jehovah, by ceasing to pray for you, and I have directed you in the good and upright way;
only, fear ye Jehovah, and ye have served Him in truth with all your heart, for see that which He hath made great with you;
and if ye really do evil, both ye and your king are consumed.'
A son of a year [is] Saul in his reigning, yea, two years he hath reigned over Israel,
and Saul chooseth for himself three thousand [men] out of Israel; and two thousand are with Saul in Michmash, and in the hill-country of Beth-El; and a thousand have been with Jonathan in Gibeah of Benjamin; and the remnant of the people he hath sent each to his tents.
And Jonathan smiteth the garrison of the Philistines which [is] in Geba, and the Philistines hear, and Saul hath blown with a trumpet through all the land, saying, 'Let the Hebrews hear.'
And all Israel have heard, saying, 'Saul hath smitten the garrison of the Philistines,' and also, 'Israel hath been abhorred by the Philistines;' and the people are called after Saul to Gilgal.
And the Philistines have been gathered to fight with Israel; thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and a people as the sand which [is] on the sea-shore for multitude; and they come up and encamp in Michmash, east of Beth-Aven.
And the men of Israel have seen that they are distressed, that the people hath been oppressed, and the people hide themselves in caves, and in thickets, and in rocks, and in high places, and in pits.
And Hebrews have passed over the Jordan to the land of Gad and Gilead; and Saul [is] yet in Gilgal, and all the people have trembled after him.
And he waiteth seven days, according to the appointment with Samuel, and Samuel hath not come to Gilgal, and the people are scattered from off him.
And Saul saith, 'Bring nigh unto me the burnt-offering, and the peace-offerings;' and he causeth the burnt-offering to ascend.
And it cometh to pass at his completing to cause the burnt-offering to ascend, that lo, Samuel hath come, and Saul goeth out to meet him, to bless him;
and Samuel saith, 'What hast thou done?' And Saul saith, 'Because I saw that the people were scattered from off me, and thou hadst not come at the appointment of the days, and the Philistines are gathered to Michmash,
and I say, Now do the Philistines come down unto me to Gilgal, and the face of Jehovah I have not appeased; and I force myself, and cause the burnt-offering to ascend.'
And Samuel saith unto Saul, 'Thou hast been foolish; thou hast not kept the command of Jehovah thy God, which He commanded thee, for now had Jehovah established thy kingdom over Israel unto the age;
and, now, thy kingdom doth not stand, Jehovah hath sought for Himself a man according to His own heart, and Jehovah chargeth him for leader over His people, for thou hast not kept that which Jehovah commanded thee.'
And Samuel riseth, and goeth up from Gilgal to Gibeah of Benjamin; and Saul inspecteth the people who are found with him, about six hundred men,
and Saul, and Jonathan his son, and the people who are found with them, are abiding in Gibeah of Benjamin, and the Philistines have encamped in Michmash.
And the destroyer goeth out from the camp of the Philistines — three detachments; the one detachment turneth unto the way of Ophrah, unto the land of Shual;
and the one detachment turneth the way of Beth-Horon, and the one detachment turneth the way of the border which is looking on the valley of the Zeboim, toward the wilderness.
And an artificer is not found in all the land of Israel, for the Philistines said, 'Lest the Hebrews make sword or spear;'
and all Israel go down to the Philistines, to sharpen each his ploughshare, and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock;
and there hath been the file for mattocks, and for coulters, and for three-pronged rakes, and for the axes, and to set up the goads.
And it hath been, in the day of battle, that there hath not been found sword and spear in the hand of any of the people who [are] with Saul and with Jonathan — and there is found to Saul and to Jonathan his son.
And the station of the Philistines goeth out unto the passage of Michmash.
And the day cometh that Jonathan son of Saul saith unto the young man bearing his weapons, 'Come, and we pass over unto the station of the Philistines, which [is] on the other side of this;' and to his father he hath not declared [it].
And Saul is abiding at the extremity of Gibeah, under the pomegranate which [is] in Migron, and the people who [are] with him, about six hundred men,
and Ahiah, son of Ahitub, brother of I-Chabod, son of Phinehas son of Eli priest of Jehovah in Shiloh, bearing an ephod; and the people knew not that Jonathan hath gone.
And between the passages where Jonathan sought to pass over unto the station of the Philistines [is] the edge of a rock on the one side, and the edge of a rock on the other side, and the name of the one is Bozez, and the name of the other Seneh.
The one edge [is] fixed on the north over-against Michmash, and the one on the south over-against Gibeah.
And Jonathan saith unto the young man bearing his weapons, 'Come, and we pass over unto the station of these uncircumcised; it may be Jehovah doth work for us, for there is no restraint to Jehovah to save by many or by few.'
And the bearer of his weapons saith to him, 'Do all that [is] in thy heart; turn for thee; lo, I [am] with thee, as thine own heart.'
And Jonathan saith, 'Lo, we are passing over unto the men, and are revealed unto them;
if thus they say unto us, 'Stand still till we have come unto you,' then we have stood in our place, and do not go up unto them;
and if thus they say, 'Come up against us,' then we have gone up, for Jehovah hath given them into our hand, and this to us [is] the sign.
And revealed are both of them unto the station of the Philistines, and the Philistines say, 'Lo, Hebrews are coming out of the holes where they have hid themselves.'
And the men of the station answer Jonathan, and the bearer of his weapons, and say, 'Come up unto us, and we cause you to know something.' And Jonathan saith unto the bearer of his weapons, 'Come up after me, for Jehovah hath given them into the hand of Israel.'
And Jonathan goeth up on his hands, and on his feet, and the bearer of his weapons after him; and they fall before Jonathan, and the bearer of his weapons is putting to death after him.
And the first smiting which Jonathan and the bearer of his weapons have smitten is of about twenty men, in about half a furrow of a yoke of a field,
and there is a trembling in the camp, in the field, and among all the people, the station and the destroyers have trembled — even they, and the earth shaketh, and it becometh a trembling of God.
And the watchmen of Saul in Gibeah of Benjamin see, and lo, the multitude hath melted away, and it goeth on, and is beaten down.
And Saul saith to the people who [are] with him, 'Inspect, I pray you, and see; who hath gone from us?' and they inspect, and lo, Jonathan and the bearer of his weapons are not.
And Saul saith to Ahiah, 'Bring nigh the ark of God;' for the ark of God hath been on that day with the sons of Israel.
And it cometh to pass, while Saul spake unto the priest, that the noise which [is] in the camp of the Philistines goeth on, going on and becoming great, and Saul saith unto the priest, 'Remove thy hand.'
And Saul is called, and all the people who [are] with him, and they come in unto the battle, and, lo, the sword of each hath been against his neighbour — a very great destruction.
And the Hebrews [who] have been for the Philistines as heretofore, who had gone up with them into the camp, have turned round, even they, to be with Israel who [are] with Saul and Jonathan,
and all the men of Israel, who are hiding themselves in the hill-country of Ephraim, have heard that the Philistines have fled, and they pursue — even they — after them in battle.
And Jehovah saveth Israel on that day, and the battle hath passed over to Beth-Aven.
And the men of Israel have been distressed on that day, and Saul adjureth the people, saying, 'Cursed [is] the man who eateth food till the evening, and I have been avenged of mine enemies;' and none of the people hath tasted food.
And all [they of] the land have come into a forest, and there is honey on the face of the field;
and the people come in unto the forest, and lo, the honey dropped, and none is moving his hand unto his mouth, for the people feared the oath.
And Jonathan hath not heard of his father's adjuring the people, and putteth forth the end of the rod, which [is] in his hand, and dippeth it in the honeycomb, and bringeth back his hand unto his mouth — and his eyes see!
And a man of the people answereth and saith, 'Thy father certainly adjured the people, saying, Cursed [is] the man who eateth food to-day; and the people are weary.'
And Jonathan saith, 'My father hath troubled the land; see, I pray you, that mine eyes have become bright because I tasted a little of this honey.
How much more if the people had well eaten to-day of the spoil of its enemies which it hath found, for now, the smiting hath not been great among the Philistines.'
And they smite on that day among the Philistines from Michmash to Aijalon, and the people are very weary,
and the people make unto the spoil, and take sheep, and oxen, and sons of the herd, and slaughter on the earth, and the people eat with the blood.
And they declare to Saul, saying, 'Lo, the people are sinning against Jehovah, to eat with the blood.' And he saith, 'Ye have dealt treacherously, roll unto me to-day a great stone.'
And Saul saith, 'Be ye scattered among the people, and ye have said to them, Bring ye nigh unto me each his ox, and each his sheep; and ye have slain [them] in this place, and eaten, and ye do not sin against Jehovah to eat with the blood.' And all the people bring nigh each his ox, in his hand, that night, and slaughter [them] there.
And Saul buildeth an alter to Jehovah; with it he hath begun to build altars to Jehovah.
And Saul saith, 'Let us go down after the Philistines by night, and we prey upon them till the light of the morning, and leave not a man of them.' And they say, 'All that is good in thine eyes do.' And the priest saith, 'Let us draw near hither unto God.'
And Saul asketh of God, 'Do I go down after the Philistines? dost Thou give them into the hand of Israel?' and He hath not answered him on that day.
And Saul saith, 'Draw ye nigh hither all, the chiefs of the people, and know and see in what this sin hath been to-day;
for, Jehovah liveth, who is saving Israel: surely if it be in Jonathan my son, surely he doth certainly die;' and none is answering him out of all the people.
And he saith unto all Israel, 'Ye — ye are on one side, and I and Jonathan my son are on another side;' and the people say unto Saul, 'That which is good in thine eyes do.'
And Saul saith unto Jehovah, God of Israel, 'Give perfection;' and Jonathan and Saul are captured, and the people went out.
And Saul saith, 'Cast between me and Jonathan my son;' and Jonathan is captured.
And Saul saith unto Jonathan, 'Declare to me, what hast thou done?' and Jonathan declareth to him, and saith, 'I certainly tasted with the end of the rod that [is] in my hand a little honey; lo, I die!'
And Saul saith, 'Thus doth God do, and thus doth He add, for thou dost certainly die, Jonathan.'
And the people say unto Saul, 'Doth Jonathan die who wrought this great salvation in Israel? — a profanation! Jehovah liveth, if there falleth from the hair of his head to the earth, for with God he hath wrought this day;' and the people rescue Jonathan, and he hath not died.
And Saul goeth up from after the Philistines, and the Philistines have gone to their place;
and Saul captured the kingdom over Israel, and he fighteth round about against all his enemies, against Moab, and against the Bene-Ammon, and against Edom, and against the kings of Zobah, and against the Philistines, and whithersoever he turneth he doth vex [them].
And he maketh a force, and smiteth Amalek, and delivereth Israel out of the hand of its spoiler.
And the sons of Saul are Jonathan, and Ishui, and Melchi-Shua; as to the name of his two daughters, the name of the first-born [is] Merab, and the name of the younger Michal;
and the name of the wife of Saul [is] Ahinoam, daughter of Ahimaaz; and the name of the head of his host [is] Abner son of Ner, uncle of Saul;
and Kish [is] father of Saul, and Ner father of Abner [is] son of Ahiel.
And the war is severe against the Philistines all the days of Saul; when Saul hath seen any mighty man, and any son of valour, then he doth gather him unto himself.
And Samuel saith unto Saul, 'Me did Jehovah send to anoint thee for king over His people, over Israel; and now, hearken to the voice of the words of Jehovah:
'Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, I have looked after that which Amalek did to Israel, that which he laid for him in the way in his going up out of Egypt.
Now, go, and thou hast smitten Amalek, and devoted all that it hath, and thou hast no pity on it, and hast put to death from man unto woman, from infant unto suckling, from ox unto sheep, from camel unto ass.'
And Saul summoneth the people, and inspecteth them in Telaim, two hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand [are] men of Judah.
And Saul cometh in unto a city of Amalek, and layeth wait in a valley;
and Saul saith unto the Kenite, 'Go, turn aside, go down from the midst of Amalek, lest I consume thee with it, and thou didst kindness with all the sons of Israel, in their going up out of Egypt;' and the Kenite turneth aside from the midst of Amalek.
And Saul smiteth Amalek from Havilah — thy going in to Shur, which [is] on the front of Egypt,
and he catcheth Agag king of Amalek alive, and all the people he hath devoted by the mouth of the sword;
and Saul hath pity — also the people — on Agag, and on the best of the flock, and of the herd, and of the seconds, and on the lambs, and on all that [is] good, and have not been willing to devote them; and all the work, despised and wasted — it they devoted.
And the word of Jehovah is unto Samuel, saying,
'I have repented that I caused Saul to reign for king, for he hath turned back from after Me, and My words he hath not performed;' and it is displeasing to Samuel, and he crieth unto Jehovah all the night.
And Samuel riseth early to meet Saul in the morning, and it is declared to Samuel, saying, 'Saul hath come in to Carmel, and lo, he is setting up to himself a monument, and goeth round, and passeth over, and goeth down to Gilgal.'
And Samuel cometh in unto Saul, and Saul saith to him, 'Blessed [art] thou of Jehovah; I have performed the word of Jehovah.'
And Samuel saith, 'And what [is] the noise of this flock in mine ears — and the noise of the herd which I am hearing?'
And Saul saith, 'From Amalek they have brought them, because the people had pity on the best of the flock, and of the herd, in order to sacrifice to Jehovah thy God, and the remnant we have devoted.'
And Samuel saith unto Saul, 'Desist, and I declare to thee that which Jehovah hath spoken unto me to-night;' and he saith to him, 'Speak.'
And Samuel saith, 'Art not thou, if thou [art] little in thine own eyes, head of the tribes of Israel? and Jehovah doth anoint thee for king over Israel,
and Jehovah sendeth thee in the way, and saith, Go, and thou hast devoted the sinners, the Amalekite, and fought against them till they are consumed;
and why hast thou not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah — and dost fly unto the spoil, and dost do the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah?'
And Saul saith unto Samuel, 'Because — I have hearkened to the voice of Jehovah, and I go in the way which Jehovah hath sent me, and bring in Agag king of Amalek, and Amalek I have devoted;
and the people taketh of the spoil of the flock and herd, the first part of the devoted thing, for sacrifice to Jehovah thy God in Gilgal.'
And Samuel saith, 'Hath Jehovah had delight in burnt-offerings and sacrifices as [in] hearkening to the voice of Jehovah? lo, hearkening than sacrifice is better; to give attention than fat of rams;
for a sin of divination [is] rebellion, and iniquity and teraphim [is] stubbornness; because thou hast rejected the word of Jehovah, He also doth reject thee from [being] king.'
And Saul saith unto Samuel, 'I have sinned, for I passed over the command of Jehovah, and thy words; because I have feared the people, I also hearken to their voice;
and now, bear, I pray thee, with my sin, and turn back with me, and I bow myself to Jehovah.'
And Samuel saith unto Saul, 'I do not turn back with thee; for thou hast rejected the word of Jehovah, and Jehovah doth reject thee from being king over Israel.'
And Samuel turneth round to go, and he layeth hold on the skirt of his upper robe — and it is rent!
And Samuel saith unto him, 'Jehovah hath rent the kingdom of Israel from thee to-day, and given it to thy neighbour who is better than thou;
and also, the Pre-eminence of Israel doth not lie nor repent, for He [is] not a man to be penitent.'
And he saith, 'I have sinned; now, honour me, I pray thee, before the elders of my people, and before Israel, and turn back with me; and I have bowed myself to Jehovah thy God.'
And Samuel turneth back after Saul, and Saul boweth himself to Jehovah;
and Samuel saith, 'Bring ye nigh unto me Agag king of Amalek,' and Agag cometh unto him daintily, and Agag saith, 'Surely the bitterness of death hath turned aside.'
And Samuel saith, 'As thy sword bereaved women — so is thy mother bereaved above women;' and Samuel heweth Agag in pieces before Jehovah in Gilgal.
And Samuel goeth to Ramath, and Saul hath gone unto his house — to Gibeah of Saul.
And Samuel hath not added to see Saul till the day of his death, for Samuel mourned for Saul, and Jehovah repented that He had caused Saul to reign over Israel.
And Jehovah saith unto Samuel, 'Till when art thou mourning for Saul, and I have rejected him from reigning over Israel? fill thy horn with oil, and go, I send thee unto Jesse the Beth-Lehemite, for I have seen among his sons for Myself a king.
And Samuel saith, 'How do I go? when Saul hath heard, then he hath slain me.' And Jehovah saith, 'A heifer of the herd thou dost take in thy hand, and hast said, To sacrifice to Jehovah I have come;
and thou hast called for Jesse in the sacrifice, and I cause thee to know that which thou dost do, and thou hast anointed to Me him of whom I speak unto thee.'
And Samuel doth that which Jehovah hath spoken, and cometh in to Beth-Lehem, and the elders of the city tremble to meet him, and [one] saith, 'Is thy coming peace?'
and he saith, 'Peace; to sacrifice to Jehovah I have come, sanctify yourselves, and ye have come in with me to the sacrifice;' and he sanctifieth Jesse and his sons, and calleth them to the sacrifice.
And it cometh to pass, in their coming in, that he seeth Eliab, and saith, 'Surely, before Jehovah [is] His anointed.'
And Jehovah saith unto Samuel, 'Look not unto his appearance, and unto the height of his stature, for I have rejected him; for [it is] not as man seeth — for man looketh at the eyes, and Jehovah looketh at the heart.'
And Jesse calleth unto Abinadab, and causeth him to pass by before Samuel; and he saith, 'Also on this Jehovah hath not fixed.'
And Jesse causeth Shammah to pass by, and he saith, 'Also on this Jehovah hath not fixed.'
And Jesse causeth seven of his sons to pass by before Samuel, and Samuel saith to Jesse, 'Jehovah hath not fixed on these.'
And Samuel saith unto Jesse, 'Are the young men finished?' and he saith, 'Yet hath been left the youngest; and lo, he delighteth himself among the flock;' and Samuel saith unto Jesse, 'Send and take him, for we do not turn round till his coming in hither.'
And he sendeth, and bringeth him in, and he [is] ruddy, with beauty of eyes, and of good appearance; and Jehovah saith, 'Rise, anoint him, for this [is] he.'
And Samuel taketh the horn of oil, and anointeth him in the midst of his brethren, and prosper over David doth the Spirit of Jehovah from that day and onwards; and Samuel riseth and goeth to Ramath.
And the Spirit of Jehovah turned aside from Saul, and a spirit of sadness from Jehovah terrified him;
and the servants of Saul say unto him, 'Lo, we pray thee, a spirit of sadness [from] God is terrifying thee;
let our lord command, we pray thee, thy servants before thee, they seek a skilful man, playing on a harp, and it hath come to pass, in the spirit of sadness [from] God being upon thee, that he hath played with his hand, and [it is] well with thee.'
And Saul saith unto his servants, 'Provide, I pray you, for me a man playing well — then ye have brought [him] in unto me.'
And one of the servants answereth and saith, 'Lo, I have seen a son of Jesse the Beth-Lehemite, skilful in playing, and a mighty virtuous man, and a man of battle, and intelligent in word, and a man of form, and Jehovah [is] with him.'
And Saul sendeth messengers unto Jesse, and saith, 'Send unto me David thy son, who [is] with the flock.'
And Jesse taketh an ass, [with] bread, and a bottle of wine, and one kid of the goats, and sendeth by the hand of David his son unto Saul.
And David cometh in unto Saul, and standeth before him, and he loveth him greatly; and he is a bearer of his weapons.
And Saul sendeth unto Jesse, saying, 'Let David, I pray thee, stand before me, for he hath found grace in mine eyes.'
And it hath come to pass, in the spirit of [sadness from] God being on Saul, that David hath taken the harp, and played with his hand, and Saul hath refreshment and gladness, and the spirit of sadness hath turned aside from off him.
And the Philistines gather their camps to battle, and are gathered to Shochoh, which [is] to Judah, and encamp between Shochoh and Azekah, in Ephes-Dammim;
and Saul and the men of Israel have been gathered, and encamp by the valley of Elah, and set the battle in array to meet the Philistines.
And the Philistines are standing on the mountain on this side, and the Israelites are standing on the mountain on that side, and the valley [is] between them.
And there goeth out a man of the duellists from the camps of the Philistines, Goliath [is] his name, from Gath; his height [is] six cubits and a span,
and a helmet of brass [is] on his head, and [with] a scaled coat of mail he [is] clothed, and the weight of the coat of mail [is] five thousand shekels of brass,
and a frontlet of brass [is] on his feet, and a javelin of brass between his shoulders,
and the wood of his spear [is] like a beam of weavers', and the flame of his spear [is] six hundred shekels of iron, and the bearer of the buckler is going before him.
And he standeth and calleth unto the ranks of Israel, and saith to them, 'Why are ye come out to set in array the battle? [am] not I the Philistine, and ye servants to Saul? choose for you a man, and let him come down unto me;
if he be able to fight with me, and have smitten me, then we have been to you for servants; and if I am able for him, and have smitten him, then ye have been to us for servants, and have served us.'
And the Philistine saith, 'I have reproached the ranks of Israel this day; give to me a man, and we fight together.'
And Saul heareth — and all Israel — these words of the Philistine, and they are broken down and greatly afraid.
And David [is] son of this Ephrathite of Beth-Lehem-Judah, whose name [is] Jesse, and he hath eight sons, and the man in the days of Saul hath become aged among men;
and the three eldest sons of Jesse go, they have gone after Saul to battle; and the name of his three sons who have gone into battle [are] Eliab the first-born, and his second Abinadab, and the third Shammah.
And David is the youngest, and the three eldest have gone after Saul,
and David is going and returning from Saul, to feed the flock of his father at Beth-Lehem.
And the Philistine draweth nigh, morning and evening, and stationeth himself forty days.
And Jesse saith to David his son, 'Take, I pray thee, to thy brethren, an ephah of this roasted [corn], and these ten loaves, and run to the camp to thy brethren;
and these ten cuttings of the cheese thou dost take in to the head of the thousand, and thy brethren thou dost inspect for welfare, and their pledge dost receive.'
And Saul, and they, and all the men of Israel [are] in the valley of Elah, fighting with the Philistines.
And David riseth early in the morning, and leaveth the flock to a keeper, and lifteth up, and goeth, as Jesse commanded him, and he cometh in to the path, and to the force which is going out unto the rank, and they have shouted for battle;
and Israel and the Philistines set in array rank to meet rank.
And David letteth down the goods from off him on the hand of a keeper of the goods, and runneth into the rank, and cometh and asketh of his brethren of welfare.
And he is speaking with them, and lo, a man of the duellists is coming up, Goliath the Philistine [is] his name, of Gath, out of the ranks of the Philistines, and he speaketh according to those words, and David heareth;
and all the men of Israel when they see the man flee from his presence, and are greatly afraid.
And the men of Israel say, 'Have ye seen this man who is coming up? for, to reproach Israel he is coming up, and it hath been — the man who smiteth him, the king doth enrich him with great riches, and his daughter he doth give to him, and his father's house doth make free in Israel.'
And David speaketh unto the men who are standing by him, saying, 'What is done to the man who smiteth this Philistine, and hath turned aside reproach from Israel? for who [is] this uncircumcised Philistine that he hath reproached the ranks of the living God?'
And the people speak to him according to this word, saying, 'Thus it is done to the man who smiteth him.'
And Eliab, his eldest brother, heareth when he speaketh unto the men, and the anger of Eliab burneth against David, and he saith, 'Why [is] this — thou hast come down! and to whom hast thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I have known thy pride, and the evil of thy heart — for, to see the battle thou hast come down.'
And David saith, 'What have I done now? is it not a word?'
And he turneth round from him unto another, and saith according to this word, and the people return him word as the first word.
And the words which David hath spoken are heard, and they declare before Saul, and he receiveth him;
and David saith unto Saul, 'Let no man's heart fall because of him, thy servant doth go, and hath fought with this Philistine.'
And Saul saith unto David, 'Thou art not able to go unto this Philistine, to fight with him, for a youth thou [art], and he a man of war from his youth.'
And David saith unto Saul, 'A shepherd hath thy servant been to his father among the sheep, and the lion hath come — and the bear — and hath taken away a sheep out of the drove,
and I have gone out after him, and smitten him, and delivered out of his mouth, and he riseth against me, and I have taken hold on his beard, and smitten him, and put him to death.
Both the lion and the bear hath thy servant smitten, and this uncircumcised Philistine hath been as one of them, for he hath reproached the ranks of the living God.'
And David saith, 'Jehovah, who delivered me out of the paw of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, He doth deliver me from the hand of this Philistine.' And Saul saith unto David, 'Go, and Jehovah is with thee.'
And Saul clotheth David with his long robe, and hath put a helmet of brass on his head, and doth clothe him with a coat of mail.
And David girded his sword above his long robe, and beginneth to go, for he hath not tried [it]; and David saith unto Saul, 'I am not able to go with these, for I had not tried;' and David turneth them aside from off him.
And he taketh his staff in his hand, and chooseth for him five smooth stones from the brook, and putteth them in the shepherds' habiliments that he hath, even in the scrip, and his sling [is] in his hand, and he draweth nigh unto the Philistine.
And the Philistine goeth on, going and drawing near unto David, and the man bearing the buckler [is] before him,
and the Philistine looketh attentively, and seeth David, and despiseth him, for he was a youth, and ruddy, with a fair appearance.
And the Philistine saith unto David, 'Am I a dog that thou art coming unto me with staves?' and the Philistine revileth David by his gods,
and the Philistine saith unto David, 'Come unto me, and I give thy flesh to the fowl of the heavens, and to the beast of the field.'
And David saith unto the Philistine, 'Thou art coming unto me with sword, and with spear, and with buckler, and I am coming unto thee in the name of Jehovah of Hosts, God of the ranks of Israel, which thou hast reproached.
This day doth Jehovah shut thee up into my hand — and I have smitten thee, and turned aside thy head from off thee, and given the carcase of the camp of the Philistines this day to the fowl of the heavens, and to the beast of the earth, and all the earth do know that God is for Israel.
and all this assembly do know that not by sword and by spear doth Jehovah save, that the battle [is] Jehovah's, and He hath given you into our hand.'
And it hath come to pass, that the Philistine hath risen, and goeth, and draweth near to meet David, and David hasteth and runneth to the rank to meet the Philistine,
and David putteth forth his hand unto the vessel, and taketh thence a stone, and slingeth, and smiteth the Philistine on his forehead, and the stone sinketh into his forehead, and he falleth on his face to the earth.
And David is stronger than the Philistine with a sling and with a stone, and smiteth the Philistine, and putteth him to death, and there is no sword in the hand of David,
and David runneth and standeth over the Philistine, and taketh his sword, and draweth it out of its sheath, and putteth him to death, and cutteth off with it his head; and the Philistines see that their hero [is] dead, and flee.
And the men of Israel rise — also Judah — and shout, and pursue the Philistines till thou enter the valley, and unto the gates of Ekron, and the wounded of the Philistines fall in the way of Shaaraim, even unto Gath, and unto Ekron,
and the sons of Israel turn back from burning after the Philistines, and spoil their camps.
And David taketh the head of the Philistine, and bringeth it in to Jerusalem, and his weapons he hath put in his own tent.
And when Saul seeth David going out to meet the Philistine, he hath said unto Abner, head of the host, 'Whose son [is] this — the youth, Abner?' and Abner saith, 'Thy soul liveth, O king, I have not known.'
And the king saith, 'Ask thou whose son this [is] — the young man.'
And when David turneth back from smiting the Philistine, then Abner taketh him and bringeth him in before Saul, and the head of the Philistine in his hand;
and Saul saith unto him, 'Whose son [art] thou, O youth?' and David saith, 'Son of thy servant Jesse, the Beth-Lehemite.'
And it cometh to pass, when he finisheth to speak unto Saul, that the soul of Jonathan hath been bound to the soul of David, and Jonathan loveth him as his own soul.
And Saul taketh him on that day, and hath not permitted him to turn back to the house of his father.
And Jonathan maketh — also David — a covenant, because he loveth him as his own soul,
and Jonathan strippeth himself of the upper robe which [is] upon him, and giveth it to David, and his long robe, even unto his sword, and unto his bow, and unto his girdle.
And David goeth out whithersoever Saul doth send him; he acted wisely, and Saul setteth him over the men of war, and it is good in the eyes of all the people, and also in the eyes of the servants of Saul.
And it cometh to pass, in their coming in, in David's returning from smiting the Philistine, that the women come out from all the cities of Israel to sing — also the dancers — to meet Saul the king, with tabrets, with joy, and with three-stringed instruments;
and the women answer — those playing, and say, 'Saul hath smitten among his thousands, And David among his myriads.'
And it is displeasing to Saul exceedingly, and this thing is evil in his eyes, and he saith, 'They have given to David myriads, and to me they have given the thousands, and more to him [is] only the kingdom;'
and Saul is eyeing David from that day and thenceforth.
And it cometh to pass, on the morrow, that the spirit of sadness [from] God prospereth over Saul, and he prophesieth in the midst of the house, and David is playing with his hand, as day by day, and the javelin [is] in the hand of Saul,
and Saul casteth the javelin, and saith, 'I smite through David, even through the wall;' and David turneth round out of his presence twice.
And Saul is afraid of the presence of David, for Jehovah hath been with him, and from Saul He hath turned aside;
and Saul turneth him aside from him, and appointeth him to himself head of a thousand, and he goeth out an cometh in, before the people.
And David is in all his ways acting wisely, and Jehovah [is] with him,
and Saul seeth that he is acting very wisely, and is afraid of him,
and all Israel and Judah love David when he is going out and coming in before them.
And Saul saith unto David, 'Lo, my elder daughter Merab — her I give to thee for a wife; only, be to me for a son of valour, and fight the battles of Jehovah;' and Saul said, 'Let not my hand be on him, but let the hand of the Philistines be upon him.'
And David saith unto Saul, 'Who [am] I? and what my life — the family of my father in Israel — that I am son-in-law to the king?'
And it cometh to pass, at the time of the giving of Merab daughter of Saul to David, that she hath been given to Adriel the Meholathite for a wife.
And Michal daughter of Saul loveth David, and they declare to Saul, and the thing is right in his eyes,
and Saul saith, 'I give her to him, and she is to him for a snare, and the hand of the Philistines is on him;' and Saul saith unto David, 'By the second — thou dost become my son-in-law to-day.'
And Saul commandeth his servants, 'Speak unto David gently, saying, Lo, the king hath delighted in thee, and all his servants have loved thee, and now, be son-in-law to the king.'
And the servants of Saul speak in the ears of David these words, and David saith, 'Is it a light thing in your eyes to be son-in-law to the king — and I a poor man, and lightly esteemed?'
And the servants of Saul declare to him, saying, 'According to these words hath David spoken.'
And Saul saith, 'Thus do ye say to David, There is no delight to the king in dowry, but in a hundred foreskins of the Philistines — to be avenged on the enemies of the king;' and Saul thought to cause David to fall by the hand of the Philistines.
And his servants declare to David these words, and the thing is right in the eyes of David, to be son-in-law to the king; and the days have not been full,
and David riseth and goeth, he and his men, and smiteth among the Philistines two hundred men, and David bringeth in their foreskins, and they set them before the king, to be son-in-law to the king; and Saul giveth to him Michal his daughter for a wife.
And Saul seeth and knoweth that Jehovah [is] with David, and Michal daughter of Saul hath loved him,
and Saul addeth to be afraid of the presence of David yet; and Saul is an enemy with David all the days.
And the princes of the Philistines come out, and it cometh to pass from the time of their coming out, David hath acted more wisely than any of the servants of Saul, and his name is very precious.
And Saul speaketh unto Jonathan his son, and unto all his servants, to put David to death,
and Jonathan son of Saul delighted exceedingly in David, and Jonathan declareth to David, saying, 'Saul my father is seeking to put thee to death, and, now, take heed, I pray thee, in the morning, and thou hast abode in a secret place, and been hidden,
and I — I go out, and have stood by the side of my father in the field where thou [art], and I speak of thee unto my father, and have seen what [is coming], and have declared to thee.'
And Jonathan speaketh good of David unto Saul his father, and saith unto him, 'Let not the king sin against his servant, against David, because he hath not sinned against thee, and because his works for thee [are] very good;
yea, he putteth his life in his hand, and smiteth the Philistine, and Jehovah worketh a great salvation for all Israel; thou hast seen, and dost rejoice, and why dost thou sin against innocent blood, to put David to death for nought?'
And Saul hearkeneth to the voice of Jonathan, and Saul sweareth, 'Jehovah liveth — he doth not die.'
And Jonathan calleth for David, and Jonathan declareth to him all these words, and Jonathan bringeth in David unto Saul, and he is before him as heretofore.
And there addeth to be war, and David goeth out and fighteth against the Philistines, and smiteth among them — a great smiting, and they flee from his face.
And a spirit of sadness [from] Jehovah is unto Saul, and he is sitting in his house, and his javelin in his hand, and David is playing with the hand,
and Saul seeketh to smite with the javelin through David, and through the wall, and he freeth himself from the presence of Saul, and he smiteth the javelin through the wall; and David hath fled and escapeth during that night.
And Saul sendeth messengers unto the house of David to watch him, and to put him to death in the morning; and Michal his wife declareth to David, saying, 'If thou art not delivering thy life to-night — tomorrow thou art put to death.'
And Michal causeth David to go down through the window, and he goeth on, and fleeth, and escapeth;
and Michal taketh the teraphim, and layeth on the bed, and the mattress of goats' [hair] she hath put [for] his pillows, and covereth with a garment.
And Saul sendeth messengers to take David, and she saith, 'He [is] sick.'
And Saul sendeth the messengers to see David, saying, 'Bring him up in the bed unto me,' — to put him to death.
And the messengers come in, and lo, the teraphim [are] on the bed, and the mattress of goats' [hair], [for] his pillows.
And Saul saith unto Michal, 'Why thus hast thou deceived me — that thou dost send away mine enemy, and he is escaped?' and Michal saith unto Saul, 'He said unto me, Send me away: why do I put thee to death?'
And David hath fled, and is escaped, and cometh in unto Samuel to Ramath, and declareth to him all that Saul hath done to him, and he goeth, he and Samuel, and they dwell in Naioth.
And it is declared to Saul, saying, 'Lo, David [is] in Naioth in Ramah.'
And Saul sendeth messengers to take David, and they see the assembly of the prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing, set over them, and the Spirit of God is on Saul's messengers, and they prophesy — they also.
And they declare [it] to Saul, and he sendeth other messengers, and they prophesy — they also; and Saul addeth and sendeth messengers a third time, and they prophesy — they also.
And he goeth — he also — to Ramath, and cometh in unto the great well which [is] in Sechu, and asketh, and saith, 'Where [are] Samuel and David?' and [one] saith, 'Lo, in Naioth in Ramah.'
And he goeth thither — unto Naioth in Ramah, and the Spirit of God is upon him — him also; and he goeth, going on, and he prophesieth till his coming in to Naioth in Ramah,
and he strippeth off — he also — his garments, and prophesieth — he also — before Samuel, and falleth down naked all that day and all the night; therefore they say, 'Is Saul also among the prophets?'
And David fleeth from Naioth in Ramah, and cometh, and saith before Jonathan, 'What have I done? what [is] mine iniquity? and what my sin before thy father, that he is seeking my life?'
And he saith to him, 'Far be it! thou dost not die; lo, my father doth not do anything great or small and doth not uncover mine ear; and wherefore doth my father hide from me this thing? this [thing] is not.'
And David sweareth again, and saith, 'Thy father hath certainly known that I have found grace in thine eyes, and he saith, Let not Jonathan know this, lest he be grieved; and yet, Jehovah liveth, and thy soul liveth, but — as a step between me and death.'
And Jonathan saith to David, 'What doth thy soul say? — and I do it for thee.'
And David saith unto Jonathan, 'Lo, the new moon [is] to-morrow; and I do certainly sit with the king to eat; and thou hast sent me away, and I have been hidden in a field till the third evening;
if thy father at all look after me, and thou hast said, David asked earnestly of me to run to Beth-Lehem his city, for a sacrifice of the days [is] there for all the family.
If thus he say: Good; peace [is] for thy servant; and if it be very displeasing to him — know that the evil hath been determined by him;
and thou hast done kindness, to thy servant, for into a covenant of Jehovah thou hast brought thy servant with thee; — and if there is in me iniquity, put thou me to death; and unto thy father, why is this — thou dost bring me in?'
And Jonathan saith, 'Far be it from thee! for I certainly do not know that the evil hath been determined by my father to come upon thee, and I do not declare it to thee.'
And David saith unto Jonathan, 'Who doth declare to me? or what [if] thy father doth answer thee sharply?'
And Jonathan saith unto David, 'Come, and we go out into the field;' and they go out both of them into the field.
And Jonathan saith unto David, 'Jehovah, God of Israel — when I search my father, about [this] time to-morrow [or] the third [day], and lo, good [is] towards David, and I do not then send unto thee, and have uncovered thine ear —
thus doth Jehovah do to Jonathan, and thus doth He add; when the evil concerning thee is good to my father, then I have uncovered thine ear, and sent thee away, and thou hast gone in peace, and Jehovah is with thee, as he was with my father;
and not only while I am alive dost thou do with me the kindness of Jehovah, and I die not,
but thou dost not cut off thy kindness from my house unto the age, nor in Jehovah's cutting off the enemies of David, each one from off the face of the ground.'
And Jonathan covenanteth with the house of David, and Jehovah hath sought [it] from the hand of the enemies of David;
and Jonathan addeth to cause David to swear, because he loveth him, for with the love of his own soul he hath loved him.
And Jonathan saith to him, 'To-morrow [is] new moon, and thou hast been looked after, for thy seat is looked after;
and on the third day thou dost certainly come down, and hast come in unto the place where thou wast hidden in the day of the work, and hast remained near the stone Ezel.
'And I shoot three of the arrows at the side, sending out for myself at a mark;
and lo, I send the youth: Go, find the arrows. If I at all say to the youth, Lo, the arrows [are] on this side of thee — take them, — then come thou, for peace [is] for thee, and there is nothing; Jehovah liveth.
And if thus I say to the young man, Lo, the arrows [are] beyond thee, — go, for Jehovah hath sent thee away;
as to the thing which we have spoken, I and thou, lo, Jehovah [is] between me and thee — unto the age.'
And David is hidden in the field, and it is the new moon, and the king sitteth down by the food to eat,
and the king sitteth on his seat, as time by time, on a seat by the wall, and Jonathan riseth, and Abner sitteth at the side of Saul, and David's place is looked after.
And Saul hath not spoken anything on that day, for he said, 'It [is] an accident; he is not clean — surely not clean.'
And it cometh to pass on the second morrow of the new moon, that David's place is looked after, and Saul saith unto Jonathan his son, 'Wherefore hath the son of Jesse not come in, either yesterday or to-day, unto the food?'
And Jonathan answereth Saul, 'David hath been earnestly asked of me unto Beth-Lehem,
and he saith, Send me away, I pray thee, for a family sacrifice we have in the city, and my brother himself hath given command to me, and now, if I have found grace in thine eyes, let me go away, I pray thee, and see my brethren; therefore he hath not come unto the table of the king.'
And the anger of Saul burneth against Jonathan, and he saith to him, 'Son of a perverse rebellious woman! have I not known that thou art fixing on the son of Jesse to thy shame, and to the shame of the nakedness of thy mother?
for all the days that the son of Jesse liveth on the ground thou art not established, thou and thy kingdom; and now, send and bring him unto me, for he [is] a son of death.'
And Jonathan answereth Saul his father, and saith unto him, 'Why is he put to death? what hath he done?'
And Saul casteth the javelin at him to smite him, and Jonathan knoweth that it hath been determined by his father to put David to death.
And Jonathan riseth from the table in the heat of anger, and hath not eaten food on the second day of the new moon, for he hath been grieved for David, for his father put him to shame.
And it cometh to pass in the morning, that Jonathan goeth out into the field for the appointment with David, and a little youth [is] with him.
And he saith to his youth, 'Run, find, I pray thee, the arrows which I am shooting;' the youth is running, and he hath shot the arrow, causing [it] to pass over him.
And the youth cometh unto the place of the arrow which Jonathan hath shot, and Jonathan calleth after the youth, and saith, 'Is not the arrow beyond thee?'
and Jonathan calleth after the youth, 'Speed, haste, stand not;' and Jonathan's youth gathereth the arrows, and cometh unto his lord.
And the youth hath not known anything, only Jonathan and David knew the word.
And Jonathan giveth his weapons unto the youth whom he hath, and saith to him, 'Go, carry into the city.'
The youth hath gone, and David hath risen from Ezel, at the south, and falleth on his face to the earth, and boweth himself three times, and they kiss one another, and they weep one with another, till David exerted himself;

and Jonathan saith to David, 'Go in peace, in that we have sworn — we two — in the name of Jehovah, saying, Jehovah is between me and thee, and between my seed and thy seed — unto the age;' and he riseth and goeth; and Jonathan hath gone in to the city.
And David cometh in to Nob, unto Ahimelech the priest, and Ahimelech trembleth at meeting David, and saith to him, 'Wherefore [art] thou thyself alone, and no man with thee?'
And David saith to Ahimelech the priest, 'The king hath commanded me a matter, and he saith unto me, Let no man know anything of the matter about which I am sending thee, and which I have commanded thee; and the young men I have caused to know at such and such a place;
and now, what is there under thy hand? five loaves give into my hand, or that which is found.'
And the priest answereth David, and saith, 'There is no common bread under my hand, but there is holy bread; if the youths have been kept only from women.'
And David answereth the priest, and saith to him, 'Surely, if women have been restrained from us as heretofore in my going out, then the vessels of the young men are holy, and it [is] a common way: and also, surely to-day it is sanctified in the vessel.'
And the priest giveth to him the holy thing, for there was no bread there except the bread of the Presence which is turned aside from the presence of Jehovah to put hot bread in the day of its being taken away.
And there [is] a man of the servants of Saul on that day detained before Jehovah, and his name [is] Doeg the Edomite, chief of the shepherds whom Saul hath.
And David saith to Ahimelech, 'And is there not here under thy hand spear or sword? for neither my sword nor my vessels have I taken in my hand, for the matter of the king was urgent.'
And the priest saith, 'The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom thou didst smite in the valley of Elah, lo, it is wrapped in a garment behind the ephod, if it thou dost take to thyself, take; for there is none other save it in this [place].' And David saith, 'There is none like it — give it to me.'
And David riseth and fleeth on that day from the face of Saul, and cometh in unto Achish king of Gath;
and the servants of Achish say unto him, 'Is not this David king of the land? is it not of this one they sing in dances, saying, 'Saul smote among his thousands, and David among his myriads?'
And David layeth these words in his heart, and is exceedingly afraid of the face of Achish king of Gath,
and changeth his behaviour before their eyes, and feigneth himself mad in their hand, and scribbleth on the doors of the gate, and letteth down his spittle unto his beard.
And Achish saith unto his servants, 'Lo, ye see a man acting as a madman; why do ye bring him in unto me?
A lack of madmen [have] I, that ye have brought in this one to act as a madman by me! doth this one come in unto my house?'
And David goeth thence, and is escaped unto the cave of Adullam, and his brethren hear, and all the house of his father, and go down unto him thither;
and gather themselves unto him do every man in distress, and every man who hath an exactor, and every man bitter in soul, and he is over them for head, and there are with him about four hundred men.
And David goeth thence to Mizpeh of Moab, and saith unto the king of Moab, 'Let, I pray thee, my father and my mother go out with you, till that I know what God doth for me;'
and he leadeth them before the king of Moab, and they dwell with him all the days of David's being in the fortress.
And Gad the prophet saith unto David, 'Thou dost not abide in a fortress, go, and thou hast entered for thee the land of Judah;' and David goeth and entereth the forest of Hareth.
And Saul heareth that David hath become known, and the men who [are] with him, and Saul is abiding in Gibeah, under the grove in Ramah, and his spear [is] in his hand, and all his servants standing by him.
And Saul saith to his servants who are standing by him, 'Hear, I pray you, ye Benjamites; also to all of you doth the son of Jesse give fields and vineyards! all of you he doth appoint heads of thousands and heads of hundreds!
for ye have conspired all of you against me, and there is none uncovering mine ear about my son's covenanting with the son of Jesse, and there is none of you grieving for me, and uncovering mine ear, that my son hath raised up my servant against me, to lie in wait as [at] this day.'
And answer doth Doeg the Edomite, who is set over the servants of Saul, and saith, 'I have seen the son of Jesse coming in to Nob, unto Ahimelech son of Ahitub,
and he asketh for him at Jehovah, and provision hath given to him, and the sword of Goliath the Philistine hath given to him.
And the king sendeth to call Ahimelech son of Ahitub, the priest, and all the house of his father, the priests, who [are] in Nob, and they come all of them unto the king;
and Saul saith, 'Hear, I pray thee, son of Ahitub;' and he saith, 'Here [am] I, my lord.'
And Saul saith unto him, 'Why have ye conspired against me, thou and the son of Jesse, by thy giving to him bread and a sword, and to ask for him at God, to rise against me, to lie in wait, as [at] this day?'
And Ahimelech answereth the king and saith, 'And who among all thy servants [is] as David — faithful, and son-in-law of the king, and hath turned aside unto thy council, and is honoured in thy house?
To-day have I begun to ask for him at God? far be it from me! let not the king lay anything against his servant, against any of the house of my father, for thy servant hath known nothing of all this, less or more.'
And the king saith, 'Thou dost surely die, Ahimelech, thou, and all the house of thy father.'
And the king saith to runners, those standing by him, 'Turn round, and put to death the priests of Jehovah, because their hand also [is] with David, and because they have known that he is fleeing, and have not uncovered mine ear;' and the servants of the king have not been willing to put forth their hand to come against the priests of Jehovah.
And the king saith to Doeg, 'Turn round thou, and come against the priests;' and Doeg the Edomite turneth round, and cometh himself against the priests, and putteth to death in that day eighty and five men bearing a linen ephod,
and Nob, the city of the priests, he hath smitten by the mouth of the sword, from man even unto woman, from infant even unto suckling, and ox, and ass, and sheep, by the mouth of the sword.
And there escapeth one son of Ahimelech, son of Ahitub, and his name [is] Abiathar, and he fleeth after David,
and Abiathar declareth to David that Saul hath slain the priests of Jehovah.
And David saith to Abiathar, 'I have known on that day when Doeg the Edomite [is] there, that he doth certainly declare [it] to Saul; I have brought [it] round to every person of the house of thy father;
dwell with me; fear not; for he who seeketh my life seeketh thy life; for a charge [art] thou with me.'
And they declare to David, saying, 'Lo, the Philistines are fighting against Keilah, and they are spoiling the threshing-floors.'
And David asketh at Jehovah, saying, 'Do I go? — and have I smitten among these Philistines?' And Jehovah saith unto David, 'Go, and thou hast smitten among the Philistines, and saved Keilah.'
And David's men say unto him, 'Lo, we here in Judah are afraid; and how much more when we go to Keilah, unto the ranks of the Philistines?'
And David addeth again to ask at Jehovah, and Jehovah answereth him, and saith, 'Rise, go down to Keilah, for I am giving the Philistines into thy hand.'
And David goeth, and his men, to Keilah, and fighteth with the Philistines, and leadeth away their cattle, and smiteth among them — a great smiting, and David saveth the inhabitants of Keilah.
And it cometh to pass, in the fleeing of Abiathar son of Ahimelech unto David, to Keilah, an ephod came down in his hand.
And it is declared to Saul that David hath come in to Keilah, and Saul saith, 'God hath made him known for my hand, for he hath been shut in, to enter into a city of doors and bar.'
And Saul summoneth the whole of the people to battle, to go down to Keilah, to lay siege unto David and unto his men.
And David knoweth that against him Saul is devising the evil, and saith unto Abiathar the priest, 'Bring nigh the ephod.'
And David saith, 'Jehovah, God of Israel, Thy servant hath certainly heard that Saul is seeking to come in unto Keilah, to destroy the city on mine account.
Do the possessors of Keilah shut me up into his hand? doth Saul come down as Thy servant hath heard? Jehovah, God of Israel, declare, I pray Thee, to Thy servant.' And Jehovah saith, 'He doth come down.'
And David saith, 'Do the possessors of Keilah shut me up, and my men, into the hand of Saul?' And Jehovah saith, 'They shut [thee] up.'
And David riseth — and his men — about six hundred men, and they go out from Keilah, and go up and down where they go up and down; and to Saul it hath been declared that David hath escaped from Keilah, and he ceaseth to go out.
And David abideth in the wilderness, in fortresses, and abideth in the hill-country, in the wilderness of Ziph; and Saul seeketh him all the days, and God hath not given him into his hand.
And David seeth that Saul hath come out to seek his life, and David [is] in the wilderness of Ziph, in a forest.
And Jonathan son of Saul riseth, and goeth unto David to the forest, and strengtheneth his hand in God,
and saith unto him, 'Fear not, for the hand of Saul my father doth not find thee, and thou dost reign over Israel, and I am to thee for second, and also so knoweth Saul my father.'
And they make a covenant both of them before Jehovah; and David abideth in the forest, and Jonathan hath gone to his house.
And the Ziphites go up unto Saul to Gibeah, saying, 'Is not David hiding himself with us in fortresses, in the forest, in the height of Hachilah, which [is] on the south of the desolate place?
And, now, by all the desire of thy soul, O king, to come down, come down, and ours [is] to shut him up into the hand of the king.'
And Saul saith, 'Blessed [are] ye of Jehovah, for ye have pity on me;
go, I pray you, prepare yet, and know and see his place where his foot is; who hath seen him there? for [one] hath said unto me, He is very subtile.
And see and know of all the hiding-places where he hideth himself, and ye have turned back unto me prepared, and I have gone with you, and it hath been, if he is in the land, that I have searched him out through all the thousands of Judah.'
And they rise and go to Ziph before Saul, and David and his men [are] in the wilderness of Maon, in the plain, at the south of the desolate place.
And Saul and his men go to seek, and they declare to David, and he goeth down the rock, and abideth in the wilderness of Maon; and Saul heareth, and pursueth after David [to] the wilderness of Maon.
And Saul goeth on this side of the mountain, and David and his men on that side of the mountain, and David is hastened to go from the face of Saul, and Saul and his men are compassing David and his men, to catch them.
And a messenger hath come in unto Saul, saying, 'Haste, and come, for the Philistines have pushed against the land.'
And Saul turneth back from pursuing after David, and goeth to meet the Philistines, therefore they have called that place 'The Rock of Divisions.'
And David goeth up thence, and abideth in fortresses [at] En-gedi.
And it cometh to pass when Saul hath turned back from after the Philistines, that they declare to him, saying, 'Lo, David [is] in the wilderness of En-gedi.'
And Saul taketh three thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and goeth to seek David and his men, on the front of the rocks of the wild goats,
and he cometh in unto folds of the flock, on the way, and there [is] a cave, and Saul goeth in to cover his feet; and David and his men in the sides of the cave are abiding.
And the men of David say unto him, 'Lo, the day of which Jehovah said unto thee, Lo, I am giving thine enemy into thy hand, and thou hast done to him as it is good in thine eyes;' and David riseth and cutteth off the skirt of the upper robe which [is] on Saul — gently.
And it cometh to pass afterwards that the heart of David smiteth him, because that he hath cut off the skirt which [is] on Saul,
and he saith to his men, 'Far be it from me, by Jehovah; I do not do this thing to my lord — to the anointed of Jehovah — to put forth my hand against him, for the anointed of Jehovah he [is].'
And David subdueth his men by words, and hath not permitted them to rise against Saul; and Saul hath risen from the cave, and goeth on the way;
and David riseth afterwards, and goeth out from the cave, and calleth after Saul, saying, 'My lord, O king!' And Saul looketh attentively behind him, and David boweth — face to the earth — and doth obeisance.
And David saith to Saul, 'Why dost thou hear the words of man, saying, Lo, David is seeking thine evil?
Lo, this day have thine eyes seen how that Jehovah hath given thee to-day into my hand in the cave; and [one] said to slay thee, and [mine eye] hath pity on thee, and I say, I do not put forth my hand against my lord, for the anointed of Jehovah he [is].
'And, my father, see, yea see the skirt of thine upper robe in my hand; for by cutting off the skirt of thy upper robe, and I have not slain thee, know and see that there is not in my hand evil and transgression, and I have not sinned against thee, and thou art hunting my soul to take it!
'Jehovah doth judge between me and thee, and Jehovah hath avenged me of thee, and my hand is not on thee;
as saith the simile of the ancients, From the wicked goeth out wickedness, and my hand is not on thee.
'After whom hath the king of Israel come out? after whom art thou pursuing? — after a dead dog! after one flea!
And Jehovah hath been for judge, and hath judged between me and thee, yea, he seeth and pleadeth my cause, and doth deliver me out of thy hand.'
And it cometh to pass, when David completeth to speak these words unto Saul, that Saul saith, 'Is this thy voice, my son David?' and Saul lifteth up his voice, and weepeth.
And he saith unto David, 'More righteous thou [art] than I; for thou hast done me good, and I have done thee evil;
and thou hast declared to-day how that thou hast done good with me, how that Jehovah shut me up into thy hand, and thou didst not slay me,
and that a man doth find his enemy, and hath sent him away in a good manner; and Jehovah doth repay thee good for that which thou didst to me this day.
'And, now, lo, I have known that thou dost certainly reign, and the kingdom of Israel hath stood in thy hand;
and, now, swear to me by Jehovah — thou dost not cut off my seed after me, nor dost thou destroy my name from the house of my father.'
And David sweareth to Saul, and Saul goeth unto his house, and David and his men have gone up unto the fortress.
And Samuel dieth, and all Israel are gathered, and mourn for him, and bury him in his house, in Ramah; and David riseth and goeth down unto the wilderness of Paran.
And [there is] a man in Maon, and his work [is] in Carmel; and the man [is] very great, and he hath three thousand sheep, and a thousand goats; and he is shearing his flock in Carmel.
And the name of the man [is] Nabal, and the name of his wife Abigail, and the woman [is] of good understanding, and of fair form, and the man [is] hard and evil [in] doings; and he [is] a Calebite.
And David heareth in the wilderness that Nabal is shearing his flock,
and David sendeth ten young men, and David saith to the young men, 'Go ye up to Carmel, and ye have come in unto Nabal, and asked of him in my name of welfare,
and said thus: To life! and thou, peace; and thy house, peace; and all that thou hast — peace!
and, now, I have heard that thou hast shearers; now, the shepherds whom thou hast have been with us, we have not put them to shame, nor hath anything been looked after by them, all the days of their being in Carmel.
'Ask thy young men, and they declare to thee, and the young men find grace in thine eyes, for on a good day we have come; give, I pray thee, that which thy hand findeth, to thy servants, and to thy son, to David.'
And the young men of David come in, and speak unto Nabal according to all these words, in the name of David — and rest.
And Nabal answereth the servants of David and saith, 'Who [is] David, and who the son of Jesse? to-day have servants been multiplied who are breaking away each from his master;
and I have taken my bread, and my water, and my flesh, which I slaughtered for my shearers, and have given [it] to men whom I have not known whence they [are]!'
And the young men of David turn on their way, and turn back, and come in, and declare to him according to all these words.
And David saith to his men, 'Gird ye on each his sword;' and they gird on each his sword, and David also girdeth on his sword, and there go up after David about four hundred men, and two hundred have remained by the vessels.
And to Abigail wife of Nabal hath one young man of the youths declared, saying, 'Lo, David hath sent messengers out of the wilderness to bless our lord, and he flieth upon them;
and the men [are] very good to us, and have not put us to shame, and we have not looked after anything all the days we have gone up and down with them, in our being in the field;
a wall they have been unto us both by night and by day, all the days of our being with them, feeding the flock.
'And, now, know and consider what thou dost; for evil hath been determined against our lord, and against all his house, and he [is] too much a son of worthlessness to be spoken to.'
And Abigail hasteth, and taketh two hundred loaves, and two bottles of wine, and five sheep, prepared, and five measures of roasted corn, and a hundred bunches of raisins, and two hundred bunches of figs, and setteth [them] on the asses.
And she saith to her young men, 'Pass over before me; lo, after you I am coming;' and to her husband Nabal she hath not declared [it];
and it hath come to pass, she is riding on the ass and is coming down in the secret part of the hill-country, and lo, David and his men are coming down to meet her, and she meeteth them.
And David said, 'Only, in vain I have kept all that this [one] hath in the wilderness, and nothing hath been looked after of all that he hath, and he turneth back to me evil for good;
thus doth God do to the enemies of David, and thus He doth add, if I leave of all that he hath till the light of the morning — of those sitting on the wall.'
And Abigail seeth David, and hasteth and cometh down from off the ass, and falleth before David on her face, and boweth herself to the earth,
and falleth at his feet and saith, 'On me, my lord, the iniquity; and let, I pray thee, thy handmaid speak in thine ear, and hear the words of thy handmaid.
'Let not, I pray thee, my lord set his heart to this man of worthlessness, on Nabal, for as his name [is] so [is] he; Nabal [is] his name, and folly [is] with him; and I, thine handmaid, did not see the young men of my lord whom thou didst send;
and now, my lord, Jehovah liveth, and thy soul liveth, in that Jehovah hath withheld thee from coming in with blood, and to save thy hand to thee — now let thine enemies be as Nabal, even those seeking evil unto my lord.
'And, now, this blessing which thy maid-servant hath brought to my lord — it hath been given to the young men who are going up and down at the feet of my lord.
'Bear, I pray thee, with the transgression of thy handmaid, for Jehovah doth certainly make to my lord a stedfast house; for the battles of Jehovah hath my lord fought, and evil is not found in thee [all] thy days.
And man riseth to pursue thee and to seek thy soul, and the soul of my lord hath been bound in the bundle of life with Jehovah thy God; as to the soul of thine enemies, He doth sling them out in the midst of the hollow of the sling.
'And it hath been, when Jehovah doth to my lord according to all the good which He hath spoken concerning thee, and appointed thee for leader over Israel,
that this is not to thee for a stumbling-block, and for an offence of heart to my lord — either to shed blood for nought, or my lord's restraining himself; and Jehovah hath done good to my lord, and thou hast remembered thy handmaid.'
And David saith to Abigail, 'Blessed [is] Jehovah, God of Israel, who hath sent thee this day to meet me,
and blessed [is] thy discretion, and blessed [art] thou in that thou hast restrained me this day from coming in with blood, and to restrain my hand to myself.
And yet, Jehovah liveth, God of Israel, who hath kept me back from doing evil with thee, for unless thou hadst hasted, and dost come to meet me, surely there had not been left to Nabal till the light of the morning, of those sitting on the wall.'
And David receiveth from her hand that which she hath brought to him, and to her he hath said, 'Go up in peace to thy house; see, I have hearkened to thy voice, and accept thy face.'
And Abigail cometh in unto Nabal, and lo, he hath a banquet in his house, like a banquet of the king, and the heart of Nabal [is] glad within him, and he [is] drunk unto excess, and she hath not declared to him anything, less or more, till the light of the morning.
And it cometh to pass in the morning, when the wine is gone out from Nabal, that his wife declareth to him these things, and his heart dieth within him, and he hath been as a stone.
And it cometh to pass, [in] about ten days, that Jehovah smiteth Nabal, and he dieth,
and David heareth that Nabal [is] dead, and saith, 'Blessed [is] Jehovah who hath pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of Nabal, and His servant hath kept back from evil, and the wickedness of Nabal hath Jehovah turned back on his own head;' and David sendeth and speaketh with Abigail, to take her to him for a wife.
And the servants of David come in unto Abigail at Carmel, and speak unto her, saying, 'David hath sent us unto thee to take thee to him for a wife.'
And she riseth and boweth herself — face to the earth — and saith, 'Lo, thy handmaid [is] for a maid-servant to wash the feet of the servants of my lord.'
And Abigail hasteth and riseth, and rideth on the ass; and five of her young women who are going at her feet; and she goeth after the messengers of David, and is to him for a wife.
And Ahinoam hath David taken from Jezreel, and they are — even both of them — to him for wives;
and Saul gave Michal his daughter, wife to David, to Phalti son of Laish, who [is] of Gallim.
And the Ziphites come in unto Saul, at Gibeah, saying, 'Is not David hiding himself in the height of Hachilah, on the front of the desert?'
And Saul riseth, and goeth down unto the wilderness of Ziph, and with him three thousand men, chosen ones of Israel, to seek David in the wilderness of Ziph.
And Saul encampeth in the height of Hachilah, which [is] on the front of the desert, by the way, and David is abiding in the wilderness, and he seeth that Saul hath come after him in to the wilderness;
and David sendeth spies, and knoweth that Saul hath come unto Nachon,
and David riseth, and cometh in unto the place where Saul hath encamped, and David seeth the place where Saul hath lain, and Abner son of Ner, head of his host, and Saul is lying in the path, and the people are encamping round about him.
And David answereth and saith unto Ahimelech the Hittite, and unto Abishai son of Zeruiah, brother of Joab, saying, 'Who doth go down with me unto Saul, unto the camp?' and Abishai saith, 'I — I go down with thee.'
And David cometh — and Abishai — unto the people by night, and lo, Saul is lying sleeping in the path, and his spear struck into the earth at his pillow, and abner and the people are lying round about him.
And Abishai saith unto David, 'God hath shut up to-day thine enemy into thy hand; and, now, let me smite him, I pray thee, with a spear, even into the earth at once — and I do repeat [it] to him.'
And David saith unto Abishai, 'Destroy him not; for who hath put forth his hand against the anointed of Jehovah, and been acquitted?'
And David saith, 'Jehovah liveth; except Jehovah doth smite him, or his day come that he hath died, or into battle he go down, and hath been consumed —
far be it from me, by Jehovah, from putting forth my hand against the anointed of Jehovah; and, now, take, I pray thee, the spear which [is] at his pillow, and the cruse of water, and we go away.'
And David taketh the spear, and the cruse of water at the pillow of Saul, and they go away, and there is none seeing, and there is none knowing, and there is none awaking, for all of them are sleeping, for a deep sleep [from] Jehovah hath fallen upon them.
And David passeth over to the other side, and standeth on the top of the hill afar off — great [is] the place between them;
and David calleth unto the people, and unto Abner son of Ner, saying, 'Dost thou not answer, Abner?' and Abner answereth and saith, 'Who [art] thou [who] hast called unto the king?'
And David saith unto Abner, 'Art not thou a man? and who [is] like thee in Israel? but why hast thou not watched over thy lord the king? for one of the people had come in to destroy the king, thy lord.
Not good is this thing which thou hast done; Jehovah liveth, but ye [are] sons of death, in that ye have not watched over your lord, over the anointed of Jehovah; and now, see where the king's spear [is], and the cruse of water which [is] at his bolster.'
And Saul discerneth the voice of David, and saith, 'Is this thy voice, my son David?' and David saith, 'My voice, my lord, O king!'
and he saith, 'Why [is] this — my lord is pursuing after his servant? for what have I done, and what [is] in my hand evil?
And, now, let, I pray thee, my lord the king hear the words of his servant: if Jehovah hath moved thee against me, let Him accept a present; and if the sons of men — cursed [are] they before Jehovah, for they have cast me out to-day from being admitted into the inheritance of Jehovah, saying, Go, serve other gods.
'And now, let not my blood fall to the earth over-against the face of Jehovah, for the king of Israel hath come out to seek one flea, as [one] pursueth the partridge in mountains.'
And Saul saith, 'I have sinned; turn back, my son David, for I do evil to thee no more, because that my soul hath been precious in thine eyes this day; lo, I have acted foolishly, and do err very greatly.'
And David answereth and saith, 'Lo, the king's spear; and let one of the young men pass over, and receive it;
and Jehovah doth turn back to each his righteousness and his faithfulness, in that Jehovah hath given thee to-day into [my] hand, and I have not been willing to put forth my hand against the anointed of Jehovah,
and lo, as thy soul hath been great this day in mine eyes, so is my soul great in the eyes of Jehovah, and He doth deliver me out of all distress.'
And Saul saith unto David, 'Blessed [art] thou, my son David, also working thou dost work, and also prevailing thou dost prevail.' And David goeth on his way, and Saul hath turned back to his place.
And David saith unto his heart, 'Now am I consumed one day by the hand of Saul; there is nothing for me better than that I diligently escape unto the land of the Philistines, and Saul hath been despairing of me — of seeking me any more in all the border of Israel, and I have escaped out of his hand.'
And David riseth, and passeth over, he and six hundred men who [are] with him, unto Achish son of Maoch king of Gath;
and David dwelleth with Achish in Gath, he and his men, each one with his household, [even] David and his two wives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail wife of Nabal the Carmelitess.
And it is declared to Saul that David hath fled to Gath, and he hath not added any more to seek him.
And David saith unto Achish, 'If, I pray thee, I have found grace in thine eyes, they give to me a place in one of the cities of the field, and I dwell there, yea, why doth thy servant dwell in the royal city with thee?'
And Achish giveth to him in that day Ziklag, therefore hath Ziklag been to the kings of Judah till this day.
And the number of the days which David hath dwelt in the field of the Philistines [is] days and four months;
and David goeth up and his men, and they push unto the Geshurite, and the Gerizite, and the Amalekite, (for they are inhabitants of the land from of old), as thou comest in to Shur and unto the land of Egypt,
and David hath smitten the land, and doth not keep alive man and woman, and hath taken sheep, and oxen, and asses, and camels, and garments, and turneth back, and cometh in unto Achish.
And Achish saith, 'Whither have ye pushed to-day?' and David saith, 'Against the south of Judah, and against the south of the Jerahmeelite, and unto the south of the Kenite.'
Neither man nor woman doth David keep alive, to bring in [word] to Gath, saying, 'Lest they declare [it] against us, saying, Thus hath David done, and thus [is] his custom all the days that he hath dwelt in the fields of the Philistines.'
And Achish believeth in David, saying, 'He hath made himself utterly abhorred among his people, in Israel, and hath been to me for a servant age-during.'
And it cometh to pass in those days, that the Philistines gather their camps for the war, to fight against Israel, and Achish saith unto David, 'Thou dost certainly know that with me thou dost go out into the camp, thou and thy men.'
And David saith unto Achish, 'Therefore — thou dost know that which thy servant dost do.' And Achish saith unto David, 'Therefore — keeper of my head I do appoint thee all the days.'
And Samuel hath died, and all Israel mourn for him, and bury him in Ramah, even in his city, and Saul hath turned aside those having familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land.
And the Philistines are gathered, and come in, and encamp in Shunem, and Saul gathereth all Israel, and they encamp in Gilboa,
and Saul seeth the camp of the Philistines, and feareth, and his heart trembleth greatly,
and Saul asketh at Jehovah, and Jehovah hath not answered him, either by dreams, or by Urim, or by prophets.
And Saul saith to his servants, 'Seek for me a woman possessing a familiar spirit, and I go unto her, and inquire of her;' and his servants say unto him, 'Lo, a woman possessing a familiar spirit in En-dor.'
And Saul disguiseth himself and putteth on other garments, and goeth, he and two of the men with him, and they come in unto the woman by night, and he saith, 'Divine, I pray thee, to me by the familiar spirit, and cause to come up to me him whom I say unto thee.'
And the woman saith unto him, 'Lo, thou hast known that which Saul hath done, that he hath cut off those having familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land; and why art thou laying a snare for my soul — to put me to death?'
And Saul sweareth to her by Jehovah, saying, 'Jehovah liveth, punishment doth not meet thee for this thing.'
And the woman saith, 'Whom do I bring up to thee?' and he saith, 'Samuel — bring up to me.'
And the woman seeth Samuel, and crieth with a loud voice, and the woman speaketh unto Saul, saying, 'Why hast thou deceived me — and thou Saul?'
And the king saith to her, 'Do not fear; for what hast thou seen?' and the woman saith unto Saul, 'Gods I have seen coming up out of the earth.'
And he saith to her, 'What [is] his form?' and she saith, 'An aged man is coming up, and he [is] covered with an upper robe;' and Saul knoweth that he [is] Samuel, and boweth — face to thee earth — and doth obeisance.
And Samuel saith unto Saul, 'Why hast thou troubled me, to bring me up?' And Saul saith, 'I have great distress, and the Philistines are fighting against me, God hath turned aside from me, and hath not answered me any more, either by the hand of the prophets, or by dreams; and I call for thee to let me know what I do.'
And Samuel saith, 'And why dost thou ask me, and Jehovah hath turned aside from thee, and is thine enemy?
And Jehovah doth for Himself as He hath spoken by my hand, and Jehovah rendeth the kingdom out of thy hand, and giveth it to thy neighbour — to David.
Because thou hast not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah, nor didst the fierceness of His anger on Amalek — therefore this thing hath Jehovah done to thee this day;
yea, Jehovah giveth also Israel with thee into the hand of the Philistines, and tomorrow thou and thy sons [are] with me; also the camp of Israel doth Jehovah give into the hand of the Philistines.'
And Saul hasteth and falleth — the fulness of his stature — to the earth, and feareth greatly because of the words of Samuel; also power was not in him, for he had not eaten bread all the day, and all the night.
And the woman cometh in unto Saul, and seeth that he hath been greatly troubled, and saith unto him, 'Lo, thy maid-servant hath hearkened to thy voice, and I put my soul in my hand, and I obey thy words which thou hast spoken unto me;
and now, hearken, I pray thee, also thou, to the voice of thy maid-servant, and I set before thee a morsel of bread, and eat, and there is in thee power when thou goest in the way.'
And he refuseth, and saith, 'I do not eat;' and his servants urge on him, and also the woman, and he hearkeneth to their voice, and riseth from the earth, and sitteth on the bed.
And the woman hath a calf of the stall in the house, and she hasteth and slaughtereth it, and taketh flour, and kneadeth, and baketh it unleavened things,
and bringeth nigh before Saul, and before his servants, and they eat, and rise, and go on, during that night.
And the Philistines gather all their camps to Aphek, and the Israelites are encamping at a fountain which [is] in Jezreel,
and the princes of the Philistines are passing on by hundreds, and by thousands, and David and his men are passing on in the rear with Achish.
And the heads of the Philistines say, 'What [are] these Hebrews?' and Achish saith unto the heads of the Philistines, 'Is not this David servant of Saul king of Israel, who hath been with me these days or these years, and I have not found in him anything [wrong] from the day of his falling away till this day.'
And the heads of the Philistines are wroth against him, and the heads of the Philistines say to him, 'Send back the man, and he doth turn back unto his place whither thou hast appointed him, and doth not go down with us into battle, and is not to us for an adversary in battle; and wherewith doth this one reconcile himself unto his lord — is it not with the heads of those men?'
Is not this David, of whom they answer in choruses, saying, Saul hath smitten among his thousands, and David among his myriads?'
And Achish calleth unto David, and saith unto him, 'Jehovah liveth, surely thou [art] upright, and good in mine eyes is thy going out, and thy coming in, with me in the camp, for I have not found in thee evil from the day of thy coming in unto me till this day; and in the eyes of the princes thou art not good;
and now, turn back, and go in peace, and thou dost do no evil in the eyes of the princes of the Philistines.'
And David saith unto Achish, 'But what have I done? and what hast thou found in thy servant from the day that I have been before thee till this day — that I go not in and have fought against the enemies of my lord the king?'
And Achish answereth and saith unto David, 'I have known that thou [art] good in mine eyes as a messenger of God; only, the princes of the Philistines have said, He doth not go up with us into battle;
and now, rise thou early in the morning, and the servants of thy lord who have come with thee, when ye have risen early in the morning, and have light, then go ye.'
And David riseth early, he and his men, to go in the morning, to turn back unto the land of the Philistines, and the Philistines have gone up to Jezreel.
And it cometh to pass, in the coming in of David and his men to Ziklag, on the third day, that the Amalekites have pushed unto the south, and unto Ziklag, and smite Ziklag, and burn it with fire,
and they take captive the women who [are] in it; from small unto great they have not put any one to death, and they lead away, and go on their way.
And David cometh in — and his men — unto the city, and lo, burnt with fire, and their wives, and their sons, and their daughters have been taken captive!
And David lifteth up — and the people who [are] with him — their voice and weep, till that they have no power to weep.
And the two wives of David have been taken captive, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail wife of Nabal the Carmelite;
and David hath great distress, for the people have said to stone him, for the soul of all the people hath been bitter, each for his sons and for his daughters; and David doth strengthen himself in Jehovah his God.
And David saith unto Abiathar the priest, son of Ahimelech, 'Bring nigh, I pray thee, to me the ephod;' and Abiathar bringeth nigh the ephod unto David,
and David asketh at Jehovah, saying, 'I pursue after this troop — do I overtake it?' And He saith to him, 'Pursue, for thou dost certainly overtake, and dost certainly deliver.'
And David goeth on, he and six hundred men who [are] with him, and they come in unto the brook of Besor, and those left have stood still,
and David pursueth, he and four hundred men, (and two hundred men stand still who have been too faint to pass over the brook of Besor),
and they find a man, an Egyptian, in the field, and take him unto David, and give to him bread, and he eateth, and they cause him to drink water,
and give to him a piece of a bunch of dried figs, and two bunches of raisins, and he eateth, and his spirit returneth unto him, for he hath not eaten bread nor drunk water three days and three nights.
And David saith to him, 'Whose [art] thou? and whence [art] thou?' And he saith, 'An Egyptian youth I [am], servant to a man, an Amalekite, and my lord forsaketh me, for I have been sick three days,
we pushed [to] the south of the Cherethite, and against that which [is] to Judah, and against the south of Caleb, and Ziklag we burned with fire.'
And David saith unto him, 'Dost thou bring me down unto this troop?' and he saith, 'Swear to me by God — thou dost not put me to death, nor dost thou shut me up into the hand of my lord — and I bring thee down unto this troop.'
And he bringeth him down, and lo, they are spread out over the face of all the earth, eating, and drinking, and feasting, with all the great spoil which they have taken out of the land of the Philistines, and out of the land of Judah.
And David smiteth them from the twilight even unto the evening of the morrow, and there hath not escaped of them a man, except four hundred young men who have ridden on the camels, and are fled.
And David delivereth all that the Amalekites have taken; also his two wives hath David delivered.
And there hath not lacked to them [anything], from small unto great, and unto sons and daughters, and from the spoil, even unto all that they had taken to themselves, the whole hath David brought back,
and David taketh the whole of the flock, and of the herd, they have led on before these cattle, and they say, 'This [is] David's spoil.'
And David cometh in unto the two hundred men who were too faint to go after David, and whom they cause to abide at the brook of Besor, and they go out to meet David, and to meet the people who [are] with him, and David approacheth the people, and asketh of them of welfare.
And every bad and worthless man, of the men who have gone with David, answereth, yea, they say, 'Because that they have not gone with us we do not give to them of the spoil which we have delivered, except each his wife and his children, and they lead away and go.
And David saith, 'Ye do not do so, my brethren, with that which Jehovah hath given to us, and He doth preserve us, and doth give the troop which cometh against us into our hand;
and who doth hearken to you in this thing? for as the portion of him who was brought down into battle, so also [is] the portion of him who is abiding by the vessels — alike they share.'
And it cometh to pass from that day and forward, that he appointeth it for a statute and for an ordinance for Israel unto this day.
And David cometh in unto Ziklag, and sendeth of the spoil to the elders of Judah, to his friends, (saying, 'Lo, for you a blessing, of the spoil of the enemies of Jehovah),'
to those in Beth-El, and to those in South Ramoth, and to those in Jattir,
and to those in Aroer, and to those in Siphmoth, and to those in Eshtemoa,
and to those in Rachal, and to those in the cities of the Jerahmeelites, and to those in the cities of the Kenites,
and to those in Hormah, and to those in Chor-Ashan, and to those in Athach,
and to those in Hebron, and to all the places where David had gone up and down, he and his men.
And the Philistines are fighting against Israel, and the men of Israel flee from the face of the Philistines, and fall wounded in mount Gilboa,
and the Philistines follow Saul and his sons, and the Philistines smite Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Malchishua, sons of Saul.
And the battle is hard against Saul, and the archers find him — men with bow — and he is pained greatly by the archers;
and Saul saith to the bearer of his weapons, 'Draw thy sword, and pierce me with it, lest they come — these uncircumcised — and have pierced me, and rolled themselves on me;' and the bearer of his weapons hath not been willing, for he is greatly afraid, and Saul taketh the sword, and falleth upon it.
And the bearer of his weapons seeth that Saul [is] dead, and he falleth — he also — on his sword, and dieth with him;
and Saul dieth, and three of his sons, and the bearer of his weapons, also all his men, on that day together.
And they see — the men of Israel, who [are] beyond the valley, and who [are] beyond the Jordan — that the men of Israel have fled, and that Saul and his sons have died, and they forsake the cities and flee, and Philistines come in, and dwell in them.
And it cometh to pass on the morrow, that the Philistines come to strip the wounded, and they find Saul and his three sons fallen on mount Gilboa,
and they cut off his head, and strip off his weapons, and send into the land of the Philistines round about, to proclaim tidings [in] the house of their idols, and [among] the people;
and they place his weapons [in] the house of Ashtaroth, and his body they have fixed on the wall of Beth-Shan.
And they hear regarding it — the inhabitants of Jabesh-Gilead — that which the Philistines have done to Saul,
and all the men of valour arise, and go all the night, and take the body of Saul, and the bodies of his sons, from the wall of Beth-Shan, and come in to Jabesh, and burn them there,
and they take their bones, and bury [them] under the tamarisk in Jabesh, and fast seven days.
And it cometh to pass, after the death of Saul, that David hath returned from smiting the Amalekite, and David dwelleth in Ziklag two days,
and it cometh to pass, on the third day, that lo, a man hath come in out of the camp from Saul, and his garments [are] rent, and earth on his head; and it cometh to pass, in his coming in unto David, that he falleth to the earth, and doth obeisance.
And David saith to him, 'Whence comest thou?' and he saith unto him, 'Out of the camp of Israel I have escaped.'
And David saith unto him, 'What hath been the matter? declare, I pray thee, to me.' And he saith, that 'The people hath fled from the battle, and also a multitude hath fallen of the people, and they die; and also Saul and Jonathan his son have died.'
And David saith unto the youth who is declaring [it] to him, 'How hast thou known that Saul and Jonathan his son [are] dead?'
And the youth who is declaring [it] to him saith, I happened to meet in mount Gilboa, and lo, Saul is leaning on his spear; and lo, the chariots and those possessing horses have followed him;
and he turneth behind him, and seeth me, and calleth unto me, and I say, Here [am] I.
And he saith to me, Who [art] thou? and I say unto him, An Amalekite I [am].'
'And he saith unto me, Stand, I pray thee, over me, and put me to death, for seized me hath the arrow, for all my soul [is] still in me.
And I stand over him, and put him to death, for I knew that he doth not live after his falling, and I take the crown which [is] on his head, and the bracelet which [is] on his arm, and bring them in unto my lord hither.'
And David taketh hold on his garments, and rendeth them, and also all the men who [are] with him,
and they mourn, and weep, and fast till the evening, for Saul, and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of Jehovah, and for the house of Israel, because they have fallen by the sword.
And David saith unto the youth who is declaring [it] to him, 'Whence [art] thou?' and he saith, 'Son of a sojourner, an Amalekite, I [am].'
And David saith unto him, 'How wast thou not afraid to put forth thy hand to destroy the anointed of Jehovah?'
And David calleth to one of the youths, and saith, 'Draw nigh — fall upon him;' and he smiteth him, and he dieth;
and David saith unto him, 'Thy blood [is] on thine own head, for thy mouth hath testified against thee, saying, I — I put to death the anointed of Jehovah.'
And David lamenteth with this lamentation over Saul, and over Jonathan his son;
and he saith to teach the sons of Judah 'The Bow;' lo, it is written on the book of the Upright: —
'The Roebuck, O Israel, On thy high places [is] wounded; How have the mighty fallen!
Declare [it] not in Gath, Proclaim not the tidings in the streets of Ashkelon, Lest they rejoice — The daughters of the Philistines, Lest they exult — The daughters of the Uncircumcised!
Mountains of Gilboa! No dew nor rain be on you, And fields of heave-offerings! For there hath become loathsome The shield of the mighty, The shield of Saul — without the anointed with oil.
From the blood of the wounded, From the fat of the mighty, The bow of Jonathan Hath not turned backward; And the sword of Saul doth not return empty.
Saul and Jonathan! They are loved and pleasant in their lives, And in their death they have not been parted. Than eagles they have been lighter, Than lions they have been mightier!
Daughters of Israel! for Saul weep ye, Who is clothing you [in] scarlet with delights. Who is lifting up ornaments of gold on your clothing.
How have the mighty fallen In the midst of the battle! Jonathan! on thy high places wounded!
I am in distress for thee, my brother Jonathan, Very pleasant wast thou to me; Wonderful was thy love to me, Above the love of women!
How have the mighty fallen, Yea, the weapons of war perish!'
And it cometh to pass afterwards, that David asketh at Jehovah, saying, 'Do I go up into one of the cities of Judah?' and Jehovah saith unto him, 'Go up.' And David saith, 'Whither do I go up?' and He saith, 'To Hebron.'
And David goeth up thither, and also his two wives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail wife of Nabal the Carmelite;
and his men who [are] with him hath David brought up — a man and his household — and they dwell in the cities of Hebron.
And the men of Judah come, and anoint there David for king over the house of Judah; and they declare to David, saying, 'The men of Jabesh-Gilead [are] they who buried Saul.'
And David sendeth messengers unto the men of Jabesh-Gilead, and saith unto them, 'Blessed [are] ye of Jehovah, in that ye have done this kindness with your lord, with Saul, that ye bury him.
'And, now, Jehovah doth with you kindness and truth, and also, I do with you this good because ye have done this thing;
and now, are your hands strong, and be ye for sons of valour, for your lord Saul. [is] dead, and also — me have the house of Judah anointed for king over them.'
And Abner, son of Ner, head of the host which Saul hath, hath taken Ish-Bosheth, son of Saul, and causeth him to pass over to Mahanaim,
and causeth him to reign over Gilead, and over the Ashurite, and over Jezreel, and over Ephraim, and over Benjamin, and over Israel — all of it.
A son of forty years, [is] Ish-Bosheth son of Saul, in his reigning over Israel, and two years he hath reigned, only the house of Judah have been after David.
And the number of the days that David hath been king in Hebron, over the house of Judah, is seven years and six months.
And Abner son of Ner goeth out, and servants of Ish-Bosheth son of Saul, from Mahanaim to Gibeon.
And Joab son of Zeruiah, and servants of David, have gone out, and they meet by the pool of Gibeon together, and sit down, these by the pool on this [side], and these by the pool on that.
And Abner saith unto Joab, 'Let the youths rise, I pray thee, and they play before us;' and Joab saith, 'Let them rise.'
And they rise and pass over, in number twelve of Benjamin, even of Ish-Bosheth son of Saul, and twelve of the servants of David.
And they lay hold, each on the head of his companion, and his sword [is] in the side of his companion, and they fall together, and [one] calleth that place Helkath-Hazzurim, which [is] in Gibeon,
and the battle is very hard on that day, and Abner is smitten, and the men of Israel, before the servants of David.
And there are there three sons of Zeruiah, Joab, and Abishai, and Asahel, and Asahel [is] light on his feet, as one of the roes which [are] in the field,
And Asahel pursueth after Abner, and hath not turned aside to go to the right or to the left, from after Abner.
And Abner looketh behind him, and saith, 'Art thou he — Asahel?' and he saith, 'I [am].'
And Abner saith to him, 'Turn thee aside to thy right hand or to thy left, and seize for thee one of the youths, and take to thee his armour;' and Asahel hath not been willing to turn aside from after him.
And Abner addeth again, saying unto Asahel, 'Turn thee aside from after me, why do I smite thee to the earth? and how do I lift up my face unto Joab thy brother?'
And he refuseth to turn aside, and Abner smiteth him with the hinder part of the spear unto the fifth [rib], and the spear cometh out from behind him, and he falleth there, and dieth under it; and it cometh to pass, every one who hath come unto the place where Asahel hath fallen and dieth — they stand still.
And Joab and Abishai pursue after Abner, and the sun hath gone in, and they have come in unto the height of Ammah, which [is] on the front of Giah, the way of the wilderness of Gibeon.
And the sons of Benjamin gather themselves together after Abner, and become one troop, and stand on the top of a certain height,
and Abner calleth unto Joab, and saith, 'For ever doth the sword consume? hast thou not known that it is bitterness in the latter end? and till when dost thou not say to the people to turn back from after their brethren?'
And Joab saith, 'God liveth! for unless thou hadst spoken, surely then from the morning had the people gone up each from after his brother.'
And Joab bloweth with a trumpet, and all the people stand still, and pursue no more after Israel, nor have they added any more to fight.
And Abner and his men have gone through the plain all that night, and pass over the Jordan, and go on [through] all Bithron, and come in to Mahanaim.
And Joab hath turned back from after Abner, and gathereth all the people, and there are lacking of the servants of David nineteen men, and Asahel;
and the servants of David have smitten of Benjamin, even among the men of Abner, three hundred and sixty men — they died.
And they lift up Asahel, and bury him in the burying-place of his father, which [is] in Beth-Lehem, and they go all the night — Joab and his men — and it is light to them in Hebron.
And the war is long between the house of Saul and the house of David, and David is going on and [is] strong, and the house of Saul are going on and [are] weak.
And there are born to David sons in Hebron, and his first-born is Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess,
and his second [is] Chileab, of Abigail wife of Nabal the Carmelite, and the third [is] Absalom son of Maacah daughter of Talmai king of Geshur,
and the fourth [is] Adonijah son of Haggith, and the fifth [is] Shephatiah son of Abital,
and the sixth [is] Ithream, of Eglah wife of David; these have been born to David in Hebron.
And it cometh to pass, in the war being between the house of Saul and the house of David, that Abner hath been strengthening himself in the house of Saul,
and Saul hath a concubine, and her name [is] Rizpah daughter of Aiah, and [Ish-Bosheth] saith unto Abner, 'Wherefore hast thou gone in unto the concubine of my father?'
And it is displeasing to Abner exceedingly, because of the words of Ish-Bosheth, and he saith, 'The head of a dog [am] I — that in reference to Judah to-day I do kindness with the house of Saul thy father, unto his brethren, and unto his friends, and have not delivered thee into the hand of David — that thou chargest against me iniquity concerning the woman to-day?
thus doth God to Abner, and thus He doth add to him, surely as Jehovah hath sworn to David — surely so I do to him:
to cause the kingdom to pass over from the house of Saul, and to raise up the throne of David over Israel, and over Judah, from Dan even unto Beer-Sheba.'
And he is not able any more to turn back Abner a word, because of his fearing him.
And Abner sendeth messengers unto David for himself, saying, 'Whose [is] the land?' saying, 'Make thy covenant with me, and lo, my hand [is] with thee, to bring round unto thee all Israel.'
And he saith, 'Good — I make with thee a covenant; only, one thing I am asking of thee, that is, Thou dost not see my face, except thou dost first bring in Michal, daughter of Saul in thy coming into see my face.'
And David sendeth messengers unto Ish-Bosheth son of Saul, saying, 'Give up my wife Michal, whom I betrothed to myself with a hundred foreskins of the Philistines.'
And Ish-Bosheth sendeth, and taketh her from a man, from Phaltiel son of Laish,
and her husband goeth with her, going on and weeping behind her, unto Bahurim, and Abner saith unto him, 'Go, turn back;' and he turneth back.
And the word of Abner was with the elders of Israel, saying, 'Heretofore ye have been seeking David for king over you,
and now, do [it], for Jehovah hath spoken of David saying, By the hand of David my servant — to save My people Israel out of the hand of the Philistines, and out of the hand of all their enemies.'
And Abner speaketh also in the ears of Benjamin, and Abner goeth also to speak in the ears of David in Hebron all that [is] good in the eyes of Israel, and in the eyes of all the house of Benjamin,
and Abner cometh in unto David, to Hebron, and with him twenty men, and David maketh for Abner, and for the men who [are] with him, a banquet.
And Abner saith unto David, 'I arise, and go, and gather unto my lord the king the whole of Israel, and they make with thee a covenant, and thou hast reigned over all that thy soul desireth;' and David sendeth away Abner, and he goeth in peace.
And lo, the servants of David, and Joab, have come from the troop, and much spoil have brought with them, and Abner is not with David in Hebron, for he hath sent him away, and he goeth in peace;
and Joab and all the host that [is] with him have come, and they declare to Joab, saying, 'Abner son of Ner hath come unto the king, and he sendeth him away, and he goeth in peace.'
And Joab cometh unto the king, and saith, 'What hast thou done? lo, Abner hath come unto thee! why [is] this — thou hast sent him away, and he is really gone?
Thou hast known Abner son of Ner, that to deceive thee he came, and to know thy going out and thy coming in, and to know all that thou art doing.'
And Joab goeth out from David, and sendeth messengers after Abner, and they bring him back from the well of Sirah, and David knew not.
And Abner turneth back to Hebron, and Joab turneth him aside unto the midst of the gate to speak with him quietly, and smiteth him there in the fifth [rib] — and he dieth — for the blood of Asahel his brother.
And David heareth afterwards and saith, 'Acquitted [am] I, and my kingdom, by Jehovah, unto the age, from the blood of Abner son of Ner;
it doth stay on the head of Joab, and on all the house of his father, and there is not cut off from the house of Joab one having an issue, and leprous, and laying hold on a staff, and falling by a sword, and lacking bread.'
And Joab and Abishai his brother slew Abner because that he put to death Asahel their brother, in Gibeon, in battle.
And David saith unto Joab, and unto all the people who [are] with him, 'Rend your garments, and gird on sackcloth, and mourn before Abner;' and king David is going after the bier.
And they bury Abner in Hebron, and the king lifteth up his voice, and weepeth at the grave of Abner, and all the people weep;
and the king lamenteth for Abner, and saith: — 'As the death of a fool doth Abner die?
Thy hands not bound, And thy feet to fetters not brought nigh! As one falling before sons of evil — Thou hast fallen!' and all the people add to weep over him.
And all the people come to cause David to eat bread while yet day, and David sweareth, saying, 'Thus doth God to me, and thus He doth add, for — before the going in of the sun, I taste no bread or any other thing.'
And all the people have discerned [it], and it is good in their eyes, as all that the king hath done is good in the eyes of all the people;
and all the people know, even all Israel, in that day, that it hath not been from the king — to put to death Abner son of Ner.
And the king saith unto his servants, 'Do ye not know that a prince and a great one hath fallen this day in Israel?
and I to-day [am] tender, and an anointed king: and these men, sons of Zeruiah, [are] too hard for me; Jehovah doth recompense to the doer of the evil according to his evil.'
And the son of Saul heareth that Abner [is] dead in Hebron, and his hands are feeble, and all Israel have been troubled.
And two men, heads of troops, have been [to] the son of Saul, the name of the one [is] Baanah, and the name of the second Rechab, sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, of the sons of Benjamin, for also Beeroth is reckoned to Benjamin,
and the Beerothites flee to Gittaim, and are there sojourners unto this day.
And to Jonathan son of Saul [is] a son — lame; he was a son of five years at the coming in of the rumour of [the death of] Saul and Jonathan, out of Jezreel, and his nurse lifteth him up, and fleeth, and it cometh to pass in her hasting to flee, that he falleth, and becometh lame, and his name [is] Mephibosheth.
And the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, go, and come in at the heat of the day unto the house of Ish-Bosheth, and he is lying down — the lying down of noon;
and thither they have come, unto the midst of the house, taking wheat, and they smite him unto the fifth [rib], and Rechab and Baanah his brother have escaped;
yea, they come in to the house, and he is lying on his bed, in the inner part of his bed-chamber, and they smite him, and put him to death, and turn aside his head, and they take his head, and go the way of the plain all the night,
and bring in the head of Ish-Bosheth unto David in Hebron, and say unto the king, 'Lo, the head of Ish-Bosheth, son of Saul, thine enemy, who sought thy life; and Jehovah doth give to my lord the king vengeance this day, of Saul and of his seed.'
And David answereth Rechab and Baanah his brother, sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, and saith to them, 'Jehovah liveth, who hath redeemed my soul out of all adversity,
when one is declaring to me, saying, Lo, Saul is dead, and he was as a bearer of tidings in his own eyes, then I take hold on him, and slay him in Ziklag, instead of my giving to him [for] the tidings.
Also — when wicked men have slain the righteous man in his own house, on his bed; and now, do not I require his blood of your hand, and have taken you away from the earth?'
And David commandeth the young men, and they slay them, and cut off their hands and their feet, and hang [them] over the pool in Hebron, and the head of Ish-Bosheth they have taken, and bury [it] in the burying-place of Abner in Hebron.
And all the tribes of Israel come unto David, to Hebron, and speak, saying, 'Lo, we [are] thy bone and thy flesh;
also heretofore, in Saul's being king over us, thou hast been he who is bringing out and bringing in Israel, and Jehovah saith to thee, Thou dost feed My people Israel, and thou art for leader over Israel.'
And all the elders of Israel come unto the king, to Hebron, and king David maketh with them a covenant in Hebron before Jehovah, and they anoint David for king over Israel.
A son of thirty years [is] David in his being king; forty years he hath reigned;
in Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months, and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three years, over all Israel and Judah.
And the king goeth, and his men, to Jerusalem, unto the Jebusite, the inhabitant of the land, and they speak to David, saying, 'Thou dost not come in hither, except thou turn aside the blind and the lame;' saying, 'David doth not come in hither.'
And David captureth the fortress of Zion, it [is] the city of David.
And David saith on that day, 'Any one smiting the Jebusite, (let him go up by the watercourse), and the lame and the blind — the hated of David's soul,' — because the blind and lame say, 'He doth not come into the house.'
And David dwelleth in the fortress, and calleth it — City of David, and David buildeth round about, from Millo and inward,
and David goeth, going on and becoming great, and Jehovah, God of Hosts, [is] with him.
And Hiram king of Tyre sendeth messengers unto David, and cedar-trees, and artificers of wood, and artificers of stone, for walls, and they build a house for David,
and David knoweth that Jehovah hath established him for king over Israel, and that He hath lifted up his kingdom, because of His people Israel.
And David taketh again concubines and wives out of Jerusalem, after his coming from Hebron, and there are born again to David sons and daughters.
And these [are] the names of those born to him in Jerusalem: Shammuah, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon,
and Ibhar, and Elishua, and Nepheg, and Japhia,
and Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphalet.
And the Philistines hear that they have anointed David for king over Israel, and all the Philistines come up to seek David, and David heareth, and goeth down unto the fortress,
and the Philistines have come, and are spread out in the valley of Rephaim.
And David asketh of Jehovah, saying, 'Do I go up unto the Philistines? dost Thou give them into my hand?' And Jehovah saith unto David, 'Go up, for I certainly give the Philistines into thy hand.'
And David cometh in to Baal-Perazim, and David smiteth them there, and saith, 'Jehovah hath broken forth [on] mine enemies before me, as the breaking forth of waters;' therefore he hath called the name of that place Baal-Perazim.
And they forsake there their idols, and David and his men lift them up.
And the Philistines add again to come up, and are spread out in the valley of Rephaim,
and David asketh of Jehovah, and He saith, 'Thou dost not go up, turn round unto their rear, and thou hast come to them over-against the mulberries,
and it cometh to pass, in thy hearing the sound of a stepping in the tops of the mulberries, then thou dost move sharply, for then hath Jehovah gone out before thee to smite in the camp of the Philistines.'
And David doth so, as Jehovah commanded him, and smiteth the Philistines from Geba unto thy coming to Gazer.
And David gathered again every chosen one in Israel, thirty thousand,
and David riseth and goeth, and all the people who [are] with him, from Baale-Judah, to bring up thence the ark of God, whose name hath been called — the name of Jehovah of Hosts, inhabiting the cherubs — upon it.
And they cause the ark of God to ride on a new cart, and lift it up from the house of Abinadab, which [is] in the height, and Uzzah and Ahio sons of Abinadab are leading the new cart;
and they lift it up from the house of Abinadab, which [is] in the height, with the ark of God, and Ahio is going before the ark,
and David and all the house of Israel are playing before Jehovah, with all kinds of [instruments] of fir-wood, even with harps, and with psalteries, and with timbrels, and with cornets, and with cymbals.
And they come unto the threshing-floor of Nachon, and Uzzah putteth forth [his hand] unto the ark of God, and layeth hold on it, for they released the oxen;
and the anger of Jehovah burneth against Uzzah, and God smiteth him there for the error, and he dieth there by the ark of God.
And it is displeasing to David, because that Jehovah hath broken forth a breach upon Uzzah, and [one] calleth that place Perez-Uzzah, unto this day;
and David feareth Jehovah on that day, and saith, 'How doth the ark of Jehovah come in unto me?'
And David hath not been willing to turn aside unto himself the ark of Jehovah, to the city of David, and David turneth it aside to the house of Obed-Edom the Gittite,
and the ark of Jehovah doth inhabit the house of Obed-Edom the Gittite three months, and Jehovah blesseth Obed-Edom and all his house.
And it is declared to king David, saying, 'Jehovah hath blessed the house of Obed-Edom, and all that he hath, because of the ark of God;' and David goeth and bringeth up the ark of God from the house of Obed-Edom to the city of David with joy.
And it cometh to pass, when those bearing the ark of Jehovah have stepped six steps, that he sacrificeth an ox and a fatling.
And David is dancing with all strength before Jehovah, and David is girded with a linen ephod,
and David and all the house of Israel are bringing up the ark of Jehovah with shouting, and with the voice of a trumpet,
and it hath come to pass, the ark of Jehovah hath come in to the city of David, and Michal daughter of Saul, hath looked through the window, and seeth king David moving and dancing before Jehovah, and despiseth him in her heart.
And they bring in the ark of Jehovah, and set it up in its place, in the midst of the tent which David hath spread out for it, and David causeth to ascend burnt-offerings before Jehovah, and peace-offerings.
And David finisheth from causing to ascend the burnt-offering, and the peace-offerings, and blesseth the people in the name of Jehovah of Hosts,
and he apportioneth to all the people, to all the multitude of Israel, from man even unto woman, to each, one cake of bread, and one eshpar, and one ashisha, and all the people go, each to his house.
And David turneth back to bless his house, and Michal daughter of Saul goeth out to meet David, and saith, 'How honourable to-day was the king of Israel, who was uncovered to-day before the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain ones is openly uncovered!'
And David saith unto Michal, ' — Before Jehovah, who fixed on me above thy father, and above all his house, to appoint me leader over the people of Jehovah, and over Israel, — yea, I played before Jehovah;
and I have been more vile than this, and have been low in mine eyes, and with the handmaids whom thou hast spoken of, with them I am honoured.'
As to Michal daughter of Saul, she had no child till the day of her death.
And it cometh to pass, when the king sat in his house, and Jehovah hath given rest to him round about, from all his enemies,
that the king saith unto Nathan the prophet, 'See, I pray thee, I am dwelling in a house of cedars, and the ark of God is dwelling in the midst of the curtain.'
And Nathan saith unto the king, 'All that [is] in thine heart — go, do, for Jehovah [is] with thee.'
And it cometh to pass in that night, that the word of Jehovah is unto Nathan, saying,
'Go, and thou hast said unto My servant, unto David, Thus said Jehovah, Dost thou build for Me a house for My dwelling in?
for I have not dwelt in a house even from the day of My bringing up the sons of Israel out of Egypt, even unto this day, and am walking up and down in a tent and in a tabernacle.
During all [the time] that I have walked up and down among all the sons of Israel, a word have I spoken with one of the tribes of Israel which I commanded to feed my people Israel, saying, 'Why have ye not built to Me a house of cedars?
and now, thus dost thou say to My servant, to David: 'Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, I have taken thee from the comely place, from after the flock, to be leader over My people, over Israel;
and I am with thee whithersoever thou hast gone, and I cut off all thine enemies from thy presence, and have made for thee a great name, as the name of the great ones who [are] in the earth,
and I have appointed a place for My people, for Israel, and have planted it, and it hath tabernacled in its place, and it is not troubled any more, and the sons of perverseness do not add to afflict it any more, as in the beginning,
even from the day that I appointed judges over My people Israel; and I have given rest to thee from all thine enemies, and Jehovah hath declared to thee that Jehovah doth make for thee a house.
'When thy days are full, and thou hast lain with thy fathers, then I have raised up thy seed after thee which goeth out from thy bowels, and have established his kingdom;
He doth build a house for My Name, and I have established the throne of his kingdom unto the age.
I am to him for a father, and he is to Me for a son; whom in his dealings perversely I have even reproved with a rod of men, and with strokes of the sons of Adam,
and My kindness doth not turn aside from him, as I turned it aside from Saul, whom I turned aside from before thee,
and stedfast [is] thy house and thy kingdom unto the age before thee, thy throne is established unto the age.'
According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so spake Nathan unto David.
And king David cometh in and sitteth before Jehovah, and saith, 'Who [am] I, Lord Jehovah? and what my house, that Thou hast brought me hitherto?
And yet this [is] little in Thine eyes, Lord Jehovah, and Thou dost speak also concerning the house of Thy servant afar off; and this [is] the law of the Man, Lord Jehovah.
And what doth David add more to speak unto Thee? and Thou, Thou hast known Thy servant, Lord Jehovah.
Because of Thy word, and according to Thy heart, Thou hast done all this greatness, to cause Thy servant to know [it].
Therefore Thou hast been great, Jehovah God, for there is none like Thee, and there is no God save Thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears.
'And who [is] as Thy people, as Israel — one nation in the earth, whom God hath gone to redeem to Him for a people, and to make for Him a name — and to do for you the greatness — even fearful things for Thy land, at the presence of Thy people, whom Thou hast redeemed to Thee out of Egypt — [among the] nations and their gods?
Yea, Thou dost establish to Thee Thy people Israel, to Thee for a people unto the age, and Thou, Jehovah, hast been to them for God.
'And now, Jehovah God, the word which Thou hast spoken concerning Thy servant, and concerning his house, establish unto the age, and do as Thou hast spoken;
And Thy Name is great unto the age, saying, Jehovah of Hosts [is] God over Israel, and the house of Thy servant David is established before Thee,
For Thou, Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, Thou hast uncovered the ear of Thy servant, saying, A house I build for thee, therefore hath Thy servant found his heart to pray unto Thee this prayer;
And now, Lord Jehovah, Thou [art] God Himself, and Thy words are truth, and Thou speakest unto Thy servant this goodness,
And now, begin and bless the house of Thy servant, to be unto the age before Thee, for Thou, Lord Jehovah, hast spoken, and by Thy blessing is the house of Thy servant blessed — to the age.'
And it cometh to pass afterwards that David smiteth the Philistines, and humbleth them, and David taketh the bridle of the metropolis out of the hand of the Philistines.
And he smiteth Moab, and measureth them with a line, causing them to lie down on the earth, and he measureth two lines to put to death, and the fulness of the line to keep alive, and the Moabites are to David for servants, bearers of a present.
And David smiteth Hadadezer son of Rehob, king of Zobah, in his going to bring back his power by the River [Euphrates;]
and David captureth from him a thousand and seven hundred horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen, and David destroyeth utterly the whole of the charioteers, only he leaveth of them a hundred charioteers.
And Aram of Damascus cometh to give help to Hadadezer king of Zobah, and David smiteth of Aram twenty and two thousand men;
and David putteth garrisons in Aram of Damascus, and Aram is to David for a servant, bearing a present; and Jehovah saveth David whithersoever he hath gone;
and David taketh the shields of gold which were on the servants of Hadadezer, and bringeth them to Jerusalem;
and from Betah, and from Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, hath king David taken very much brass.
And Toi king of Hamath heareth that David hath smitten all the force of Hadadezer,
and Toi sendeth Joram his son unto king David to ask of him of welfare, and to bless him, (because that he hath fought against Hadadezer, and smiteth him, for a man of wars [with] Toi had Hadadezer been), and in his hand have been vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of brass,
also them did king David sanctify to Jehovah, with the silver and the gold which he sanctified of all the nations which he subdued:
of Aram, and of Moab, and of the Bene-Ammon, and of the Philistines, and of Amalek, and of the spoil of Hadadezer son of Rehob king of Zobah.
And David maketh a name in his turning back from his smiting Aram in the valley of Salt — eighteen thousand;
and he putteth in Edom garrisons — in all Edom he hath put garrisons, and all Edom are servants to David; and Jehovah saveth David whithersoever he hath gone.
And David reigneth over all Israel, and David is doing judgment and righteousness to all his people,
and Joab son of Zeruiah [is] over the host, and Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud [is] remembrancer,
and Zadok son of Ahitub, and Ahimelech son of Abiathar, [are] priests, and Seraiah [is] scribe,
and Benaiah son of Jehoiada [is over] both the Cherethite and the Pelethite, and the sons of David have been ministers.
And David saith, 'Is there yet any left to the house of Saul, and I do with him kindness because of Jonathan?'
And the house of Saul hath a servant, and his name [is] Ziba, and they call for him unto David; and the king saith unto him, 'Art thou Ziba?' and he saith, 'Thy servant.'
And the king saith, 'Is there not yet a man to the house of Saul, and I do with him the kindness of God?' And Ziba saith unto the king, 'Jonathan hath yet a son — lame.'
And the king saith to him, 'Where [is] he?' and Ziba saith unto the king, 'Lo, he [is] in the house of Machir, son of Ammiel, in Lo-Debar.'
And king David sendeth, and taketh him out of the house of Machir son of Ammiel, of Lo-Debar,
and Mephibosheth son of Jonathan, son of Saul, cometh unto David, and falleth on his face, and doth obeisance, and David saith, 'Mephibosheth;' and he saith, 'Lo, thy servant.'
And David saith to him, 'Be not afraid; for I certainly do with thee kindness because of Jonathan thy father, and have given back to thee all the field of Saul thy father, and thou dost eat bread at my table continually.'
And he boweth himself, and saith, 'What [is] thy servant, that thou hast turned unto the dead dog — such as I?'
And the king calleth unto Ziba servant of Saul, and saith unto him, 'All that was to Saul and to all his house, I have given to the son of thy lord,
and thou hast served for him the land, thou and thy sons, and thy servants, and hast brought in, and there hath been to the son of thy lord bread, and he hath eaten it; and Mephibosheth son of thy lord doth eat continually bread at my table;' and Ziba hath fifteen sons and twenty servants.
And Ziba saith unto the king, 'According to all that my lord the king commandeth his servant, so doth thy servant;' as to Mephibosheth, 'he is eating at my table ([saith the king]) as one of the sons of the king.'
And Mephibosheth hath a young son, and his name [is] Micha, and every one dwelling in the house of Ziba [are] servants to Mephibosheth.
And Mephibosheth is dwelling in Jerusalem, for at the table of the king he is eating continually, and he [is] lame of his two feet.
And it cometh to pass afterwards, that the king of the Bene-Ammon dieth, and Hanun his son reigneth in his stead,
and David saith, 'I do kindness with Hanun son of Nahash, as his father did with me kindness;' and David sendeth to comfort him by the hand of his servants concerning his father, and the servants of David come in to the land of the Bene-Ammon.
And the heads of the Bene-Ammon say unto Hanun their lord, 'Is David honouring thy father in thine eyes because he hath sent to thee comforters? for to search the city, and to spy it, and to overthrow it, hath not David sent his servants unto thee?'
And Hanun taketh the servants of David, and shaveth off the half of their beard, and cutteth off their long robes in the midst — unto their buttocks, and sendeth them away;
and they declare [it] to David, and he sendeth to meet them, for the men have been greatly ashamed, and the king saith, 'Abide in Jericho till your beard doth spring up — then ye have returned.'
And the Bene-Ammon see that they have been abhorred by David, and the Bene-Ammon send and hire Aram of Beth-Rehob, and Aram of Zoba, twenty thousand footmen, and the king of Maacah [with] a thousand men, and Ish-Tob [with] twelve thousand men;
and David heareth, and sendeth Joab, and all the host — the mighty men.
And the Bene-Ammon come out, and set battle in array, at the opening of the gate, and Aram of Zoba, and Rehob, and Ish-Tob, and Maacah, [are] by themselves in the field;
and Joab seeth that the front of the battle hath been unto him before and behind, and he chooseth of all the chosen in Israel, and setteth in array to meet Aram,
and the rest of the people he hath given into the hand of Abishai his brother, and setteth in array to meet the Bene-Ammon.
And he saith, 'If Aram be stronger than I, then thou hast been to me for salvation, and if the Bene-Ammon be stronger than thou, then I have come to give salvation to thee;
be strong and strengthen thyself for our people, and for the cities of our God, and Jehovah doth that which is good in His eyes.'
And Joab draweth nigh, and the people who [are] with him, to battle against Aram, and they flee from his presence;
and the Bene-Ammon have seen that Aram hath fled, and they flee from the presence of Abishai, and go in to the city; and Joab turneth back from the Bene-Ammon, and cometh in to Jerusalem.
And Aram seeth that it is smitten before Israel, and they are gathered together;
and Hadadezer sendeth, and bringeth out Aram which [is] beyond the River, and they come in to Helam, and Shobach head of the host of Hadadezer [is] before them.
And it is declared to David, and he gathereth all Israel, and passeth over the Jordan, and cometh in to Helam, and Aram setteth itself in array to meet David, and they fight with him;
and Aram fleeth from the presence of Israel, and David slayeth of Aram seven hundred charioteers, and forty thousand horsemen, and Shobach head of its host he hath smitten, and he dieth there.
And all the kings — servants of Hadadezer — see that they have been smitten before Israel, and make peace with Israel, and serve them; and Aram is afraid to help any more the Bene-Ammon.
And it cometh to pass, at the revolution of the year — at the time of the going out of the messengers — that David sendeth Joab, and his servants with him, and all Israel, and they destroy the Bene-Ammon, and lay siege against Rabbah. And David is dwelling in Jerusalem,
and it cometh to pass, at evening-time, that David riseth from off his couch, and walketh up and down on the roof of the king's house, and seeth from the roof a woman bathing, and the woman [is] of very good appearance,
and David sendeth and inquireth about the woman, and saith, 'Is not this Bath-Sheba, daughter of Eliam, wife of Uriah the Hittite?'
And David sendeth messengers, and taketh her, and she cometh unto him, and he lieth with her — and she is purifying herself from her uncleanness — and she turneth back unto her house;
and the woman conceiveth, and sendeth, and declareth to David, and saith, 'I [am] conceiving.'
And David sendeth unto Joab, 'Send unto me Uriah the Hittite,' and Joab sendeth Uriah unto David;
and Uriah cometh unto him, and David asketh of the prosperity of Joab, and of the prosperity of the people, and of the prosperity of the war.
And David saith to Uriah, 'Go down to thy house, and wash thy feet;' and Uriah goeth out of the king's house, and there goeth out after him a gift from the king,
and Uriah lieth down at the opening of the king's house, with all the servants of his lord, and hath not gone down unto his house.
And they declare to David, saying, 'Uriah hath not gone down unto his house;' and David saith unto Uriah, 'Hast thou not come from a journey? wherefore hast thou not gone down unto thy house?'
And Uriah saith unto David, 'The ark, and Israel, and Judah, are abiding in booths, and my lord Joab, and the servants of my lord, on the face of the field are encamping; and I — I go in unto my house to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife! — thy life, and the life of thy soul — if I do this thing.'
And David saith unto Uriah, 'Abide in this [place] also to-day, and to-morrow I send thee away;' and Uriah abideth in Jerusalem, on that day, and on the morrow,
and David calleth for him, and he eateth before him, and drinketh, and he causeth him to drink, and he goeth out in the evening to lie on his couch with the servants of his lord, and unto his house he hath not gone down.
And it cometh to pass in the morning, that David writeth a letter unto Joab, and sendeth by the hand of Uriah;
and he writeth in the letter, saying, 'Place ye Uriah over-against the front of the severest battle, and ye have turned back from after him, and he hath been smitten, and hath died.'
And it cometh to pass in Joab's watching of the city, that he appointeth Uriah unto the place where he knew that valiant men [are];
and the men of the city go out and fight with Joab, and there fall [some] of the people, of the servants of David; and there dieth also Uriah the Hittite.
And Joab sendeth and declareth to David all the matters of the war,
and commandeth the messenger, saying, 'At thy finishing all the matters of the war to speak unto the king,
then, it hath been, if the king's fury ascend, and he hath said to thee, Wherefore did ye draw nigh unto the city to fight? did ye not know that they shoot from off the wall?
Who smote Abimelech son of Jerubbesheth? did not a woman cast on him a piece of a rider from the wall, and he dieth in Thebez? why drew ye nigh unto the wall? that thou hast said, Also thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead.'
And the messenger goeth, and cometh in, and declareth to David all that with which Joab sent him,
and the messenger saith unto David, 'Surely the men have been mighty against us, and come out unto us into the field, and we are upon them unto the opening of the gate,
and those shooting shoot at thy servants from off the wall, and [some] of the servants of the king are dead, and also, thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead.
And David saith unto the messenger, 'Thus dost thou say unto Joab, Let not this thing be evil in thine eyes; for thus and thus doth the sword devour; strengthen thy warfare against the city, and throw it down — and strengthen thou him.'
And the wife of Uriah heareth that Uriah her husband [is] dead, and lamenteth for her lord;
and the mourning passeth by, and David sendeth and gathereth her unto his house, and she is to him for a wife, and beareth to him a son; and the thing which David hath done is evil in the eyes of Jehovah.
And Jehovah sendeth Nathan unto David, and he cometh unto him, and saith to him: 'Two men have been in one city; One rich and one poor;
The rich hath flocks and herds very many;
And the poor one hath nothing, Except one little ewe-lamb, Which he hath bought, and keepeth alive, And it groweth up with him, And with his sons together; Of his morsel it eateth, And from his cup it drinketh, And in his bosom it lieth, And it is to him as a daughter;
And there cometh a traveller to the rich man, And he spareth to take Of his own flock, and of his own herd, To prepare for the traveller Who hath come to him, And he taketh the ewe-lamb of the poor man, And prepareth it for the man Who hath come unto him.'
And the anger of David burneth against the man exceedingly, and he saith unto Nathan, 'Jehovah liveth, surely a son of death [is] the man who is doing this,
and the ewe-lamb he doth repay fourfold, because that he hath done this thing, and because that he had no pity.'
And Nathan saith unto David, 'Thou [art] the man! Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, I anointed thee for king over Israel, and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul;
and I give to thee the house of thy lord, and the wives of thy lord, into thy bosom, and I give to thee the house of Israel and of Judah; and if little, then I add to thee such and such [things].
'Wherefore hast thou despised the word of Jehovah, to do the evil thing in His eyes? Uriah the Hittite thou hast smitten by the sword, and his wife thou hast taken to thee for a wife, and him thou hast slain by the sword of the Bene-Ammon.
'And now, the sword doth not turn aside from thy house unto the age, because thou hast despised Me, and dost take the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be to thee for a wife;
thus said Jehovah, Lo, I am raising up against thee evil, out of thy house, and have taken thy wives before thine eyes, and given to thy neighbour, and he hath lain with thy wives before the eyes of this sun;
for thou hast done [it] in secret, and I do this thing before all Israel, and before the sun.'
And David saith unto Nathan, 'I have sinned against Jehovah.' And Nathan saith unto David, 'Also — Jehovah hath caused thy sin to pass away; thou dost not die;
only, because thou hast caused the enemies of Jehovah greatly to despise by this thing, also the son who is born to thee doth surely die.'
And Nathan goeth unto his house, and Jehovah smiteth the lad, whom the wife of Uriah hath born to David, and it is incurable;
and David seeketh God for the youth, and David keepeth a fast, and hath gone in and lodged, and lain on the earth.
And the elders of his house rise against him, to raise him up from the earth, and he hath not been willing, nor hath he eaten with them bread;
and it cometh to pass on the seventh day, that the lad dieth, and the servants of David fear to declare to him that the lad is dead, for they said, 'Lo, in the lad being alive we spake unto him, and he did not hearken to our voice; and how do we say unto him, The lad is dead? — then he hath done evil.'
And David seeth that his servants are whispering, and David understandeth that the lad is dead, and David saith unto his servants, 'Is the lad dead?' and they say, 'Dead.'
And David riseth from the earth, and doth bathe and anoint [himself], and changeth his raiment, and cometh in to the house of Jehovah, and boweth himself, and cometh unto his house, and asketh and they place for him bread, and he eateth.
And his servants say unto him, 'What [is] this thing thou hast done? because of the living lad thou hast fasted and dost weep, and when the lad is dead thou hast risen and dost eat bread.'
And he saith, 'While the lad is alive I have fasted, and weep, for I said, Who knoweth? — Jehovah doth pity me, and the lad hath lived;
and now, he hath died, why [is] this — I fast? am I able to bring him back again? I am going unto him, and he doth not turn back unto me.'
And David comforteth Bath-Sheba his wife, and goeth in unto her, and lieth with her, and she beareth a son, and he calleth his name Solomon; and Jehovah hath loved him,
and sendeth by the hand of Nathan the prophet, and calleth his name Jedidiah, because of Jehovah.
And Joab fighteth against Rabbah of the Bene-Ammon, and captureth the royal city,
and Joab sendeth messengers unto David, and saith, 'I have fought against Rabbah — also I have captured the city of waters;
and now, gather the rest of the people, and encamp against the city, and capture it, lest I capture the city, and my name hath been called upon it.'
And David gathereth all the people, and goeth to Rabbah, and fighteth against it, and captureth it;
and he taketh the crown of their king from off his head, and its weight [is] a talent of gold, and precious stones, and it is on the head of David; and the spoil of the city he hath brought out, very much;
and the people who [are] in it he hath brought out, and setteth to the saw, and to cutting instruments of iron, and to axes of iron, and hath caused them to pass over into the brick-kiln; and so he doth to all the cities of the Bene-Ammon; and David turneth back, and all the people, to Jerusalem.
And it cometh to pass afterwards that Absalom son of David hath a fair sister, and her name [is] Tamar, and Amnon son of David loveth her.
And Amnon hath distress — even to become sick, because of Tamar his sister, for she [is] a virgin, and it is hard in the eyes of Amnon to do anything to her.
And Amnon hath a friend, and his name [is] Jonadab, son of Shimeah, David's brother, and Jonadab [is] a very wise man,
and saith to him, 'Wherefore [art] thou thus lean, O king's son, morning by morning? dost thou not declare to me?' And Amnon saith to him, 'Tamar — sister of Absalom my brother — I am loving.'
And Jonadab saith to him, 'Lie down on thy couch, and feign thyself sick, and thy father hath come in to see thee, and thou hast said unto him, 'Let, I pray thee, Tamar my sister come in and give me bread to eat; and she hath made the food before mine eyes so that I see [it], and have eaten from her hand.'
And Amnon lieth down, and feigneth himself sick, and the king cometh in to see him, and Amnon saith unto the king, 'Let, I pray thee, Tamar my sister come, and she maketh before mine eyes two cakes, and I eat from her hand.'
And David sendeth unto Tamar, to the house, saying, 'Go, I pray thee, to the house of Amnon thy brother, and make for him food.'
And Tamar goeth to the house of Amnon her brother, and he is lying down, and she taketh the dough, and kneadeth, and maketh cakes before his eyes, and cooketh the cakes,
and taketh the frying-pan, and poureth out before him, and he refuseth to eat, and Amnon saith, 'Take ye out every one from me;' and they go out every one from him.
And Amnon saith unto Tamar, 'Bring the food into the inner chamber, and I eat from thy hand;' and Tamar taketh the cakes that she hath made, and bringeth in to Amnon her brother, into the inner chamber,
and she bringeth nigh unto him to eat, and he layeth hold on her, and saith to her, 'Come, lie with me, my sister.'
And she saith to him, 'Nay, my brother, do not humble me, for it is not done so in Israel; do not this folly.
And I — whither do I cause my reproach to go? and thou — thou art as one of the fools in Israel; and now, speak, I pray thee, unto the king; for he doth not withhold me from thee.'
And he hath not been willing to hearken to her voice, and is stronger than she, and humbleth her, and lieth with her.
And Amnon hateth her — a very great hatred — that greater [is] the hatred with which he hath hated her than the love with which he loved her, and Amnon saith to her, 'Rise, go.'
And she saith to him, 'Because of the circumstances this evil is greater than the other that thou hast done with me — to send me away;' and he hath not been willing to hearken to her,
and calleth his young man, his servant, and saith, 'Send away, I pray thee, this one from me without, and bolt the door after her;'
— and upon her [is] a long coat, for such upper robes do daughters of the king who [are] virgins put on, — and his servant taketh her out without, and hath bolted the door after her.
And Tamar taketh ashes for her head, and the long coat that [is] on her she hath rent, and putteth her hand on her head, and goeth, going on and crying;
and Absalom her brother saith unto her, 'Hath Amnon thy brother been with thee? and now, my sister, keep silent, he [is] thy brother; set not thy heart to this thing;' and Tamar dwelleth — but desolate — in the house of Absalom her brother.
And king David hath heard all these things, and it is very displeasing to him;
and Absalom hath not spoken with Amnon either evil or good, for Absalom is hating Amnon, because that he humbled Tamar his sister.
And it cometh to pass, after two years of days, that Absalom hath shearers in Baal-Hazor, which [is] with Ephraim, and Absalom calleth for all the sons of the king.
And Absalom cometh unto the king, and saith, 'Lo, I pray thee, thy servant hath shearers, let the king go, I pray thee, and his servants, with thy servant.'
And the king saith unto Absalom, 'Nay, my son, let us not all go, I pray thee, and we are not too heavy on thee;' and he presseth on him, and he hath not been willing to go, and he blesseth him.
And Absalom saith, 'If not — let, I pray thee, Amnon my brother go with us;' and the king saith to him, 'Why doth he go with thee?'
and Absalom urgeth on him, and he sendeth with him Amnon, and all the sons of the king.
And Absalom commandeth his young men, saying, 'See, I pray thee, when the heart of Amnon [is] glad with wine, and I have said unto you, Smite Amnon, that ye have put him to death; fear not; is it not because I have commanded you? be strong, yea, become sons of valour.'
And the young men of Absalom do to Amnon as Absalom commanded, and rise do all the sons of the king, and they ride, each on his mule, and flee.
And it cometh to pass — they [are] in the way — and the report hath come unto David, saying, 'Absalom hath smitten all the sons of the king, and there is not left of them one;'
and the king riseth, and rendeth his garments, and lieth on the earth, and all his servants are standing by [with] rent garments.
And Jonadab son of Shimeah, David's brother, answereth and saith, 'Let not my lord say, The whole of the young men, the sons of the king, they have put to death; for Amnon alone [is] dead, for by the command of Absalom it hath been appointed from the day of his humbling Tamar his sister;
and now, let not my lord the king lay unto his heart the word, saying, All the sons of the king have died, for Amnon alone [is] dead.'
And Absalom fleeth, and the young man who is watching lifteth up his eyes and looketh, and lo, much people are coming by the way behind him, on the side of the hill.
And Jonadab saith unto the king, 'Lo, the sons of the king have come; as the word of thy servant, so it hath been.'
And it cometh to pass at his finishing to speak, that lo, the sons of the king have come, and they lift up their voice, and weep, and also the king and all his servants have wept — a very great weeping.
And Absalom hath fled, and goeth unto Talmai, son of Ammihud, king of Geshur, and [David] mourneth for his son all the days.
And Absalom hath fled, and goeth to Geshur, and is there three years;
and [the soul of] king David determineth to go out unto Absalom, for he hath been comforted for Amnon, for [he is] dead.
And Joab son of Zeruial knoweth that the heart of the king [is] on Absalom,
and Joab sendeth to Tekoah, and taketh thence a wise woman, and saith unto her, 'Feign thyself a mourner, I pray thee, and put on, I pray thee, garments of mourning, and anoint not thyself with oil, and thou hast been as a woman these many days mourning for the dead,
and thou hast gone unto the king, and spoken unto him, according to this word;' and Joab putteth the words into her mouth.
And the woman of Tekoah speaketh unto the king, and falleth on her face to the earth, and doth obeisance, and saith, 'Save, O king.'
And the king saith to her, 'What — to thee?' and she saith, 'Truly a widow woman [am] I, and my husband dieth,
and thy maid-servant hath two sons; and they strive both of them in a field, and there is no deliverer between them, and the one smiteth the other, and putteth him to death;
and lo, the whole family hath risen against thy maid-servant, and say, Give up him who smiteth his brother, and we put him to death for the life of his brother whom he hath slain, and we destroy also the heir; and they have quenched my coal which is left — so as not to set to my husband a name and remnant on the face of the ground.'
And the king saith unto the woman, 'Go to thine house, and I give charge concerning thee.'
And the woman of Tekoah saith unto the king, 'On me, my lord, O king, [is] the iniquity, and on the house of my father; and the king and his throne [are] innocent.'
And the king saith, 'He who speaketh [aught] unto thee, and thou hast brought him unto me, then he doth not add any more to come against thee.'
And she saith, 'Let, I pray thee, the king remember by Jehovah thy God, that the redeemer of blood add not to destroy, and they destroy not my son;' and he saith, 'Jehovah liveth; if there doth fall of the hair of thy son to the earth.'
And the woman saith, 'Let, I pray thee, thy maid-servant speak unto my lord the king a word;' and he saith, 'Speak.'
And the woman saith, 'And why hast thou thought thus concerning the people of God? yea, the king is speaking this thing as a guilty one, in that the king hath not brought back his outcast;
for we do surely die, and [are] as water which is running down to the earth, which is not gathered, and God doth not accept a person, and hath devised devices in that the outcast is not outcast by Him.
'And now that I have come to speak unto the king my lord this word, [it is] because the people made me afraid, and thy maid-servant saith, Let me speak, I pray thee, unto the king; it may be the king doth do the word of his handmaid,
for the king doth hearken to deliver his handmaid out of the paw of the man [seeking] to destroy me and my son together out of the inheritance of God,
and thy maid-servant saith, Let, I pray thee, the word of my lord the king be for ease; for as a messenger of God so [is] my lord the king, to understand the good and the evil; and Jehovah thy God is with thee.'
And the king answereth and saith unto the woman, 'Do not, I pray thee, hide from me the thing that I am asking thee;' and the woman saith, 'Let, I pray thee, my lord the king speak.'
And the king saith, 'Is the hand of Joab with thee in all this?' And the woman answereth and saith, 'Thy soul liveth, my lord, O king, none [doth turn] to the right or to the left from all that my lord the king hath spoken; for thy servant Joab he commanded me, and he put in the mouth of thy maid-servant all these words;
in order to bring round the appearance of the thing hath thy servant Joab done this thing, and my lord [is] wise, according to the wisdom of a messenger of God, to know all that [is] in the land.'
And the king saith unto Joab, 'Lo, I pray thee, thou hast done this thing; and go, bring back the young man Absalom.'
And Joab falleth on his face to the earth, and doth obeisance, and blesseth the king, and Joab saith, 'To-day hath thy servant known that I have found grace in thine eyes, my lord, O king, in that the king hath done the word of his servant.'
And Joab riseth and goeth to Geshur, and bringeth in Absalom to Jerusalem,
and the king saith, 'Let him turn round unto his house, and my face he doth not see.' And Absalom turneth round unto his house, and the face of the king he hath not seen.
And like Absalom there was no man [so] fair in all Israel, to praise greatly; from the sole of his foot even unto his crown there was no blemish in him;
and in his polling his head — and it hath been at the end of year by year that he polleth [it], for it [is] heavy on him, and he hath polled it — he hath even weighed out the hair of his head — two hundred shekels by the king's weight.
And there are born to Absalom three sons, and one daughter, and her name [is] Tamar; she was a woman of a fair appearance.
And Absalom dwelleth in Jerusalem two years of days, and the face of the king he hath not seen;
and Absalom sendeth unto Joab, to send him unto the king, and he hath not been willing to come unto him; and he sendeth again a second time, and he hath not been willing to come.
And he saith unto his servants, 'See, the portion of Joab [is] by the side of mine, and he hath barley there; go, and burn it with fire;' and the servants of Absalom burn the portion with fire.
And Joab riseth and cometh unto Absalom in the house, and saith unto him, 'Why have thy servants burned the portion that I have with fire?'
And Absalom saith unto Joab, 'Lo, I sent unto thee, saying, Come hither, and I send thee unto the king to say, Why have I come in from Geshur? — good for me while I [am] there — and now, let me see the king's face, and if there is in me iniquity then thou hast put me to death.'
And Joab cometh unto the king, and declareth [it] to him, and he calleth unto Absalom, and he cometh unto the king, and boweth himself to him, on his face, to the earth, before the king, and the king giveth a kiss to Absalom.
And it cometh to pass afterwards, that Absalom prepareth for himself a chariot, and horses, and fifty men are running before him;
and Absalom hath risen early, and stood by the side of the way of the gate, and it cometh to pass, every man who hath a pleading to come unto the king for judgment, that Absalom calleth unto him, and saith, 'Of what city [art] thou?' and he saith, 'Of one of the tribes of Israel [is] thy servant.'
And Absalom saith unto him, 'See, thy matters [are] good and straightforward — and there is none hearkening to thee from the king.'
And Absalom saith, 'Who doth make me a judge in the land, that unto me doth come every man who hath a plea and judgment? — then I have declared him righteous.'
And it hath come to pass, in the drawing nearing of any one to bow himself to him, that he hath put forth his hand, and laid hold on him, and given a kiss to him;
and Absalom doth according to this thing to all Israel who come in for judgment unto the king, and Absalom stealeth the heart of the men of Israel.
And it cometh to pass, at the end of forty years, that Absalom saith unto the king, 'Let me go, I pray thee, and I complete my vow, that I vowed to Jehovah in Hebron,
for a vow hath thy servant vowed in my dwelling in Geshur, in Aram, saying, If Jehovah doth certainly bring me back to Jerusalem, then I have served Jehovah.'
And the king saith to him, 'Go in peace;' and he riseth and goeth to Hebron,
and Absalom sendeth spies through all the tribes of Israel, saying, 'At your hearing the voice of the trumpet, then ye have said, Absalom hath reigned in Hebron.'
And with Absalom have gone two hundred men, out of Jerusalem, invited ones, and they are going in their simplicity, and have not known anything;
and Absalom sendeth Ahithophel the Gilonite, a counsellor of David, out of his city, out of Gilo, in his sacrificing sacrifices; and the conspiracy is strong, and the people are going and increasing with Absalom.
And he who is declaring tidings cometh in unto David, saying, 'The heart of the men of Israel hath been after Absalom.'
And David saith to all his servants who [are] with him in Jerusalem, 'Rise, and we flee, for we have no escape from the face of Absalom; haste to go, lest he hasten, and have overtaken us, and forced on us evil, and smitten the city by the mouth of the sword.'
And the servants of the king say unto the king, 'According to all that my lord the king chooseth — lo, thy servants [do].'
And the king goeth out, and all his household at his feet, and the king leaveth ten women — concubines — to keep the house.
And the king goeth out, and all the people at his feet, and they stand still at the farthest off house.
And all his servants are passing on at his side, and all the Cherethite, and all the Pelethite, and all the Gittites, six hundred men who came at his feet from Gath, are passing on at the front of the king.
And the king saith unto Ittai the Gittite, 'Why dost thou go — thou also — with us? turn back — and abide with the king, for thou [art] a stranger, and also an exile thou — to thy place.
Yesterday [is] thy coming in, and to-day I move thee to go with us, and I am going on that which I am going! — turn back, and take back thy brethren with thee, — kindness and truth.'
And Ittai answereth the king and saith, 'Jehovah liveth, and my lord the king liveth, surely in the place where my lord the king is — if for death, if for life, surely there is thy servant.'
And David saith unto Ittai, 'Go and pass over;' and Ittai the Gittite passeth over, and all his men, and all the infants who [are] with him.
And all the land are weeping — a great voice, and all the people are passing over; and the king is passing over through the brook Kidron, and all the people are passing over on the front of the way of the wilderness;
and lo, also Zadok, and all the Levites with him, bearing the ark of the covenant of God, and they make the ark of God firm, and Abiathar goeth up, till the completion of all the people to pass over out of the city.
And the king saith to Zadok, 'Take back the ark of God to the city; if I find grace in the eyes of Jehovah, then He hath brought me back, and shewn me it and His habitation;
and if thus He say, I have not delighted in thee; here [am] I, He doth to me as [is] good in His eyes.'
And the king saith unto Zadok the priest, 'Art thou a seer? turn back to the city in peace, and Ahimaaz thy son, and Jonathan son of Abiathar, your two sons with you;
see ye, I am tarrying in the plains of the wilderness till the coming in of a word from you to declare to me.'
And Zadok taketh back — and Abiathar — the ark of God to Jerusalem, and they abide there.
And David is going up in the ascent of the olives, going up and weeping, and he hath the head covered, and he is going barefooted, and all the people who [are] with him have covered each his head, and have gone up, going up and weeping;
and David declared, saying, 'Ahithophel [is] among the conspirators with Absalom;' and David saith, 'Make foolish, I pray Thee, the counsel of Ahithophel, O Jehovah.'
And it cometh to pass, David hath come unto the top, where he boweth himself to God, and lo, to meet him [is] Hushai the Archite, his coat rent, and earth on his head;
and David saith to him, 'If thou hast passed on with me then thou hast been on me for a burden,
and if to the city thou dost turn back, and hast said to Absalom, Thy servant I am, O king; servant of thy father I [am] also hitherto, and now, I [am] also thy servant; then thou hast made void for me the counsel of Ahithophel;
and are there not with thee there Zadok and Abiathar the priests? and it hath been, the whole of the matter that thou hearest from the house of the king thou dost declare to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests.
Lo, there with them [are] their two sons, Ahimaaz to Zadok, and Jonathan to Abiathar, and ye have sent by their hand unto me anything that ye hear.'
And Hushai, David's friend, cometh in to the city, and Absalom cometh in to Jerusalem.
And David hath passed on a little from the top, and lo, Ziba, servant of Mephibosheth — to meet him, and a couple of asses saddled, and upon them two hundred loaves, and a hundred bunches of raisins, and a hundred [of] summer-fruit, and a bottle of wine.
And the king saith unto Ziba, 'What — these to thee?' and Ziba saith, 'The asses for the household of the king to ride on, and the bread and the summer-fruit for the young men to eat, and the wine for the wearied to drink in the wilderness.'
And the king saith, 'And where [is] the son of thy lord?' and Ziba saith unto the king, 'Lo, he is abiding in Jerusalem, for he said, To-day do the house of Israel give back to me the kingdom of my father.'
And the king saith to Ziba, 'Lo, thine [are] all that Mephibosheth hath;' and Ziba saith, 'I have bowed myself — I find grace in thine eyes, my lord, O king.'
And king David hath come in unto Bahurim, and lo, thence a man is coming out, of the family of the house of Saul, and his name [is] Shimei, son of Gera, he cometh out, coming out and reviling;
and he stoneth David with stones, and all the servants of king David, and all the people, and all the mighty men on his right and on his left.
And thus said Shimei in his reviling, 'Go out, go out, O man of blood, and man of worthlessness!
Jehovah hath turned back on thee all the blood of the house of Saul, in whose stead thou hast reigned, and Jehovah doth give the kingdom in to the hand of Absalom thy son; and lo, thou [art] in thine evil, for a man of blood thou [art].'
And Abishai son of Zeruiah saith unto the king, 'Why doth this dead dog revile my lord the king? let me pass over, I pray thee, and I turn aside his head.'
And the king saith, 'What — to me and to you, O sons of Zeruiah? for — let him revile; even because Jehovah hath said to him, Revile David; and who saith, Wherefore hast Thou done so?'
And David saith unto Abishai, and unto all his servants, 'Lo, my son who came out of my bowels is seeking my life, and also surely now the Benjamite; leave him alone, and let him revile, for Jehovah hath said [so] to him;
it may be Jehovah doth look on mine affliction, and Jehovah hath turned back to me good for his reviling this day.'
And David goeth with his men in the way, and Shimei is going at the side of the hill over-against him, going on, and he revileth, and stoneth with stones over-against him, and hath dusted with dust.
And the king cometh in, and all the people who [are] with him, wearied, and they are refreshed there.
And Absalom and all the people, the men of Israel, have come in to Jerusalem, and Ahithophel with him,
and it cometh to pass, when Hushai the Archite, David's friend, hath come unto Absalom, that Hushai saith unto Absalom, 'Let the king live! let the king live!'
And Absalom saith unto Hushai, 'This thy kindness with thy friend! why hast thou not gone with thy friend?'
And Hushai saith unto Absalom, 'Nay, for he whom Jehovah hath chosen, and this people, even all the men of Israel, his I am, and with him I abide;
and secondly, for whom do I labour? is it not before his son? as I served before thy father so am I before thee.'
And Absalom saith unto Ahithophel, 'Give for you counsel what we do.'
And Ahithophel saith unto Absalom, 'Go in unto the concubines of thy father, whom he left to keep the house, and all Israel hath heard that thou hast been abhorred by thy father, and the hands of all who [are] with thee have been strong.'
And they spread out for Absalom the tent on the roof, and Absalom goeth in unto the concubines of his father before the eyes of all Israel.
And the counsel of Ahithophel which he counselled in those days [is] as [when] one inquireth at the word of God; so [is] all the counsel of Ahithophel both to David and to Absalom.
And Ahithophel said unto Absalom, 'Let me choose, I pray thee, twelve thousand men, and I arise and pursue after David to-night,
and come upon him, and he weary and feeble-handed, and I have caused him to tremble, and all the people have fled who [are] with him, and I have smitten the king by himself,
and I bring back all the people unto thee — as the turning back of the whole [is] the man whom thou art seeking — all the people are peace.
And the thing is right in the eyes of Absalom, and in the eyes of all the elders of Israel.
And Absalom saith, 'Call, I pray thee, also for Hushai the Archite, and we hear what [is] in his mouth — even he.'
And Hushai cometh in unto Absalom, and Absalom speaketh unto him, saying, 'According to this word hath Ahithophel spoken; do we do his word? if not, thou — speak thou.'
And Hushai saith unto Absalom, 'Not good [is] the counsel that Ahithophel hath counselled at this time.'
And Hushai saith, 'Thou hast known thy father and his men, that they [are] heroes, and they are bitter in soul as a bereaved bear in a field, and thy father [is] a man of war, and doth not lodge with the people;
lo, now, he is hidden in one of the pits, or in one of the places, and it hath been, at the falling among them at the commencement, that the hearer hath heard, and said, There hath been a slaughter among the people who [are] after Absalom;
and he also, the son of valour, whose heart [is] as the heart of the lion, doth utterly melt, for all Israel doth know that thy father is a hero, and sons of valour [are] those with him.
'So that I have counselled: Let all Israel be diligently gathered unto thee, from Dan even unto Beer-Sheba, as the sand that [is] by the sea for multitude, and thou thyself art going in the midst;
and we have come in unto him in one of the places where he is found, and we [are] upon him as the dew falleth on the ground, and there hath not been left of him and of all the men who [are] with him even one.
And if unto a city he is gathered, then they have caused all Israel to bear unto that city ropes, and we have drawn it unto the brook till that there hath not been found there even a stone.'
And Absalom saith — and all the men of Israel — 'Better [is] the counsel of Hushai the Archite than the counsel of Ahithophel;' and Jehovah willed to make void the good counsel of Ahithophel for the sake of Jehovah's bringing unto Absalom the evil.
And Hushai saith unto Zadok and unto Abiathar the priests, 'Thus and thus hath Ahithophel counselled Absalom and the elders of Israel, and thus and thus I have counselled;
and now, send hastily, and declare to David, saying, Lodge not to-night in the plains of the wilderness, and also, certainly pass over, lest there be a swallowing up of the king and of all the people who are with him.'
And Jonathan and Ahimaaz are standing at En-Rogel, and the maid-servant hath gone and declared to them — and they go and have declared [it] to king David — for they are not able to be seen to go in to the city.
And a youth seeth them, and declareth to Absalom; and they go on both of them hastily, and come in unto the house of a man in Bahurim, and he hath a well in his court, and they go down there,
and the woman taketh and spreadeth the covering over the face of the well, and spreadeth on it the ground corn, and the thing hath not been known.
And the servants of Absalom come in unto the woman to the house, and say, 'Where [are] Ahimaaz and Jonathan?' and the woman saith to them, 'They passed over the brook of water;' and they seek, and have not found, and turn back to Jerusalem.
And it cometh to pass, after their going on, that they come up out of the well, and go and declare to king David, and say unto David, 'Rise ye, and pass over hastily the waters, for thus hath Ahithophel counselled against you.'
And David riseth, and all the people who [are] with him, and they pass over the Jordan, till the light of the morning, till one hath not been lacking who hath not passed over the Jordan.
And Ahithophel hath seen that his counsel was not done, and he saddleth the ass, and riseth and goeth unto his house, unto his city, and giveth charge unto his household, and strangleth himself, and dieth, and he is buried in the burying-place of his father.
And David came to Mahanaim, and Absalom passed over the Jordan, he and all the men of Israel with him;
and Amasa hath Absalom set instead of Joab over the host, and Amasa [is] a man's son whose name is Ithra the Israelite who hath gone in unto Abigail, daughter of Nahash, sister of Zeruiah, mother of Joab;
and Israel encampeth with Absalom [in] the land of Gilead.
And it cometh to pass at the coming in of David to Mahanaim, that Shobi, son of Nahash, from Rabbah of the Bene-Ammon, and Machir son of Ammiel, from Lo-Debar, and Barzillai the Gileadite, from Rogelim,
couch, and basin, and earthen vessel, and wheat, and barley, and flour, and roasted [corn], and beans, and lentiles, and roasted [pulse],
and honey, and butter, and sheep, and cheese of kine, have brought nigh for David, and for the people who [are] with him to eat, for they said, 'Thy people [is] hungry, and weary, and thirsty, in the wilderness.'
And David inspecteth the people who [are] with him, and setteth over them heads of thousands and heads of hundreds,
and David sendeth the third of the people by the hand of Joab, and the third by the hand of Abishai, son of Zeruiah, brother of Joab, and the third by the hand of Ittai the Gittite, and the king saith unto the people, 'I certainly go out — I also — with you.'
And the people say, 'Thou dost not go out, for if we utterly flee, they do not set [their] heart upon us; and if half of us die, they do not set [their] heart unto us — for now like us [are] ten thousand; and now, better that thou be to us from the city for an helper.'
And the king saith unto them, 'That which is good in your eyes I do;' and the king standeth at the side of the gate, and all the people have gone out by hundreds and by thousands,
and the king chargeth Joab, and Abishai, and Ittai, saying, 'Gently — for me, for the youth, for Absalom;' and all the people heard in the king's charging all the heads concerning Absalom.
And the people goeth out into the field to meet Israel, and the battle is in a forest of Ephraim;
and smitten there are the people of Israel before the servants of David, and the smiting there is great on that day — twenty thousand;
and the battle is there scattered over the face of all the land, and the forest multiplieth to devour among the people more than those whom the sword hath devoured in that day.
And Absalom meeteth before the servants of David, and Absalom is riding on the mule, and the mule cometh in under an entangled bough of the great oak, and his head taketh hold on the oak, and he is placed between the heavens and the earth, and the mule that [is] under him hath passed on.
And one man seeth, and declareth to Joab, and saith, 'Lo, I saw Absalom hanged in an oak.'
And Joab saith to the man who is declaring [it] to him, 'And lo, thou hast seen — and wherefore didst thou not smite him there to the earth — and on me to give to thee ten silverlings and one girdle?'
And the man saith unto Joab, 'Yea, though I am weighing on my hand a thousand silverlings, I do not put forth my hand unto the son of the king; for in our ears hath the king charged thee, and Abishai, and Ittai, saying, Observe ye who [is] against the youth — against Absalom;
or I had done against my soul a vain thing, and no matter is hid from the king, and thou — thou dost station thyself over-against.'
And Joab saith, 'Not right — I tarry before thee;' and he taketh three darts in his hand, and striketh them into the heart of Absalom, while he [is] alive, in the midst of the oak.
And they go round — ten youths bearing weapons of Joab — and smite Absalom, and put him to death.
And Joab bloweth with a trumpet, and the people turneth back from pursuing after Israel, for Joab hath kept back the people;
and they take Absalom and cast him in the forest unto the great pit, and set up over him a very great heap of stones, and all Israel have fled — each to his tent.
And Absalom hath taken, and setteth up for himself in his life, the standing-pillar that [is] in the king's valley, for he said, 'I have no son to cause my name to be remembered;' and he calleth the standing-pillar by his own name, and it is called 'The monument of Absalom' unto this day.
And Ahimaaz son of Zadok said, 'Let me run, I pray thee, and I bear the king tidings, for Jehovah hath delivered him out of the hand of his enemies;'
and Joab saith to him, 'Thou art not a man of tidings this day, but thou hast borne tidings on another day, and this day thou dost not bear tidings, because the king's son [is] dead.'
And Joab saith to Cushi, 'Go, declare to the king that which thou hast seen;' and Cushi boweth himself to Joab, and runneth.
And Ahimaaz son of Zadok addeth again, and saith unto Joab, 'And whatever it be, let me run, I pray thee, I also, after the Cushite.' And Joab saith, 'Why [is] this — thou art running, my son, and for thee there are no tidings found?' —
'And, whatever it be, [said he,] let me run.' And he saith to him, 'Run;' and Ahimaaz runneth the way of the circuit, and passeth by the Cushite.
And David is sitting between the two gates, and the watchman goeth unto the roof of the gate, unto the wall, and lifteth up his eyes, and looketh, and lo, a man running by himself.
And the watchman calleth, and declareth to the king, and the king saith, 'If by himself, tidings [are] in his mouth;' and he cometh, coming on and drawing near.
And the watchman seeth another man running, and the watchman calleth unto the gatekeeper, and saith, 'Lo, a man running by himself;' and the king saith, 'Also this one is bearing tidings.'
And the watchman saith, 'I see the running of the first as the running of Ahimaaz son of Zadok.' And the king saith, 'This [is] a good man, and with good tidings he cometh.'
And Ahimaaz calleth and saith unto the king, 'Peace;' and he boweth himself to the king, on his face, to the earth, and saith, 'Blessed [is] Jehovah thy God who hath shut up the men who lifted up their hand against my lord the king.'
And the king saith, 'Peace to the youth — to Absalom?' And Ahimaaz saith, 'I saw the great multitude, at the sending away of the servant of the king, even thy servant [by] Joab, and I have not known what [it is].'
And the king saith, 'Turn round, station thyself here;' and he turneth round and standeth still.
And lo, the Cushite hath come, and the Cushite saith, 'Let tidings be proclaimed, my lord, O king; for Jehovah hath delivered thee to-day out of the hand of all those rising up against thee.'
And the king saith unto the Cushite, 'Peace to the youth — to Absalom?' And the Cushite saith, 'Let them be — as the youth — the enemies of my lord the king, and all who have risen up against thee for evil.'
And the king trembleth, and goeth up on the upper chamber of the gate, and weepeth, and thus he hath said in his going, 'My son! Absalom my son; my son Absalom; oh that I had died for thee, Absalom, my son, my son.'
And it is declared to Joab, 'Lo, the king is weeping and mourning for Absalom;'
and the salvation on that day becometh mourning to all the people, for the people hath heard on that day, saying, 'The king hath been grieved for his son.'
And the people stealeth away, on that day, to go in to the city, as the people steal away, who are ashamed, in their fleeing in battle;
and the king hath covered his face, yea, the king crieth — a loud voice — 'My son Absalom, Absalom, my son, my son.'
And Joab cometh in unto the king to the house, and saith, 'Thou hast put to shame to-day the faces of all thy servants, those delivering thy life to-day, and the life of thy sons, and of thy daughters, and the life of thy wives, and the life of thy concubines,
to love thine enemies, and to hate those loving thee, for thou hast declared to-day that thou hast no princes and servants, for I have known to-day that if Absalom [were] alive, and all of us to-day dead, that then it were right in thine eyes.
'And now, rise, go out and speak unto the heart of thy servants, for by Jehovah I have sworn, that — thou art not going out — there doth not lodge a man with thee to-night; and this [is] worse for thee than all the evil that hath come upon thee from thy youth till now.'
And the king riseth, and sitteth in the gate, and to all the people they have declared, saying, 'Lo, the king is sitting in the gate;' and all the people come in before the king, and Israel hath fled, each to his tents.
And it cometh to pass, all the people are contending through all the tribes of Israel, saying, 'The king delivered us out of the hand of our enemies, yea, he himself delivered us out of the hand of the Philistines, and now he hath fled out of the land because of Absalom,
and Absalom whom we anointed over us [is] dead in battle, and now, why are ye silent — to bring back the king?'
And king David sent unto Zadok and unto Abiathar the priests, saying, 'Speak ye unto the elders of Judah, saying, Why are ye last to bring back the king unto his house? (and the word of all Israel hath come unto the king, unto his house;)
my brethren ye [are], my bone and my flesh ye [are], and why are ye last to bring back the king?
And to Amasa say ye, Art not thou my bone and my flesh? Thus doth God do to me, and thus He doth add, if thou art not head of the host before me all the days instead of Joab.'
And he inclineth the heart of all the men of Judah as one man, and they send unto the king, 'Turn back, thou, and all thy servants.'
And the king turneth back, and cometh in unto the Jordan, and Judah hath come to Gilgal, to go to meet the king, to bring the king over the Jordan,
and Shimei son of Gera, the Benjamite, who [is] from Bahurim, hasteth, and cometh down with the men of Judah, to meet king David,
and a thousand men [are] with him from Benjamin, and Ziba servant of the house of Saul, and his fifteen sons and his twenty servants with him, and they have gone prosperously over the Jordan before the king.
And passed over hath the ferry-boat to carry over the household of the king, and to do that which [is] good in his eyes, and Shimei son of Gera hath fallen before the king in his passing over into Jordan,
and saith unto the king, 'Let not my lord impute to me iniquity; neither do thou remember that which thy servant did perversely in the day that my lord the king went out from Jerusalem, — for the king to set [it] unto his heart;
for thy servant hath known that I have sinned; and lo, I have come to-day, first of all the house of Joseph, to go down to meet my lord the king.'
And Abishai son of Zeruiah answereth and saith, 'For this is not Shimei put to death — because he reviled the anointed of Jehovah?'
And David saith, 'What — to me and to you, O sons of Zeruiah, that ye are to me to-day for an adversary? to-day is any man put to death in Israel? for have I not known that to-day I [am] king over Israel?'
And the king saith unto Shimei, 'Thou dost not die;' and the king sweareth to him.
And Mephibosheth son of Saul hath come down to meet the king — and he prepared not his feet, nor did he prepare his upper lip, yea, his garments he washed not, even from the day of the going away of the king, till the day that he came in peace —
and it cometh to pass, when he hath come to Jerusalem to meet the king, that the king saith to him, 'Why didst thou not go with me, Mephibosheth?'
And he saith, 'My lord, O king, my servant deceived me, for thy servant said, I saddle for me the ass, and ride on it, and go with the king, for thy servant [is] lame;
and he uttereth slander against thy servant unto my lord the king, and my lord the king [is] as a messenger of God; and do thou that which is good in thine eyes,
for all the house of my father have been nothing except men of death before my lord the king, and thou dost set thy servant among those eating at thy table, and what right have I any more — even to cry any more unto the king?'
And the king saith to him, 'Why dost thou speak any more of thy matters? I have said, Thou and Ziba — share ye the field.'
And Mephibosheth saith unto the king, 'Yea, the whole let him take, after that my lord the king hath come in peace unto his house.'
And Barzillai the Gileadite hath gone down from Rogelim, and passeth over the Jordan with the king, to send him away over the Jordan;
and Barzillai [is] very aged, a son of eighty years, and he hath sustained the king in his abiding in Mahanaim, for he [is] a very great man;
and the king saith unto Barzillai, 'Pass thou over with me, and I have sustained thee with me in Jerusalem.'
And Barzillai saith unto the king, 'How many [are] the days of the years of my life, that I go up with the king to Jerusalem?
A son of eighty years I [am] to-day; do I know between good and evil? doth thy servant taste that which I am eating, and that which I drink? do I hearken any more to the voice of singers and songstresses? and why is thy servant any more for a burden unto my lord the king?
As a little thing, thy servant doth pass over the Jordan with the king, and why doth the king recompense me this recompense?
Let, I pray thee, thy servant turn back again, and I die in mine own city, near the burying-place of my father and of my mother, — and lo, thy servant Chimham, let him pass over with my lord the king, and do thou to him that which [is] good in thine eyes.'
And the king saith, 'With me doth Chimham go over, and I do to him that which [is] good in thine eyes, yea, all that thou dost fix on me I do to thee.'
And all the people pass over the Jordan, and the king hath passed over, and the king giveth a kiss to Barzillai, and blesseth him, and he turneth back to his place.
And the king passeth over to Gilgal, and Chimham hath passed over with him, and all the people of Judah, and they bring over the king, and also the half of the people of Israel.
And, lo, all the men of Israel are coming unto the king, and they say unto the king, 'Wherefore have they stolen thee — our brethren, the men of Judah?' (and they bring the king and his household over the Jordan, and all the men of David with him).
And all the men of Judah answer against the men of Israel, 'Because the king [is] near unto us, and why [is] this — ye are displeased about this matter? have we at all eaten of the king's [substance?] a gift hath he lifted up to us?'
And the men of Israel answer the men of Judah, and say, 'Ten parts we have in the king, and also in David more than you; and wherefore have ye lightly esteemed us, that our word hath not been first to bring back our king?' And the word of the men of Judah is sharper than the word of the men of Israel.
And there hath been called there a man of worthlessness, and his name [is] Sheba, son of Bichri, a Benjamite, and he bloweth with a trumpet, and saith, 'We have no portion in David, and we have no inheritance in the son of Jesse; each to his tents, O Israel.'
And every man of Israel goeth up from after David, after Sheba son of Bichri, and the men of Judah have cleaved to their king, from the Jordan even unto Jerusalem.
And David cometh in unto his house at Jerusalem, and the king taketh the ten women-concubines — whom he had left to keep the house, and putteth them in a house of ward, and sustaineth them, and unto them he hath not gone in, and they are shut up unto the day of their death, in widowhood living.
And the king saith unto Amasa, 'Call for me the men of Judah [in] three days, and thou, stand here,'
and Amasa goeth to call Judah, and tarrieth beyond the appointed time that he had appointed him;
and David saith unto Abishai, 'Now doth Sheba son of Bichri do evil to us more than Absalom; thou, take the servants of thy lord, and pursue after him, lest he have found for himself fenced cities, and delivered himself [from] our eye.'
And the men of Joab go out after him, and the Cherethite, and the Pelethite, and all the mighty men, and they go out from Jerusalem to pursue after Sheba son of Bichri;
they [are] near the great stone that [is] in Gibeon, and Amasa hath gone before them, and Joab [is] girded; his long robe he hath put on him, and upon it a girdle — a sword [is] fastened upon his loins in its sheath; and he hath gone out, and it falleth.
And Joab saith to Amasa, 'Art thou [in] peace, my brother?' and the right hand of Joab layeth hold on the beard of Amasa to give a kiss to him;
and Amasa hath not been watchful of the sword that [is] in the hand of Joab, and he smiteth him with it unto the fifth [rib], and sheddeth out his bowels to the earth, and he hath not repeated [it] to him, and he dieth; and Joab and Abishai his brother have pursued after Sheba son of Bichri.
And a man hath stood by him, of the young men of Joab, and saith, 'He who hath delight in Joab, and he who [is] for David — after Joab!'
And Amasa is rolling himself in blood, in the midst of the highway, and the man seeth that all the people have stood still, and he bringeth round Amasa out of the highway to the field, and casteth over him a garment, when he hath seen that every one who hath come by him — hath stood still.
When he hath been removed out of the highway, every man hath passed on after Joab, to pursue after Sheba son of Bichri.
And he passeth over through all the tribes of Israel to Abel, and to Beth-Maachah, and to all the Berites, and they are assembled, and go in also after him,
and they go in and lay siege against him, in Abel of Beth-Maachah, and cast up a mount against the city, and it standeth in a trench, and all the people who are [are] with Joab are destroying, to cause the wall to fall.
And a wise woman calleth out of the city, 'Hear, hear; say, I pray you, unto Joab, Come near hither, and I speak unto thee.'
And he cometh near unto her, and the woman saith, 'Art thou Joab?' and he saith, 'I [am].' And she saith to him, 'Hear the words of thy handmaid;' and he saith, 'I am hearing.'
and she speaketh, saying, 'They spake often in former times, saying, Let them diligently ask at Abel, and so they finished.
I [am] of the peaceable — faithful ones of Israel; thou art seeking to destroy a city, and a mother in Israel; why dost thou swallow up the inheritance of Jehovah?
And Joab answereth and saith, 'Far be it — far be it from me; I do not swallow up nor destroy.
The matter [is] not so; for a man of the hill-country of Ephraim — Sheba son of Bichri his name — hath lifted up his hand against the king, against David; give ye up him by himself, and I go away from the city.' And the woman saith unto Joab, 'Lo, his head is cast unto thee over the wall.'
And the woman cometh unto all the people in her wisdom, and they cut off the head of Sheba son of Bichri, and cast [it] unto Joab, and he bloweth with a trumpet, and they are scattered from the city, each to his tents, and Joab hath turned back to Jerusalem unto the king.
And Joab [is] over all the host of Israel, and Benaiah son of Jehoiada [is] over the Cherethite, and over the Pelethite,
and Adoram [is] over the tribute, and Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud [is] the remembrancer,
and Sheva [is] scribe, and Zadok and Abiathar [are] priests,
and also, Ira the Jairite hath been minister to David.
And there is a famine in the days of David three years, year after year, and David seeketh the face of Jehovah, and Jehovah saith, 'For Saul and for the bloody house, because that he put to death the Gibeonites.'
And the king calleth for the Gibeonites, and saith unto them — as to the Gibeonites, they [are] not of the sons of Israel, but of the remnant of the Amorite, and the sons of Israel had sworn to them, and Saul seeketh to smite them in his zeal for the sons of Israel and Judah —
yea, David saith unto the Gibeonites, 'What do I do for you? and with what do I make atonement? and bless ye the inheritance of Jehovah.'
And the Gibeonites say to him, 'We have no silver and gold by Saul and by his house, and we have no man to put to death in Israel;' and he saith, 'What ye are saying I do to you.'
And they say unto the king, 'The man who consumed us, and who devised against us — we have been destroyed from stationing ourselves in all the border of Israel —
let there be given to us seven men of his sons, and we have hanged them before Jehovah, in the height of Saul, the chosen of Jehovah.' And the king saith, 'I do give;'
and the king hath pity on Mephibosheth son of Jonathan, son of Saul, because of the oath of Jehovah that [is] between them, between David and Jonathan son of Saul;
and the king taketh the two sons of Rizpah daughter of Aiah, whom she bore to Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth, and the five sons of Michal daughter of Saul whom she bare to Adriel son of Barzillai the Meholathite,
and giveth them into the hand of the Gibeonites, and they hang them in the hill before Jehovah; and the seven fall together, and they have been put to death in the days of harvest, in the first [days], the commencement of barley-harvest.
And Rizpah daughter of Aiah taketh the sackcloth, and stretcheth it out for herself on the rock, from the commencement of harvest till water hath been poured out upon them from the heavens, and hath not suffered a fowl of the heavens to rest upon them by day, or the beast of the field by night.
And it is declared to David that which Rizpah daughter of Aiah, concubine of Saul, hath done,
and David goeth and taketh the bones of Saul, and the bones of Jonathan his son, from the possessors of Jabesh-Gilead, who had stolen them from the broad place of Beth-Shan, where the Philistines hanged them, in the day of the Philistines smiting Saul in Gilboa;
and he bringeth up thence the bones of Saul, and the bones of Jonathan his son, and they gather the bones of those hanged,
and bury the bones of Saul and of Jonathan his son in the land of Benjamin, in Zelah, in the burying-place of Kish his father, and do all that the king commanded, and God is entreated for the land afterwards.
And again have the Philistines war with Israel, and David goeth down, and his servants with him, and they fight with the Philistines; and David is weary,
and Ishbi-Benob, who [is] among the children of the giant — the weight of his spear [is] three hundred [shekels] weight of brass, and he is girded with a new one — speaketh of smiting David,
and Abishai son of Zeruiah giveth help to him, and smiteth the Philistine, and putteth him to death; then swear the men of David to him, saying, 'Thou dost not go out again with us to battle, nor quench the lamp of Israel.'
And it cometh to pass afterwards, that the battle is again in Gob with the Philistines, then hath Sibbechai the Hushathite smitten Saph, who [is] among the children of the giant.
And the battle is again in Gob with the Philistines, and Elhanan son of Jaare-Oregim, the Beth-Lehemite, smiteth [a brother of] Goliath the Gittite, and the wood of his spear [is] like a beam of weavers.
And the battle is again in Gath, and there is a man of stature, and the fingers of his hands [are] six, and the toes of his feet [are] six, twenty and four in number, and he also hath been born to the giant,
and he reproacheth Israel, and smite him doth Jonathan son of Shimeah, brother of David;
these four have been born to the giant in Gath, and they fall by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants.
And David speaketh to Jehovah the words of this song in the day Jehovah hath delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies, and out of the hand of Saul,
and he saith: 'Jehovah [is] my rock, And my bulwark, and a deliverer to me,
My God [is] my rock — I take refuge in Him; My shield, and the horn of my salvation, My high tower, and my refuge! My Saviour, from violence Thou savest me!
The Praised One, I call Jehovah: And from mine enemies I am saved.
When the breakers of death compassed me, The streams of the worthless terrify me,
The cords of Sheol have surrounded me, Before me have been the snares of death.
In mine adversity I call Jehovah, And unto my God I call, And He heareth from His temple my voice, And my cry [is] in His ears,
And shake and tremble doth the earth, Foundations of the heavens are troubled, And are shaken, for He hath wrath!
Gone up hath smoke by His nostrils. And fire from His mouth devoureth, Brands have been kindled by it.
And He inclineth heaven, and cometh down, And thick darkness [is] under His feet.
And He rideth on a cherub, and doth fly, And is seen on the wings of the wind.
And He setteth darkness Round about Him — tabernacles, Darkness of waters — thick clouds of the skies.
From the brightness before Him Were brands of fire kindled!
Thunder from the heavens doth Jehovah, And the Most High giveth forth His voice.
And He sendeth forth arrows, And scattereth them; Lightning, and troubleth them;
And seen are the streams of the sea, Revealed are foundations of the world, By the rebuke of Jehovah, From the breath of the spirit of His anger.
He sendeth from above — He taketh me, He draweth me out of many waters.
He delivereth me from my strong enemy, From those hating me, For they were stronger than I.
They are before me in a day of my calamity, And Jehovah is my support,
And He bringeth me out to a large place, He draweth me out for He delighted in me.
Jehovah recompenseth me, According to my righteousness, According to the cleanness of my hands, He doth return to me.
For I have kept the ways of Jehovah, And have not done wickedly against my God.
For all His judgments [are] before me, As to His statutes, I turn not from them.
And I am perfect before Him, And I keep myself from mine iniquity.
And Jehovah returneth to me, According to my righteousness, According to my cleanness before His eyes.
With the kind Thou shewest Thyself kind, With the perfect man Thou shewest Thyself perfect,
With the pure Thou shewest Thyself pure, And with the perverse Thou shewest Thyself a wrestler.
And the poor people Thou dost save, And Thine eyes on the high causest to fall.
For Thou [art] my lamp, O Jehovah, And Jehovah doth lighten my darkness.
For by Thee I run — a troop, By my God I leap a wall.
God! Perfect [is] His way, The saying of Jehovah is tried, A shield He [is] to all those trusting in Him.
For who is God save Jehovah? And who a Rock save our God?
God — my bulwark, [my] strength, And He maketh perfect my way;
Making my feet like hinds, And on my high places causeth me to stand,
Teaching my hands for battle, And brought down was a bow of brass by mine arms,
And Thou givest to me the shield of Thy salvation, And Thy lowliness maketh me great.
Thou enlargest my step under me, And mine ankles have not slidden.
I pursue mine enemies and destroy them, And I turn not till they are consumed.
And I consume them, and smite them, And they rise not, and fall under my feet.
And Thou girdest me [with] strength for battle, Thou causest my withstanders to bow under me.
And mine enemies — Thou givest to me the neck, Those hating me — and I cut them off.
They look, and there is no saviour; Unto Jehovah, and He hath not answered them.
And I beat them as dust of the earth, As mire of the streets I beat them small — I spread them out!
And — Thou dost deliver me From the strivings of my people, Thou placest me for a head of nations; A people I have not known do serve me.
Sons of a stranger feign obedience to me, At the hearing of the ear they hearken to me.
Sons of a stranger fade away, And gird themselves by their close places.
Jehovah liveth, and blessed [is] my Rock, And exalted is my God — The Rock of my salvation.
God — who is giving vengeance to me, And bringing down peoples under me,
And bringing me forth from mine enemies, Yea, above my withstanders Thou raisest me up. From a man of violence Thou deliverest me.
Therefore I confess Thee, O Jehovah, among nations. And to Thy name I sing praise.
Magnifying the salvations of His king, And doing loving-kindness to His anointed, To David, and to his seed — unto the age!'
And these [are] the last words of David: — 'The affirmation of David son of Jesse — And the affirmation of the man raised up — Concerning the Anointed of the God of Jacob, And the Sweetness of the Songs of Israel:
The Spirit of Jehovah hath spoken by me, And His word [is] on my tongue.
He said — the God of Israel — to me, He spake — the Rock of Israel: He who is ruling over man [is] righteous, He is ruling in the fear of God.
And as the light of morning he riseth, A morning sun — no clouds! By the shining, by the rain, Tender grass of the earth!
For — not so [is] my house with God; For — a covenant age-during He made with me, Arranged in all things, and kept; For — all my salvation, and all desire, For — He hath not caused [it] to spring up.
As to the worthless — As a thorn driven away [are] all of them, For — not by hand are they taken;
And the man who cometh against them Is filled with iron and the staff of a spear, And with fire they are utterly burnt In the cessation.'
These [are] the names of the mighty ones whom David hath: sitting in the seat [is] the Tachmonite, head of the captains — he [is] Adino, who hardened himself against eight hundred — wounded at one time.
And after him [is] Eleazar son of Dodo, son of Ahohi, of the three mighty men with David; in their exposing themselves among the Philistines — they have been gathered there to battle, and the men of Israel go up —
he hath arisen, and smiteth among the Philistines till that his hand hath been weary, and his hand cleaveth unto the sword, and Jehovah worketh a great salvation on that day, and the people turn back after him only to strip off.
And after him [is] Shammah son of Agee the Hararite, and the Philistines are gathered into a company, and there is there a portion of the field full of lentiles, and the people hath fled from the presence of the Philistines,
and he stationeth himself in the midst of the portion, and delivereth it, and smiteth the Philistines, and Jehovah worketh a great salvation.
And three of the thirty heads go down and come unto the harvest, unto David, unto the cave of Adullam, and the company of the Philistines are encamping in the valley of Rephaim,
and David [is] then in a fortress, and the station of the Philistines [is] then in Beth-Lehem,
and David longeth and saith, 'Who doth give me a drink of the water of the well of Beth-Lehem, which [is] by the gate?'
And the three mighty ones cleave through the camp of the Philistines, and draw water out of the well of Beth-Lehem, which [is] by the gate, and take [it] up, and bring in unto David; and he was not willing to drink it, and poureth it out to Jehovah,
and saith, 'Far be it from me, O Jehovah, to do this; is it the blood of the men who are going with their lives?' and he was not willing to drink it; these [things] did the three mighty ones.
And Abishai brother of Joab, son of Zeruiah, he [is] head of three, and he is lifting up his spear against three hundred — wounded, and he hath a name among three.
Of the three is he not the honoured? and he becometh their head; and unto the [first] three he hath not come.
And Benaiah son of Jehoiada (son of a man of valour, great in deeds from Kabzeel), he hath smitten two lion-like men of Moab, and he hath gone down and smitten the lion in the midst of the pit in a day of snow.
And he hath smitten the Egyptian man, a man of appearance, and in the hand of the Egyptian [is] a spear, and he goeth down unto him with a rod, and taketh violently away the spear out of the hand of the Egyptian, and slayeth him with his own spear.
These [things] hath Benaiah son of Jehoiada done, and hath a name among three mighty.
Of the thirty he is honoured, and unto the three he came not; and David setteth him over his guard.
Asahel brother of Joab [is] of the thirty; Elhanan son of Dodo of Beth-Lehem.
Shammah the Harodite, Elika the Harodite,
Helez the Paltite, Ira son of Ikkesh the Tekoite,
Abiezer the Annethothite, Mebunnai the Hushathite,
Zalmon the Ahohite, Maharai the Netophathite,
Heleb son of Baanah the Netophathite, Ittai son of Ribai from Gibeah of the sons of Benjamin,
Benaiah the Pirathonite, Hiddai of the brooks of Gaash,
Abi-Albon the Arbathite, Azmaveth the Barhumite,
Eliahba the Shaalbonite, [of] the sons of Jashen, Jonathan,
Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam son of Sharar the Hararite,
Eliphelet son of Ahasbai, son of the Maachathite, Eliam son of Ahithophel the Gilonite,
Hezrai the Carmelite, Paarai the Arbite,
Igal son of Nathan from Zobah, Bani the Gadite,
Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Beerothite, bearer of the weapons of Joab son of Zeruiah,
Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite,
Uriah the Hittite; in all thirty and seven.
And the anger of Jehovah addeth to burn against Israel, and [an adversary] moveth David about them, saying, 'Go, number Israel and Judah.'
And the king saith unto Joab, head of the host that [is] with him, 'Go to and fro, I pray thee, through all the tribes of Israel, from Dan even unto Beer-Sheba, and inspect ye the people — and I have known the number of the people.'
And Joab saith unto the king, 'Yea, Jehovah thy God doth add unto the people, as they are, a hundred times, and the eyes of my lord the king are seeing; and my lord the king, why is he desirous of this thing?'
And the word of the king is severe towards Joab, and against the heads of the force, and Joab goeth out, and the heads of the force, [from] before the king to inspect the people, even Israel;
and they pass over the Jordan, and encamp in Aroer, on the right of the city that [is] in the midst of the brook of Gad, and unto Jazer,
and they come in to Gilead, and unto the land of Tahtim-Hodshi, and they come in to Dan-Jaan, and round about unto Zidon,
and they come in to the fortress of Tyre, and all the cities of the Hivite, and of the Canaanite, and go out unto the south of Judah, to Beer-Sheba.
And they go to and fro through all the land, and come in at the end of nine months and twenty days to Jerusalem,
and Joab giveth the account of the inspection of the people unto the king, and Israel is eight hundred thousand men of valour, drawing sword, and the men of Judah five hundred thousand men.
And the heart of David smiteth him, after that he hath numbered the people, and David saith unto Jehovah, 'I have sinned greatly in that which I have done, and now, O Jehovah, cause to pass away, I pray Thee, the iniquity of Thy servant, for I have acted very foolishly.'
And David riseth in the morning, and the word of Jehovah hath been unto Gad the prophet, seer of David, saying,
'Go, and thou hast spoken unto David, Thus said Jehovah: Three — I am lifting up for thee, choose thee one of them, and I do [it] to thee.'
And Gad cometh in unto David, and declareth to him, and saith to him, 'Do seven years of famine come in to thee in thy land? or three months art thou fleeing before thine adversary — and he pursuing thee? or are three days' pestilence in thy land? now, know and see what word I take back to Him sending me.'
And David saith unto Gad, 'I have great distress, let us fall, I pray thee, into the hand of Jehovah, for many [are] His mercies, and into the hand of man let me not fall.'
And Jehovah giveth a pestilence on Israel from the morning even unto the time appointed, and there die of the people, from Dan even unto Beer-Sheba, seventy thousand men,
and the messenger putteth forth his hand to Jerusalem to destroy it, and Jehovah repenteth concerning the evil, and saith to the messenger who is destroying among the people, 'Enough, now, cease thy hand;' and the messenger of Jehovah was near the threshing-floor of Araunah the Jebusite.
And David speaketh unto Jehovah, when he seeth the messenger who is smiting among the people, and saith, 'Lo, I have sinned, yea, I have done perversely; and these — the flock — what have they done? Let, I pray Thee, Thy hand be on me, and on the house of my father.'
And Gad cometh in unto David on that day, and saith to him, 'Go up, raise to Jehovah an altar in the threshing-floor of Araunah the Jebusite;'
and David goeth up, according to the word of Gad, as Jehovah commanded.
And Araunah looketh, and seeth the king and his servants passing over unto him, and Araunah goeth out and boweth himself to the king — his face to the earth.
And Araunah saith, 'Wherefore hath my lord the king come unto his servant?' and David saith, 'To buy from thee the threshing-floor, to build an altar to Jehovah, and the plague is restrained from the people.'
And Araunah saith unto David, 'Let my lord the king take and cause to ascend that which is good in his eyes; see, the oxen for a burnt-offering, and the threshing instruments, and the instruments of the oxen, for wood;'
the whole hath Araunah given, [as] a king to a king; and Araunah saith unto the king, 'Jehovah thy God doth accept thee.'
And the king saith unto Araunah, 'Nay, for I do surely buy from thee for a price, and I do not cause to ascend to Jehovah my God burnt-offerings for nought;' and David buyeth the threshing-floor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver,
and David buildeth there an altar to Jehovah, and causeth to ascend burnt-offerings and peace-offerings, and Jehovah is entreated for the land, and the plague is restrained from Israel.
And king David [is] old, entering into days, and they cover him with garments, and he hath no heat,
and his servants say to him, 'Let them seek for my lord the king a young woman, a virgin, and she hath stood before the king, and is to him a companion, and hath lain in thy bosom, and my lord the king hath heat.'
And they seek a fair young woman in all the border of Israel, and find Abishag the Shunammite, and bring her in to the king,
and the young woman [is] very very fair, and she is to the king a companion, and serveth him, and the king hath not known her.
And Adonijah son of Haggith is lifting himself up, saying, 'I do reign;' and he prepareth for himself a chariot and horsemen, and fifty men running before him,
and his father hath not grieved him [all] his days, saying, 'Wherefore thus hast thou done?' and he also [is] of a very good form, and [his mother] bare him after Absalom.
And his words are with Joab son of Zeruiah, and with Abiathar the priest, and they help after Adonijah;
and Zadok the priest, and Benaiah son of Jehoiada, and Nathan the prophet, and Shimei, and Rei, and the mighty ones whom David hath, have not been with Adonijah.
And Adonijah sacrificeth sheep and oxen and fatlings near the stone of Zoheleth, that [is] by En-Rogel, and calleth all his brethren, sons of the king, and for all the men of Judah, servants of the king;
and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah, and the mighty ones, and Solomon his brother, he hath not called.
And Nathan speaketh unto Bath-Sheba, mother of Solomon, saying, 'Hast thou not heard that Adonijah son of Haggith hath reigned, and our lord David hath not known?
and now, come, let me counsel thee, I pray thee, and deliver thy life, and the life of thy son Solomon;
go and enter in unto king David, and thou hast said unto him, Hast thou not, my lord, O king, sworn to thy handmaid, saying, Surely Solomon thy son doth reign after me, and he doth sit on my throne? and wherefore hath Adonijah reigned?
Lo, thou are yet speaking there with the king, and I come in after thee, and have completed thy words.'
And Bath-Sheba cometh in unto the king, to the inner chamber, and the king [is] very aged, and Abishag the Shunammite is serving the king:
and Bath-Sheba boweth and doth obeisance to the king, and the king saith, 'What — to thee?'
And she saith to him, 'My lord, thou hast sworn by Jehovah thy God to thy handmaid: Surely Solomon thy son doth reign after me, and he doth sit on my throne;
and now, lo, Adonijah hath reigned, and now, my lord, O king, thou hast not known;
and he sacrificeth ox, and fatling, and sheep in abundance, and calleth for all the sons of the king, and for Abiathar the priest, and for Joab head of the host — and for Solomon thy servant he hath not called.
And thou, my lord, O king, the eyes of all Israel [are] on thee, to declare to them who doth sit on the throne of my lord the king after him;
and it hath been, when my lord the king lieth with his fathers, that I have been, I and my son Solomon — [reckoned] sinners.'
And lo, she is yet speaking with the king, and Nathan the prophet hath come in;
and they declare to the king, saying, 'Lo, Nathan the prophet;' and he cometh in before the king, and boweth himself to the king, on his face to the earth.
And Nathan saith, 'My lord, O king, thou hast said, Adonijah doth reign after me, and he doth sit on my throne;
for he hath gone down to-day, and doth sacrifice ox, and fatling, and sheep, in abundance, and calleth for all the sons of the king, and for the heads of the host, and for Abiathar the priest, and lo, they are eating and drinking before him, and they say, Let king Adonijah live!
'And for me — me, thy servant, and for Zadok the priest, and for Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, and for Solomon thy servant, he hath not called;
if from my lord the king this thing hath been, then thou hast not caused thy servant to know who doth sit on the throne of my lord the king after him.'
And king David answereth and saith, 'Call for me for Bath-Sheba;' and she cometh in before the king, and standeth before the king.
And the king sweareth and saith, 'Jehovah liveth, who hath redeemed my soul out of all adversity;
surely as I sware to thee by Jehovah, God of Israel, saying, Surely Solomon thy son doth reign after me, and he doth sit on my throne in my stead; surely so I do this day.'
And Bath-Sheba boweth — face to the earth — and doth obeisance to the king, and saith, 'Let my lord, king David, live to the age.'
And king David saith, 'Call for me for Zadok the priest, and for Nathan the prophet, and for Benaiah son of Jehoiada;' and they come in before the king.
And the king saith to them, 'Take with you the servants of your lord, and ye have caused Solomon my son to ride on mine own mule, and caused him to go down unto Gihon,
and anointed him there hath Zadok the priest — and Nathan the prophet — for king over Israel, and ye have blown with a trumpet, and said, Let king Solomon live;
and ye have come up after him, and he hath come in and hath sat on my throne, and he doth reign in my stead, and him I have appointed to be leader over Israel, and over Judah.'
And Benaiah son of Jehoiada answereth the king, and saith, 'Amen! so doth Jehovah, God of my lord the king, say;
as Jehovah hath been with my lord the king, so is He with Solomon, and doth make his throne greater than the throne of my lord king David.'
And Zadok the priest goeth down, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethite, and the Pelethite, and they cause Solomon to ride on the mule of king David, and cause him to go unto Gihon,
and Zadok the priest taketh the horn of oil out of the tent, and anointeth Solomon, and they blow with a trumpet, and all the people say, 'Let king Solomon live.'
And all the people come up after him, and the people are piping with pipes, and rejoicing — great joy, and the earth rendeth with their voice.
And Adonijah heareth, and all those called, who [are] with him, and they have finished to eat, and Joab heareth the noise of the trumpet, and saith, 'Wherefore [is] the noise of the city roaring?'
He is yet speaking, and lo, Jonathan son of Abiathar the priest hath come in, and Adonijah saith, 'Come in, for a man of valour thou [art], and thou bearest good tidings.'
And Jonathan answereth and saith to Adonijah, 'Verily our lord king David hath caused Solomon to reign,
and the king sendeth with him Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethite, and the Pelethite, and they cause him to ride on the king's mule,
and they anoint him — Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet — for king in Gihon, and are come up thence rejoicing, and the city is moved; it [is] the noise that ye have heard.
'And also Solomon hath sat on the throne of the kingdom,
and also the servants of the king have come into bless our lord king David, saying, Thy God doth make the name of Solomon better than thy name, and his throne greater than thy throne; and the king boweth himself on the bed,
and also thus hath the king said, Blessed [is] Jehovah, God of Israel, who hath given to-day [one] sitting on my throne, and mine eyes seeing.'
And they tremble, and rise — all those called who [are] for Adonijah — and go, each on his way;
and Adonijah feareth because of Solomon, and riseth, and goeth, and layeth hold on the horns of the altar.
And it is declared to Solomon, saying, 'Lo, Adonijah feareth king Solomon, and lo, he hath laid hold on the horns of the altar, saying, Let king Solomon swear to me as to-day — he doth not put to death his servant by the sword.'
And Solomon saith, 'If he becometh a virtuous man — there doth not fall of his hair to the earth, and if evil is found in him — then he hath died.'
And king Solomon sendeth, and they bring him down from off the altar, and he cometh in and boweth himself to king Solomon, and Solomon saith to him, 'Go to thy house.'
And draw near do the days of David to die, and he chargeth Solomon his son, saying,
'I am going in the way of all the earth, and thou hast been strong, and become a man,
and kept the charge of Jehovah thy God, to walk in His ways, to keep His statutes, His commands, and His judgments, and His testimonies, as it is written in the law of Moses, so that thou dost wisely all that thou dost, and whithersoever thou turnest,
so that Jehovah doth establish His word which He spake unto me, saying, If thy sons observe their way to walk before Me in truth, with all their heart, and with all their soul; saying, There is not cut off a man of thine from the throne of Israel.
'And also, thou hast known that which he did to me — Joab son of Zeruiah — that which he did to two heads of the hosts of Israel, to Abner son of Ner, and to Amasa son of Jether — that he slayeth them, and maketh the blood of war in peace, and putteth the blood of war in his girdle, that [is] on his loins, and in his sandals that [are] on his feet;
and thou hast done according to thy wisdom, and dost not let his old age go down in peace to Sheol.
'And to the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite thou dost do kindness, and they have been among those eating at thy table, for so they drew near unto me in my fleeing from the face of Absalom thy brother.
'And lo, with thee [is] Shimei son of Gera, the Benjamite of Bahurim, and he reviled me — a grievous reviling — in the day of my going to Mahanaim; and he hath come down to meet me at the Jordan, and I swear to him by Jehovah, saying, I do not put thee to death by the sword;
and now, acquit him not, for a wise man thou [art], and thou hast known that which thou dost to him, and hast brought down his old age with blood to Sheol.'
And David lieth down with his fathers, and is buried in the city of David,
and the days that David hath reigned over Israel [are] forty years, in Hebron he hath reigned seven years, and in Jerusalem he hath reigned thirty and three years.
And Solomon hath sat on the throne of David his father, and his kingdom is established greatly,
and Adonijah son of Haggith cometh in unto Bath-Sheba, mother of Solomon, and she saith, 'Is thy coming peace?' and he saith, 'Peace.'
And he saith, 'I have a word unto thee,' and she saith, 'Speak.'
And he saith, 'Thou hast known that the kingdom was mine, and towards me set their faces had all Israel for reigning, and the kingdom is turned round about, and is my brother's, for from Jehovah it was his;
and now, one petition I am asking of thee — turn not back my face;' and she saith unto him, 'Speak.'
And he saith, 'Speak, I pray thee, to Solomon the king, for he doth not turn back thy face, and he doth give to me Abishag the Shunammite for a wife.'
And Bath-Sheba saith, 'Good; I do speak for thee unto the king.'
And Bath-Sheba cometh in unto king Solomon to speak to him for Adonijah, and the king riseth to meet her, and boweth himself to her, and sitteth on his throne, and placeth a throne for the mother of the king, and she sitteth at his right hand.
And she saith, 'One small petition I ask of thee, turn not back my face;' and the king saith to her, 'Ask, my mother, for I do not turn back thy face.'
And she saith, 'Let Abishag the Shunammite be given to Adonijah thy brother for a wife.'
And king Solomon answereth and saith to his mother, 'And why art thou asking Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? also ask for him the kingdom — for he [is] mine elder brother — even for him, and for Abiathar the priest, and for Joab son of Zeruiah.'
And king Solomon sweareth by Jehovah, saying, 'Thus doth God to me, and thus He doth add — surely against his soul hath Adonijah spoken this word;
and now, Jehovah liveth, who hath established me, and causeth me to sit on the throne of David my father, and who hath made for me an house as He spake — surely to-day is Adonijah put to death.'
And king Solomon sendeth by the hand of Benaiah son of Jehoiada, and he falleth upon him, and he dieth.
And to Abiathar the priest said the king, 'To Anathoth go, unto thy fields; for a man of death thou [art], but in this day I do not put thee to death, because thou hast borne the ark of the Lord Jehovah before David my father, and because thou wast afflicted in all that my father was afflicted in.'
And Solomon casteth out Abiathar from being priest to Jehovah, to fulfil the word of Jehovah which He spake concerning the house of Eli in Shiloh.
And the report hath come unto Joab — for Joab hath turned aside after Adonijah, though after Absalom he did not turn aside — and Joab fleeth unto the tent of Jehovah, and layeth hold on the horns of the altar.
And it is declared to king Solomon that Joab hath fled unto the tent of Jehovah, and lo, near the altar; and Solomon sendeth Benaiah son of Jehoiada, saying, 'Go, fall upon him.'
And Benaiah cometh in unto the tent of Jehovah, and saith unto him, 'Thus said the king, Come out;' and he saith, 'Nay, but here I die.' And Benaiah bringeth back the king word, saying, 'Thus spake Joab, yea, thus he answered me.'
And the king saith to him, 'Do as he hath spoken, and fall upon him, and thou hast buried him, and turned aside the causeless blood which Joab shed, from off me, and from off the house of my father;
and Jehovah hath turned back his blood on his own head, who hath fallen on two men more righteous and better than he, and slayeth them with the sword, — and my father David knew not — Abner son of Ner, head of the host of Israel, and Amasa son of Jether, head of the host of Judah;
yea, turned back hath their blood on the head of Joab, and on the head of his seed to the age; and for David, and for his seed, and for his house, and for his throne, there is peace unto the age, from Jehovah.'
And Benaiah son of Jehoiada goeth up and falleth upon him, and putteth him to death, and he is buried in his own house in the wilderness,
and the king putteth Benaiah son of Jehoiada in his stead over the host, and Zadok the priest hath the king put in the stead of Abiathar.
And the king sendeth and calleth for Shimei, and saith to him, 'Build for thee a house in Jerusalem, and thou hast dwelt there, and dost not go out thence any where;
and it hath been, in the day of thy going out, and thou hast passed over the brook Kidron, thou dost certainly know that thou dost surely die — thy blood is on thy head.'
And Shimei saith to the king, 'The word [is] good; as my lord the king hath spoken so doth thy servant do;' and Shimei dwelleth in Jerusalem many days.
And it cometh to pass, at the end of three years, that flee do two of the servants of Shimei unto Achish son of Maachah, king of Gath, and they declare to Shimei, saying, 'Lo, thy servants [are] in Gath;'
and Shimei riseth, and saddleth his ass, and goeth to Gath, unto Achish, to seek his servants, and Shimei goeth and bringeth his servants from Gath.
And it is declared to Solomon that Shimei hath gone from Jerusalem to Gath, and doth return,
and the king sendeth and calleth for Shimei, and saith unto him, 'Have I not caused thee to swear by Jehovah — and I testify against thee, saying, In the day of thy going out, and thou hast gone anywhere, thou dost certainly know that thou dost surely die; and thou sayest unto me, The word I have heard [is] good?
and wherefore hast thou not kept the oath of Jehovah, and the charge that I charged upon thee?'
And the king saith unto Shimei, 'Thou hast known all the evil that thy heart hath known, which thou didst to David my father, and Jehovah hath turned back thine evil on thy head,
and king Solomon [is] blessed, and the throne of David is established before Jehovah unto the age.'
And the king chargeth Benaiah son of Jehoiada, and he goeth out and falleth on him, and he dieth, and the kingdom is established in the hand of Solomon.
And Solomon joineth in marriage with Pharaoh king of Egypt, and taketh the daughter of Pharaoh, and bringeth her in unto the city of David, till he completeth to build his own house, and the house of Jehovah, and the wall of Jerusalem round about.
Only, the people are sacrificing in high places, for there hath not been built a house for the name of Jehovah till those days.
And Solomon loveth Jehovah, to walk in the statutes of David his father — only, in high places he is sacrificing and making perfume —
and the king goeth to Gibeon, to sacrifice there, for it [is] the great high place; a thousand burnt-offerings cause to ascend doth Solomon on that altar.
In Gibeon hath Jehovah appeared unto Solomon, in a dream of the night, and God saith, 'Ask — what do I give to thee?'
And Solomon saith, 'Thou hast done with Thy servant David my father great kindness, as he walked before Thee in truth and in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart with Thee, and Thou dost keep for him this great kindness, and dost give to him a son sitting on his throne, as [at] this day.
And now, O Jehovah my God, Thou hast caused thy servant to reign instead of David my father; and I [am] a little child, I do not know to go out and to come in;
and Thy servant [is] in the midst of thy people, whom Thou hast chosen, a people numerous, that is not numbered nor counted for multitude,
and Thou hast given to Thy servant an understanding heart, to judge Thy people, to discern between good and evil; for who is able to judge this Thy great people?'
And the thing is good in the eyes of the Lord, that Solomon hath asked this thing,
and God saith unto him, 'Because that thou hast asked this thing, and hast not asked for thee many days, nor asked for thee riches, nor asked the life of thine enemies, and hast asked for thee discernment to understand judgment,
lo, I have done according to thy words; lo, I have given to thee a heart, wise and understanding, that like thee there hath not been before thee, and after thee there doth not arise like thee;
and also, that which thou hast not asked I have given to thee, both riches and honour, that there hath not been like thee a man among the kings all thy days;
and if thou dost walk in My ways to keep My statutes, and My commands, as David thy father walked, then I have prolonged thy days.'
And Solomon awaketh, and lo, a dream; and he cometh in to Jerusalem, and standeth before the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, and causeth to ascend burnt-offerings, and maketh peace-offerings. And he maketh a banquet for all his servants,
then come in do two women, harlots, unto the king, and stand before him,
and the one woman saith, 'O, my lord, I and this woman are dwelling in one house, and I bring forth with her, in the house;
and it cometh to pass on the third day of my bringing forth, that this woman also bringeth forth, and we [are] together, there is no stranger with us in the house, save we two, in the house.
And the son of this woman dieth at night, because she hath lain upon it,
and she riseth in the middle of the night, and taketh my son from beside me — and thy handmaid is asleep — and layeth it in her bosom, and her dead son she hath laid in my bosom;
and I rise in the morning to suckle my son, and lo, dead; and I consider concerning it in the morning, and lo, it was not my son whom I did bear.'
And the other woman saith, 'Nay, but my son [is] the living, and thy son the dead;' and this [one] saith, 'Nay, but thy son [is] the dead, and my son the living.' And they speak before the king.
And the king saith, 'This [one] saith, This [is] my son, the living, and thy son [is] the dead; and that [one] saith, Nay, but thy son [is] the dead, and my son the living.'
And the king saith, 'Take for me a sword;' and they bring the sword before the king,
and the king saith, 'Cut the living child into two, and give the half to the one, and the half to the other.'
And the woman whose son [is] the living one saith unto the king (for her bowels yearned over her son), yea, she saith, 'O, my lord, give to her the living child, and put it not at all to death;' and this [one] saith, 'Let it be neither mine or thine — cut [it].'
And the king answereth and saith, 'Give ye to her the living child, and put it not at all to death; she [is] its mother.'
And all Israel hear of the judgment that the king hath judged, and fear because of the king, for they have seen that the wisdom of God [is] in his heart, to do judgment.
And king Solomon is king over all Israel,
and these [are] the heads whom he hath: Azariah son of Zadok [is] the priest;
Elihoreph and Ahiah sons of Shisha [are] scribes; Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud [is] remembrancer;
and Benaiah son of Jehoiada [is] over the host; and Zadok and Abiathar [are] priests;
and Azariah son of Nathan [is] over the officers; and Zabud son of Nathan [is] minister, friend of the king;
And Ahishar [is] over the household, and Adoniram son of Abda [is] over the tribute.
And Solomon hath twelve officers over all Israel, and they have sustained the king and his household — a month in the year is on each one for sustenance;
and these [are] their names: Ben-Hur in the hill-country of Ephraim;
Ben-Dekar in Makaz, and Shaalbim, and Beth-Shemesh, and Elon-Beth-Hanan.
Ben-Hesed [is] in Aruboth, hath Sochoh and all the land of Hepher;
Ben-Abinadab [hath] all the elevation of Dor, Taphath daughter of Solomon became his wife.
Baana Ben-Ahilud [hath] Taanach and Megiddo, and all Beth-Shean, which [is] by Zartanah beneath Jezreel, from Beth-Shean unto Abel-Meholah, unto beyond Jokneam.
Ben-Geber, in Ramoth-Gilead, hath the small towns of Jair son of Manasseh, which [are] in Gilead; he hath a portion of Argob that [is] in Bashan, sixty great cities [with] wall and brazen bar.
Ahinadab son of Iddo [hath] Mahanaim.
Ahimaaz [is] in Naphtali; he also hath taken Basemath daughter of Solomon for a wife.
Baanah Ben-Hushai [is] in Asher, and in Aloth.
Jehoshaphat Ben-Paruah [is] in Issachar.
Shimei Ben-Elah [is] in Benjamin.
Geber Ben-Uri [is] in the land of Gilead, the land of Sihon king of the Amorite, and of Og king of Bashan: and one officer who [is] in the land.
Judah and Israel [are] many, as the sand that [is] by the sea for multitude, eating and drinking and rejoicing.
And Solomon hath been ruling over all the kingdoms, from the River [to] the land of the Philistines and unto the border of Egypt: they are bringing nigh a present, and serving Solomon, all days of his life.
And the provision of Solomon for one day is thirty cors of flour, and sixty cors of meal;
ten fat oxen, and twenty feeding oxen, and a hundred sheep, apart from hart, and roe, and fallow-deer, and fatted beasts of the stalls,
for he is ruling over all beyond the river, from Tiphsah and unto Gaza, over all the kings beyond the river, and he hath peace from all his servants round about.
And Judah dwelleth — and Israel — in confidence, each under his vine, and under his fig-tree, from Dan even unto Beer-Sheba, all the days of Solomon.
And Solomon hath forty thousand stalls of horses for his chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen.
And these officers have sustained king Solomon and every one drawing near unto the table of king Solomon, each [in] his month; they let nothing be lacking.
And the barley and the straw, for horses and for dromedaries, they bring in unto the place where they are, each according to his ordinance.
And God giveth wisdom to Solomon, and understanding, very much, and breadth of heart, as the sand that [is] on the edge of the sea;
and the wisdom of Solomon is greater than the wisdom of any of the sons of the east, and than all the wisdom of Egypt;
and he is wiser than all men, than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, and Chalcol, and Darda, sons of Mahol, and his name is in all the nations round about.
And he speaketh three thousand similes, and his songs [are] five, and the chief one;
and he speaketh concerning the trees, from the cedar that [is] in Lebanon, even unto the hyssop that is coming out in the wall, and he speaketh concerning the cattle, and concerning the fowl, and concerning the creeping things, and concerning the fishes,
and there come out of all the peoples to hear the wisdom of Solomon, from all kings of the earth who have heard of his wisdom.
And Hiram king of Tyre sendeth his servants unto Solomon, for he heard that they had anointed him for king instead of his father, for Hiram was a lover of David all the days;
and Solomon sendeth unto Hiram, saying,
'Thou hast known David my father, that he hath not been able to build a house to the name of Jehovah his God, because of the wars that have been round about him, till Jehovah's putting them under the soles of his feet.
'And now, Jehovah my God hath given rest to me round about, there is no adversary nor evil occurrence,
and lo, I am saying to build a house to the name of Jehovah my God, as Jehovah spake unto David my father, saying, Thy son whom I appoint in thy stead on thy throne, he doth build the house for My name.
'And now, command, and they cut down for me cedars out of Lebanon, and my servants are with thy servants, and the hire of thy servants I give to thee according to all that thou sayest, for thou hast known that there is not among us a man acquainted with cutting wood, like the Sidonians.'
And it cometh to pass at Hiram's hearing the words of Solomon, that he rejoiceth exceedingly, and saith, 'Blessed [is] Jehovah to-day, who hath given to David a wise son over this numerous people.'
And Hiram sendeth unto Solomon, saying, I have heard that which thou hast sent unto me, I do all thy desire concerning cedar-wood, and fir-wood,
my servants bring down from Lebanon to the sea, and I make them floats in the sea unto the place that thou sendest unto me, and I have spread them out there; and thou dost take [them] up, and thou dost execute my desire, to give the food of my house.'
And Hiram is giving to Solomon cedar-trees, and fir-trees, all his desire,
and Solomon hath given to Hiram twenty thousand cors of wheat, food for his house, and twenty cors of beaten oil; thus doth Solomon give to Hiram year by year.
And Jehovah hath given wisdom to Solomon as He spake to him, and there is peace between Hiram and Solomon, and they make a covenant both of them.
And king Solomon lifteth up a tribute out of all Israel, and the tribute is thirty thousand men,
and he sendeth them to Lebanon, ten thousand a month, by changes, a month they are in Lebanon, two months in their own house; and Adoniram [is] over the tribute.
And king Solomon hath seventy thousand bearing burdens, and eighty thousand hewing in the mountain,
apart from the heads of the officers of Solomon, who [are] over the work, three thousand and three hundred, those ruling over the people who are working in the business.
And the king commandeth, and they bring great stones, precious stone, to lay the foundation of the house, hewn stones;
and the builders of Solomon, and the builders of Hiram, and the Giblites hew, and prepare the wood and the stones to build the house.
And it cometh to pass, in the four hundred and eightieth year of the going out of the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt, in the fourth year — in the month of Zif, it [is] the second month — of the reigning of Solomon over Israel, that he buildeth the house for Jehovah.
As to the house that king Solomon hath built for Jehovah, sixty cubits [is] its length, and twenty its breadth, and thirty cubits its height.
As to the porch on the front of the temple of the house, twenty cubits [is] its length on the front of the breadth of the house; ten by the cubit [is] its breadth on the front of the house;
and he maketh for the house windows of narrow lights.
And he buildeth against the wall of the house a couch round about, [even] the walls of the house round about, of the temple and of the oracle, and maketh sides round about.
The lowest couch, five by the cubit [is] its breadth; and the middle, six by the cubit [is] its breadth; and the third, seven by the cubit [is] its breadth, for withdrawings he hath put to the house round about, without — not to lay hold on the walls of the house.
And the house, in its being built, of perfect stone brought [thither] hath been built, and hammer, and the axe — any instrument of iron — was not heard in the house, in its being built.
The opening of the middle side [is] at the right shoulder of the house, and with windings they go up on the middle one, and from the middle one unto the third.
And he buildeth the house, and completeth it, and covereth the house [with] beams and rows of cedars.
And he buildeth the couch against all the house, five cubits [is] its height, and it taketh hold of the house by cedar-wood.
And the word of Jehovah is unto Solomon, saying,
'This house that thou art building — if thou dost walk in My statutes, and My judgments dost do, yea, hast done all My commands, to walk in them, then I have established My word with thee, which I spake unto David thy father,
and have tabernacled in the midst of the sons of Israel, and do not forsake My people Israel.'
And Solomon buildeth the house and completeth it;
and he buildeth the walls of the house within with beams of cedar, from the floor of the house unto the walls of the ceiling; he hath overlaid with wood the inside, and covereth the floor of the house with ribs of fir.
And he buildeth the twenty cubits on the sides of the house with ribs of cedar, from the floor unto the walls; and he buildeth for it within, for the oracle, for the holy of holies.
And forty by the cubit was the house, it [is] the temple before [it].
And the cedar for the house within [is] carvings of knobs and openings of flowers; the whole [is] cedar, there is not a stone seen.
And the oracle in the midst of the house within he hath prepared, to put there the ark of the covenant of Jehovah.
And before the oracle [is] twenty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, and twenty cubits [is] its height; and he overlayeth it with gold refined, and overlayeth the altar with cedar.
And Solomon overlayeth the house within with gold refined, and causeth [it] to pass over in chains of gold before the oracle, and overlayeth it with gold.
And the whole of the house he hath overlaid with gold, till the completion of all the house; and the whole of the altar that the oracle hath, he hath overlaid with gold.
And he maketh within the oracle two cherubs, of the oil-tree, ten cubits [is] their height;
and five cubits [is] the one wing of the cherub, and five cubits the second wing of the cherub, ten cubits from the ends of its wings even unto the ends of its wings;
and ten by the cubit [is] the second cherub, one measure and one form [are] to the two cherubs,
the height of the one cherub [is] ten by the cubit, and so [is] the second cherub;
and he setteth the cherubs in the midst of the inner house, and they spread out the wings of the cherubs, and a wing of the one cometh against the wall, and a wing of the second cherub is coming against the second wall, and their wings [are] unto the midst of the house, coming wing against wing;
and he overlayeth the cherubs with gold,
and all the walls of the house round about he hath carved with openings of carvings, cherubs, and palm trees, and openings of flowers, within and without.
And the floor of the house he hath overlaid with gold, within and without;
as to the opening of the oracle, he made doors of the oil-tree; the lintel, side-posts, a fifth.
And the two doors [are] of the oil-tree, and he hath carved upon them carvings of cherubs, and palm-trees, and openings of flowers, and overlaid with gold, and he causeth the gold to go down on the cherubs and on the palm-trees.
And so he hath made for the opening of the temple, side-posts of the oil-tree, from the fourth.
And the two doors [are] of fir-tree, the two sides of the one door are revolving, and the two hangings of the second door are revolving.
And he hath carved cherubs, and palms, and openings of flowers, and overlaid with straightened gold the graved work.
And he buildeth the inner court, three rows of hewn work, and a row of beams of cedar.
In the fourth year hath the house of Jehovah been founded, in the month Zif,
and in the eleventh year, in the month Bul — [that is] the eighth month — hath the house been finished in all its matters, and in all its ordinances, and he buildeth it seven years.
And his own house hath Solomon built thirteen years, and he finisheth all his house.
And he buildeth the house of the forest of Lebanon; a hundred cubits [is] its length, and fifty cubits its breadth, and thirty cubits its height, on four rows of cedar pillars, and cedar-beams on the pillars;
and [it is] covered with cedar above, on the sides that [are] on the forty and five pillars, fifteen in the row.
And windows [are] in three rows, and sight [is] over-against sight three times.
And all the openings and the side-posts [are] square — windows; and sight [is] over-against sight three times.
And the porch of the pillars he hath made; fifty cubits its length, and thirty cubits its breadth, and the porch [is] before them, and pillars and a thick place [are] before them.
And the porch of the throne where he judgeth — the porch of judgment — he hath made, and [it is] covered with cedar from the floor unto the floor.
As to his house where he dwelleth, the other court [is] within the porch — as this work it hath been; and a house he maketh for the daughter of Pharaoh — whom Solomon hath taken — like this porch.
All these [are] of precious stone, according to the measures of hewn work, sawn with a saw, within and without, even from the foundation unto the coping, and at the outside, unto the great court.
And the foundation [is] of precious stone, great stones, stones of ten cubits, and stones of eight cubits;
and above [are] precious stone, according to the measures of hewn work, and cedar;
and the great court round about [is] three rows of hewn work, and a row of cedar-beams, even for the inner court of the house of Jehovah, and for the porch of the house.
And king Solomon sendeth and taketh Hiram out of Tyre —
he [is] son of a woman, a widow, of the tribe of Naphtali, and his father a man of Tyre, a worker in brass, and he is filled with the wisdom and the understanding, and the knowledge to do all work in brass — and he cometh unto king Solomon, and doth all his work.
And he formeth the two pillars of brass; eighteen cubits [is] the height of the one pillar, and a cord of twelve cubits doth compass the second pillar.
And two chapiters he hath made to put on the tops of the pillars, cast in brass; five cubits the height of the one chapiter, and five cubits the height of the second chapiter.
Nets of net-work, wreaths of chain-work [are] for the chapiters that [are] on the top of the pillars, seven for the one chapiter, and seven for the second chapiter.
And he maketh the pillars, and two rows round about on the one net-work, to cover the chapiters that [are] on the top, with the pomegranates, and so he hath made for the second chapiter.
And the chapiters that [are] on the top of the pillars [are] of lily-work in the porch, four cubits;
and the chapiters on the two pillars also above, over-against the protuberance that [is] beside the net; and the pomegranates [are] two hundred, in rows round about on the second chapiter.
And he raiseth up the pillars for the porch of the temple, and he raiseth up the right pillar, and calleth its name Jachin, and he raiseth up the left pillar, and calleth its name Boaz;
and on the top of the pillars [is] lily-work; and the work of the pillars [is] completed.
And he maketh the molten sea, ten by the cubit from its edge unto its edge; [it is] round all about, and five by the cubit [is] its height, and a line of thirty by the cubit doth compass it round about;
and knops beneath its brim round about are compassing it, ten by the cubit, going round the sea round about; in two rows [are] the knops, cast in its being cast.
It is standing on twelve oxen, three facing the north, and three facing the west, and three facing the south, and three facing the east, and the sea [is] upon them above, and all their hinder parts [are] inward.
And its thickness [is] an handbreadth, and its edge as the work of the edge of a cup, flowers of lilies; two thousand baths it containeth.
And he maketh the ten bases of brass; four by the cubit [is] the length of the one base, and four by the cubit its breadth, and three by the cubit its height.
And this [is] the work of the base: they have borders, and the borders [are] between the joinings;
and on the borders that [are] between the joinings [are] lions, oxen, and cherubs, and on the joinings a base above, and beneath the lions and the oxen [are] additions — sloping work.
And four wheels of brass [are] to the one base, and axles of brass; and its four corners have shoulders — under the laver [are] the molten shoulders, beside each addition.
And its mouth within the chapiter and above [is] by the cubit, and its mouth [is] round, the work of the base, a cubit and half a cubit; and also on its mouth [are] carvings and their borders, square, not round.
And the four wheels [are] under the borders, and the spokes of the wheels [are] in the base, and the height of the one wheel [is] a cubit and half a cubit.
And the work of the wheels [is] as the work of the wheel of a chariot, their spokes, and their axles, and their felloes, and their naves; the whole [is] molten.
And four shoulders [are] unto the four corners of the one base; out of the base [are] its shoulders.
And in the top of the base [is] the half of a cubit in the height all round about; and on the top of the base its spokes and its borders [are] of the same.
And he openeth on the tablets of its spokes, and on its borders, cherubs, lions, and palm-trees, according to the void space of each, and additions round about.
Thus he hath made the ten bases; one casting, one measure, one form, have they all.
And he maketh ten lavers of brass; forty baths doth the one laver contain, four by the cubit [is] the one laver, one laver on the one base [is] to the ten bases;
and he putteth the five bases on the right side of the house, and five on the left side of the house, and the sea he hath put on the right side of the house, eastward — over-against the south.
And Hiram maketh the lavers, and the shovels, and the bowls; and Hiram completeth to do all the work that he made for king Solomon, [for] the house of Jehovah;
pillars two, and bowls of the chapiters that [are] on the top of the pillars two, and the nets two, to cover the two bowls of the chapiters that [are] on the top of the pillars;
and the pomegranates four hundred for the two nets, two rows of pomegranates for the one net, to cover the two bowls of the chapiters that [are] on the front of the pillars;
and the ten bases, and the ten lavers on the bases;
and the one sea, the twelve oxen under the sea,
and the pots, and the shovels, and the bowls; and all these vessels, that Hiram hath made to king Solomon [for] the house of Jehovah, [are] of brass — polished.
In the circuit of the Jordan hath the king cast them, in the thick soil of the ground, between Succoth and Zarthan.
And Solomon placeth the whole of the vessels; because of the very great abundance, the weight of the brass hath not been searched out.
And Solomon maketh all the vessels that [are] in the house of Jehovah: the altar of gold, and the table — on which [is] the bread of the Presence — of gold,
and the candlesticks, five on the right, and five on the left, before the oracle, of refined gold, and the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, of gold,
and the basins, and the snuffers, and the bowls, and the spoons, and the censers, of refined gold, and the hinges for the doors of the inner-house, for the holy of holies, for the doors of the house of the temple, of gold.
And it is complete — all the work that king Solomon hath made [for] the house of Jehovah, and Solomon bringeth in the sanctified things of David his father; the silver, and the gold, and the vessels he hath put in the treasuries of the house of Jehovah.
Then doth Solomon assemble the elders of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, princes of the fathers of the sons of Israel, unto king Solomon, to Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah from the city of David — it [is] Zion;
and all the men of Israel are assembled unto king Solomon, in the month of Ethanim, in the festival — [is] the seventh month.
And all the elders of Israel come in, and the priests lift up the ark,
and bring up the ark of Jehovah, and the tent of meeting, and all the holy vessels that [are] in the tent, yea, the priests and the Levites bring them up.
And king Solomon and all the company of Israel who are met unto him [are] with him before the ark, sacrificing sheep and oxen, that are not counted nor numbered for multitude.
And the priests bring in the ark of the covenant of Jehovah unto its place, unto the oracle of the house, unto the holy of holies, unto the place of the wings of the cherubs;
for the cherubs are spreading forth two wings unto the place of the ark, and the cherubs cover over the ark, and over its staves from above;
and they lengthen the staves, and the heads of the staves are seen from the holy [place] on the front of the oracle, and are not seen without, and they are there unto this day.
There is nothing in the ark, only the two tables of stone which Moses put there in Horeb, when Jehovah covenanted with the sons of Israel in their going out of the land of Egypt.
And it cometh to pass, in the going out of the priests from the holy [place], that the cloud hath filled the house of Jehovah,
and the priests have not been able to stand to minister because of the cloud, for the honour of Jehovah hath filled the house of Jehovah.
Then said Solomon, 'Jehovah hath said to dwell in thick darkness;
I have surely built a house of habitation for Thee; a fixed place for Thine abiding to the ages.'
And the king turneth round his face, and blesseth the whole assembly of Israel; and all the assembly of Israel is standing.
And he saith, 'Blessed [is] Jehovah, God of Israel, who spake by His mouth with David my father, and by His hand hath fulfilled [it], saying,
From the day that I brought out My people, even Israel, from Egypt, I have not fixed on a city out of all the tribes of Israel, to build a house for My name being there; and I fix on David to be over My people Israel.
'And it is with the heart of David my father to build a house for the name of Jehovah, God of Israel,
and Jehovah saith unto David my father, Because that it hath been with thy heart to build a house for My name, thou hast done well that it hath been with thy heart;
only, thou dost not build the house, but thy son who is coming out from thy loins, he doth build the house for My name.
'And Jehovah doth establish His word which He spake, and I am risen up instead of David my father, and sit on the throne of Israel, as Jehovah spake, and build the house for the name of Jehovah, God of Israel,
and set there a place for the ark, where [is] the covenant of Jehovah which He made with our fathers in His bringing them out from the land of Egypt.'
And Solomon standeth before the altar of Jehovah, over-against all the assembly of Israel, and spreadeth his hands towards the heavens,
and saith, 'Jehovah, God of Israel, there is not a God like Thee, in the heavens above, and on the earth beneath, keeping the covenant and the kindness for Thy servants, those walking before Thee with all their heart,
who hast kept for Thy servant David my father that which Thou spakest to him; yea, Thou speakest with Thy mouth, and with Thy hand hast fulfilled [it], as [at] this day.
'And now, Jehovah, God of Israel, keep for Thy servant David my father that which Thou spakest to him, saying, There is not cut off to thee a man from before Me, sitting on the throne of Israel — only, if thy sons watch their way, to walk before Me as thou hast walked before Me.
'And now, O God of Israel, let it be established, I pray Thee, Thy word which Thou hast spoken to Thy servant, David my father.
But, is it true? — God dwelleth on the earth! lo, the heavens, and the heavens of the heavens do not contain Thee, how much less this house which I have builded!
'Then thou hast turned unto the prayer of Thy servant, and unto his supplication, O Jehovah my God, to hearken unto the cry and unto the prayer which Thy servant is praying before Thee to-day,
for Thine eyes being open towards this house night and day, towards the place of which Thou hast said, My Name is there; to hearken unto the prayer which Thy servant prayeth towards this place.
'Then Thou hast hearkened unto the supplication of Thy servant, and of Thy people Israel, which they pray towards this place; yea, Thou dost hearken in the place of Thy dwelling, in the heavens — and Thou hast hearkened, and hast forgiven,
that which a man sinneth against his neighbour, and he hath lifted up upon him an oath to cause him to swear, and the oath hath come in before Thine altar in this house,
then Thou dost hear in the heavens, and hast done, and hast judged Thy servants, to declare wicked the wicked, to put his way on his head, and to declare righteous the righteous, to give him according to his righteousness.
'In Thy people Israel being smitten before an enemy, because they sin against Thee, and they have turned back unto Thee, and have confessed Thy name, and prayed, and made supplication unto Thee in this house,
then thou dost hear in the heavens, and hast forgiven the sin of Thy people Israel, and brought them back unto the ground that Thou gavest to their fathers.
'In the heavens being restrained, and there is no rain, because they sin against Thee, and they have prayed towards this place, and confessed Thy name, and from their sin turn back, for Thou dost afflict them,
then Thou dost hear in the heavens, and hast forgiven the sin of Thy servants, and of Thy people Israel, for Thou directest them the good way in which they go, and hast given rain on Thy land which Thou hast given to Thy people for inheritance.
'Famine — when it is in the land; pestilence — when it is; blasting, mildew, locust; caterpillar — when it is; when its enemy hath distressed it in the land [in] its gates, any plague, any sickness, —
any prayer, any supplication that [is] of any man of all Thy people Israel, who know each the plague of his own heart, and hath spread his hands towards this house,
then Thou dost hear in the heavens, the settled place of Thy dwelling, and hast forgiven, and hast done, and hast given to each according to all his ways, whose heart Thou knowest, (for Thou hast known — Thyself alone — the heart of all the sons of man),
so that they fear Thee all the days that they are living on the face of the ground that Thou hast given to our fathers.
'And also, unto the stranger who is not of Thy people Israel, and hath come from a land afar off for Thy name's sake —
(for they hear of Thy great name, and of Thy strong hand, and of Thy stretched-out arm) — and he hath come in and prayed towards this house,
Thou dost hear in the heavens, the settled place of Thy dwelling, and hast done according to all that the stranger calleth unto Thee for, in order that all the peoples of the earth may know Thy name, to fear Thee like Thy people Israel, and to know that Thy name hath been called on this house which I have builded.
'When Thy people doth go out to battle against its enemy, in the way that Thou dost send them, and they have prayed unto Jehovah the way of the city which thou hast fixed on, and of the house which I have builded for Thy name;
then Thou hast heard in the heavens their prayer and their supplication, and hast maintained their cause.
'When they sin against Thee (for there is not a man who sinneth not), and Thou hast been angry with them, and hast given them up before an enemy, and they have taken captive their captivity unto the land of the enemy far off or near;
and they have turned [it] back unto their heart in the land whither they have been taken captive, and have turned back, and made supplication unto Thee, in the land of their captors, saying, We have sinned and done perversely — we have done wickedly;
yea, they have turned back unto Thee, with all their heart, and with all their soul, in the land of their enemies who have taken them captive, and have prayed unto Thee the way of their land, which Thou gavest to their fathers, the city which Thou hast chosen, and the house which I have builded for Thy name:
'Then Thou hast heard in the heavens, the settled place of Thy dwelling, their prayer and their supplication, and hast maintained their cause,
and hast forgiven Thy people who have sinned against Thee, even all their transgressions which they have transgressed against Thee, and hast given them mercies before their captors, and they have had mercy [on] them —
(for Thy people and Thy inheritance [are] they, whom Thou didst bring out of Egypt, out of the midst of the furnace of iron) —
for Thine eyes being open unto the supplication of Thy servant, and unto the supplication of Thy people Israel, to hearken unto them in all they call unto Thee for;
for Thou hast separated them to Thyself for an inheritance, out of all the peoples of the earth, as Thou didst speak by the hand of Moses Thy servant, in Thy bringing out our fathers from Egypt, O Lord Jehovah.'
And it cometh to pass, at Solomon's finishing to pray unto Jehovah all this prayer and supplication, he hath risen from before the altar of Jehovah, from bending on his knees, and his hands spread out to the heavens,
and he standeth and blesseth all the assembly of Israel [with] a loud voice, saying,
'Blessed [is] Jehovah who hath given rest to His people Israel, according to all that He hath spoken; there hath not fallen one word of all His good word, which He spake by the hand of Moses his servant.
'Jehovah our God is with us as He hath been with our fathers; He doth not forsake us nor leave us;
to incline our heart unto Himself, to walk in all His ways, and to keep His commands, and His statutes, and His judgments, which He commanded our fathers;
and these my words with which I have made supplication before Jehovah, are near unto Jehovah our God by day and by night, to maintain the cause of His servant, and the cause of His people Israel, the matter of a day in its day;
for all the peoples of the earth knowing that Jehovah, He [is] God; there is none else;
and your heart hath been perfect with Jehovah our God, to walk in His statutes, and to keep His commands, as [at] this day.'
And the king and all Israel with him are sacrificing a sacrifice before Jehovah;
and Solomon sacrificeth the sacrifice of peace-offerings, which he hath sacrificed to Jehovah, oxen, twenty and two thousand, and sheep, a hundred and twenty thousand; and the king and all the sons of Israel dedicate the house of Jehovah.
On that day hath the king sanctified the middle of the court that [is] before the house of Jehovah, for he hath made there the burnt-offering, and the present, and the fat of the peace-offerings; for the altar of brass that [is] before Jehovah [is] too little to contain the burnt-offering, and the present, and the fat of the peace-offerings.
And Solomon maketh, at that time, the festival — and all Israel with him, a great assembly from the entering in of Hamath unto the brook of Egypt — before Jehovah our God, seven days and seven days; fourteen days.
On the eighth day he hath sent the people away, and they bless the king, and go to their tents, rejoicing and glad of heart for all the good that Jehovah hath done to David His servant, and to Israel His people.
And it cometh to pass, at Solomon's finishing to build the house of Jehovah, and the house of the king, and all the desire of Solomon that he delighted to do,
that Jehovah appeareth unto Solomon a second time, as He appeared unto him in Gibeon,
and Jehovah saith unto him, 'I have heard thy prayer and thy supplication with which thou hast made supplication before Me; I have hallowed this house that thou hast built to put My name there — unto the age, and Mine eyes and My heart have been there all the days.
'And thou — if thou dost walk before Me as David thy father walked, in simplicity of heart, and in uprightness, to do according to all that I have commanded thee — My statutes and My judgments thou dost keep —
then I have established the throne of thy kingdom over Israel — to the age, as I spake unto David thy father, saying, There is not cut off to thee a man from [being] on the throne of Israel.
'If ye at all turn back — you and your sons — from after Me, and keep not My commands — My statutes, that I have set before you, and ye have gone and served other gods, and bowed yourselves to them,
then I have cut off Israel from the face of the ground that I have given to them, and the house that I have hallowed for My name I send away from My presence, and Israel hath been for a simile and for a byword among all the peoples;
as to this house, [that] is high, every one passing by it is astonished, and hath hissed, and they have said, Wherefore hath Jehovah done thus to this land and to this house?
and they have said, Because that they have forsaken Jehovah their God, who brought out their fathers from the land of Egypt, and they lay hold on other gods, and bow themselves to them, and serve them; therefore hath Jehovah brought in upon them all this evil.'
And it cometh to pass, at the end of twenty years, that Solomon hath built the two houses, the house of Jehovah, and the house of the king.
Hiram king of Tyre hath assisted Solomon with cedar-trees, and with fir-trees, and with gold, according to all his desire; then doth king Solomon give to Hiram twenty cities in the land of Galilee.
And Hiram cometh out from Tyre to see the cities that Solomon hath given to him, and they have not been right in his eyes,
and he saith, 'What [are] these cities that thou hast given to me, my brother?' and one calleth them the land of Cabul unto this day.
And Hiram sendeth to the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold.
And this [is] the matter of the tribute that king Solomon hath lifted up, to build the house of Jehovah, and his own house, and Millo, and the wall of Jerusalem, and Hazor, and Megiddo, and Gezer,
(Pharaoh king of Egypt hath gone up and doth capture Gezer, and doth burn it with fire, and the Canaanite who is dwelling in the city he hath slain, and giveth it [with] presents to his daughter, wife of Solomon.)
And Solomon buildeth Gezer, and Beth-Horon the lower,
and Baalath, and Tadmor in the wilderness, in the land;
and all the cities of stores that king Solomon hath, and the cities of the chariots, and the cities of the horsemen, and the desire of Solomon that he desired to build in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and in all the land of his dominion.
The whole of the people that is left of the Amorite, the Hittite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, who [are] not of the sons of Israel —
their sons who are left behind them in the land, whom the sons of Israel have not been able to devote — he hath even lifted up [on] them a tribute of service unto this day.
And out of the sons of Israel Solomon hath not appointed a servant, for they [are] the men of war, and his servants, and his heads, and his captains, and the heads of his chariots, and his horsemen.
These [are] the heads of the officers who [are] over the work of Solomon, fifty and five hundred, those ruling among the people who are labouring in the work.
Only, the daughter of Pharaoh went up out of the city of David unto her house that [Solomon] built for her; then he built Millo.
And Solomon caused to ascend, three times in a year, burnt-offerings and peace-offerings on the altar that he built to Jehovah, and he perfumed it with that which [is] before Jehovah, and finished the house.
And a navy hath king Solomon made in Ezion-Geber, that is beside Eloth, on the edge of the Sea of Suph, in the land of Edom.
And Hiram sendeth in the navy his servants, shipmen knowing the sea, with servants of Solomon,
and they come in to Ophir and take thence gold, four hundred and twenty talents, and bring [it] in unto king Solomon.
And the queen of Sheba is hearing of the fame of Solomon concerning the name of Jehovah, and cometh to try him with enigmas,
and she cometh to Jerusalem, with a very great company, camels bearing spices, and very much gold, and precious stone, and she cometh unto Solomon, and speaketh unto him all that hath been with her heart.
And Solomon declareth to her all her matters — there hath not been a thing hid from the king that he hath not declared to her.
And the queen of Sheba seeth all the wisdom of Solomon, and the house that he built,
and the food of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the standing of his ministers, and their clothing, and his butlers, and his burnt-offering that he causeth to ascend in the house of Jehovah, and there hath not been in her any more spirit.
And she saith unto the king, 'True hath been the word that I heard in my land, concerning thy matters and thy wisdom;
and I gave no credence to the words till that I have come, and my eyes see, and lo, it was not declared to me — the half; thou hast added wisdom and goodness unto the report that I heard.
O the happiness of thy men, O the happiness of thy servants — these — who are standing before thee continually, who are hearing thy wisdom!
Jehovah thy God is blessed who delighted in thee, to put thee on the throne of Israel; in Jehovah's loving Israel to the age He doth set thee for king, to do judgment and righteousness.
And she giveth to the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold, and spices very many, and precious stone; there came not like that spice any more for abundance that the queen of Sheba gave to king Solomon.
And also, the navy of Hiram that bore gold from Ophir, brought in from Ophir almug-trees very many, and precious stone;
and the king maketh the almug-trees a support for the house of Jehovah, and for the house of the king, and harps and psalteries for singers; there have not come such almug-trees, nor have there been seen [such] unto this day.
And king Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all her desire that she asked, apart from that which he gave to her as a memorial of king Solomon, and she turneth and goeth to her land, she and her servants.
And the weight of the gold that hath come to Solomon in one year is six hundred sixty and six talents of gold,
apart from [that of] the tourists, and of the traffic of the merchants, and of all the kings of Arabia, and of the governors of the land.
And king Solomon maketh two hundred targets of alloyed gold — six hundred of gold go up on the one target;
and three hundred shields of alloyed gold — three pounds of gold go up on the one shield; and the king putteth them [in] the house of the forest of Lebanon.
And the king maketh a great throne of ivory, and overlayeth it with refined gold;
six steps hath the throne, and a round top [is] to the throne behind it, and hands [are] on this [side] and on that, unto the place of the sitting, and two lions are standing near the hands,
and twelve lions are standing there on the six steps, on this [side] and on that; it hath not been made so for any kingdom.
And all the drinking vessels of king Solomon [are] of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon [are] of refined gold — there are none of silver; it was not reckoned in the days of Solomon for anything,
for a navy of Tarshish hath the king at sea with a navy of Hiram; once in three years cometh the navy of Tarshish, bearing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.
And king Solomon is greater than any of the kings of the earth for riches and for wisdom,
and all the earth is seeking the presence of Solomon, to hear his wisdom that God hath put into his heart,
and they are bringing each his present, vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and garments, and armour, and spices, horses, and mules, the matter of a year in a year.
And Solomon gathereth chariots, and horsemen, and he hath a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, and he placeth them in the cities of the chariot, and with the king in Jerusalem.
And the king maketh the silver in Jerusalem as stones, and the cedars he hath made as the sycamores that [are] in the low country, for abundance.
And the outgoing of the horses that king Solomon hath [is] from Egypt, and from Keveh; merchants of the king take from Keveh at a price;
and a chariot cometh up and cometh out of Egypt for six hundred silverlings, and a horse for fifty and a hundred, and so for all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of Aram; by their hand they bring out.
And king Solomon hath loved many strange women, and the daughter of Pharaoh, females of Moab, Ammon, Edom, Zidon, [and] of the Hittites,
of the nations of which Jehovah said unto the sons of Israel, 'Ye do not go in to them, and they do not go in to you; surely they turn aside your heart after their gods;' to them hath Solomon cleaved for love.
And he hath women, princesses, seven hundred, and concubines three hundred; and his wives turn aside his heart.
And it cometh to pass, at the time of the old age of Solomon, his wives have turned aside his heart after other gods, and his heart hath not been perfect with Jehovah his God, like the heart of David his father.
And Solomon goeth after Ashtoreth god[dess] of the Zidonians, and after Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites;
and Solomon doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, and hath not been fully after Jehovah, like David his father.
Then doth Solomon build a high place for Chemosh the abomination of Moab, in the hill that [is] on the front of Jerusalem, and for Molech the abomination of the sons of Ammon;
and so he hath done for all his strange women, who are perfuming and sacrificing to their gods.
And Jehovah sheweth Himself angry with Solomon, for his heart hath turned aside from Jehovah, God of Israel, who had appeared unto him twice,
and given a charge unto him concerning this thing, not to go after other gods; and he hath not kept that which Jehovah commanded,
and Jehovah saith to Solomon, 'Because that this hath been with thee, and thou hast not kept My covenant and My statutes that I charged upon thee, I surely rend the kingdom from thee, and have given it to thy servant.
'Only, in thy days I do it not, for the sake of David thy father; out of the hand of thy son I rend it;
only all the kingdom I do not rend away; one tribe I give to thy son, for the sake of David My servant, and for the sake of Jerusalem, that I have chosen.'
And Jehovah raiseth up an adversary to Solomon, Hadad the Edomite; of the seed of the king [is] he in Edom;
and it cometh to pass, in David's being with Edom, in the going up of Joab head of the host to bury the slain, that he smiteth every male in Edom —
for six months did Joab abide there, and all Israel, till the cutting off of every male in Edom —
and Hadad fleeth, he and certain Edomites, of the servants of his father, with him, to go in to Egypt, and Hadad [is] a little youth,
and they rise out of Midian, and come into Paran, and take men with them out of Paran, and come in to Egypt, unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he giveth to him a house, and bread hath commanded for him, and land hath given to him.
And Hadad findeth grace in the eyes of Pharaoh exceedingly, and he giveth to him a wife, the sister of his own wife, sister of Tahpenes the mistress;
and the sister of Tahpenes beareth to him Genubath his son, and Tahpenes weaneth him within the house of Pharaoh, and Genubath is in the house of Pharaoh in the midst of the sons of Pharaoh.
And Hadad hath heard in Egypt that David hath lain with his fathers, and that Joab head of the host is dead, and Hadad saith unto Pharaoh, 'Send me away, and I go unto my land.'
And Pharaoh saith to him, 'But, what art thou lacking with me, that lo, thou art seeking to go unto thine own land?' and he saith, 'Nay, but thou dost certainly send me away.'
And God raiseth to him an adversary, Rezon son of Eliadah, who hath fled from Hadadezer king of Zobah, his lord,
and gathereth unto himself men, and is head of a troop in David's slaying them, and they go to Damascus, and dwell in it, and reign in Damascus;
and he is an adversary to Israel all the days of Solomon, (besides the evil that Hadad [did]), and he cutteth off in Israel, and reigneth over Aram.
And Jeroboam son of Nebat, an Ephrathite of Zereda — the name of whose mother [is] Zeruah, a widow woman — servant to Solomon, he also lifteth up a hand against the king;
and this [is] the thing [for] which he lifted up a hand against the king: Solomon built Millo — he shut up the breach of the city of David his father,
and the man Jeroboam [is] mighty in valour, and Solomon seeth the young man that he is doing business, and appointeth him over all the burden of the house of Joseph.
And it cometh to pass, at that time, that Jeroboam hath gone out from Jerusalem, and Ahijah the Shilonite, the prophet, findeth him in the way, and he is covering himself with a new garment; and both of them [are] by themselves in a field,
and Ahijah layeth hold on the new garment that [is] on him, and rendeth it — twelve pieces,
and saith to Jeroboam, 'Take to thee ten pieces, for thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, lo, I am rending the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and have given to thee the ten tribes,
and the one tribe he hath for My servant David's sake, and for Jerusalem's sake, the city which I have fixed on, out of all the tribes of Israel.
'Because they have forsaken Me, and bow themselves to Ashtoreth, god[dess] of the Zidonians, to Chemosh god of Moab, and to Milcom god of the sons of Ammon, and have not walked in My ways, to do that which [is] right in Mine eyes, and My statutes and My judgments, like David his father.
'And I do not take the whole of the kingdom out of his hand, for prince I make him all days of his life, for the sake of David My servant whom I chose, who kept My commands and My statutes;
and I have taken the kingdom out of the hand of his son, and given it to thee — the ten tribes;
and to his son I give one tribe, for there being a lamp to David My servant all the days before Me in Jerusalem, the city that I have chosen to Myself to put My name there.
'And thee I take, and thou hast reigned over all that thy soul desireth, and thou hast been king over Israel;
and it hath been, if thou dost hear all that I command thee, and hast walked in My ways, and done that which is right in Mine eyes, to keep My statutes and My commands, as did David My servant, that I have been with thee, and have built for thee a stedfast house, as I built for David, and have given to thee Israel,
and I humble the seed of David for this; only, not all the days.'
And Solomon seeketh to put Jeroboam to death, and Jeroboam riseth and fleeth to Egypt, unto Shishak king of Egypt, and he is in Egypt till the death of Solomon.
And the rest of the matters of Solomon, and all that he did, and his wisdom, are they not written on the book of the matters of Solomon?
And the days that Solomon hath reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel [are] forty years,
and Solomon lieth with his fathers, and is buried in the city of David his father, and reign doth Rehoboam his son in his stead.
And Rehoboam goeth to Shechem, for to Shechem hath all Israel come to make him king.
And it cometh to pass, at Jeroboam son of Nebat's hearing (and he [is] yet in Egypt where he hath fled from the presence of Solomon the king, and Jeroboam dwelleth in Egypt),
that they send and call for him; and they come — Jeroboam and all the assembly of Israel — and speak unto Rehoboam, saying,
'Thy father made hard our yoke, and thou, now, make light [some] of the hard service of thy father, and his heavy yoke that he put upon us, and we serve thee.'
And he saith unto them, 'Go — yet three days, and come back unto me;' and the people go.
And king Rehoboam consulteth with the elders who have been standing in the presence of Solomon his father, in his being alive, saying, 'How are ye counselling to answer this people?'
And they speak unto him, saying, 'If, to-day, thou art servant to this people, and hast served them, and answered them, and spoken unto them good words, then they have been to thee servants all the days.'
And he forsaketh the counsel of the elders which they counselled him, and consulteth with the lads who have grown up with him, who are standing before him;
and he saith unto them, 'What are ye counselling, and we answer this people, who have spoken unto me, saying, Lighten [somewhat] of the yoke that thy father put upon us?'
And they speak unto him — the lads who had grown up with him — saying, 'Thus dost thou say to this people who have spoken unto thee, saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy, and thou, make [it] light upon us; thus dost thou speak unto them, My little [finger] is thicker than the loins of my father;
and now, my father laid on you a heavy yoke, and I add to your yoke; my father chastised you with whips, and I — I chastise you with scorpions.'
And they come — Jeroboam and all the people — unto Rehoboam, on the third day, as the king had spoken, saying, 'Come back unto me on the third day.'
And the king answereth the people sharply, and forsaketh the counsel of the elders which they counselled him,
and speaketh unto them, according to the counsel of the lads, saying, 'My father made your yoke heavy, and I add to your yoke; my father chastised you with whips, and I — I chastise you with scorpions;'
and the king hearkened not unto the people, for the revolution was from Jehovah, in order to establish His word that Jehovah spake by the hand of Ahijah the Shilonite unto Jeroboam son of Nebat.
And all Israel see that the king hath not hearkened unto them, and the people send the king back word, saying, 'What portion have we in David? yea, there is no inheritance in the son of Jesse; to thy tents, O Israel; now see thy house, O David!' and Israel goeth to its tents.
As to the sons of Israel, those dwelling in the cities of Judah — over them reign doth Rehoboam.
And king Rehoboam sendeth Adoram who [is] over the tribute, and all Israel cast at him stones, and he dieth; and king Rehoboam hath strengthened himself to go up into a chariot to flee to Jerusalem;
and Israel transgresseth against the house of David unto this day.
And it cometh to pass, at all Israel's hearing that Jeroboam hath returned, that they send and call him unto the company, and cause him to reign over all Israel; none hath been after the house of David save the tribe of Judah alone.
And Rehoboam cometh to Jerusalem, and assembleth all the house of Judah and the tribe of Benjamin, a hundred and eighty thousand chosen warriors, to fight with the house of Israel, to bring back the kingdom to Rehoboam son of Solomon.
And the word of God is unto Shemaiah a man of God, saying,
'Speak unto Rehoboam son of Solomon, king of Judah, and unto all the house of Judah and Benjamin, and the rest of the people, saying,
Thus said Jehovah, Ye do not go up nor fight with your brethren the sons of Israel; turn back each to his house, for from Me hath this thing been;' and they hear the word of Jehovah, and turn back to go according to the word of Jehovah.
And Jeroboam buildeth Shechem in the hill-country of Ephraim, and dwelleth in it, and goeth out thence, and buildeth Penuel;
and Jeroboam saith in his heart, 'Now doth the kingdom turn back to the house of David —
if this people go up to make sacrifices in the house of Jehovah in Jerusalem, then hath the heart of this people turned back unto their lord, unto Rehoboam king of Judah, and they have slain me, and turned back unto Rehoboam king of Judah.'
And the king taketh counsel, and maketh two calves of gold, and saith unto them, 'Enough to you of going up to Jerusalem; lo, thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.'
And he setteth the one in Beth-El, and the other he hath put in Dan,
and this thing becometh a sin, and the people go before the one — unto Dan.
And he maketh the house of high places, and maketh priests of the extremities of the people, who were not of the sons of Levi;
and Jeroboam maketh a festival in the eighth month, in the fifteenth day of the month, like the festival that [is] in Judah, and he offereth on the altar — so did he in Beth-El — to sacrifice to the calves which he made, and he hath appointed in Beth-El the priests of the high places that he made.
And he offereth up on the altar that he made in Beth-El, on the fifteenth day of the eighth month, in the month that he devised of his own heart, and he maketh a festival to the sons of Israel, and offereth on the altar — to make perfume.
And lo, a man of God hath come from Judah, by the word of Jehovah, unto Beth-El, and Jeroboam is standing by the altar — to make perfume;
and he calleth against the altar, by the word of Jehovah, and saith, 'Altar! altar! thus said Jehovah, Lo, a son is born to the house of David — Josiah his name — and he hath sacrificed on thee the priests of the high places who are making perfume on thee, and bones of man are burnt on thee.'
And he hath given on that day a sign, saying, 'This [is] the sign that Jehovah hath spoken, Lo, the altar is rent, and the ashes poured forth that [are] on it.'
And it cometh to pass, at the king's hearing the word of the man of God that he calleth against the altar in Beth-El, that Jeroboam putteth forth his hand from off the altar, saying, 'Catch him;' and his hand is dried up that he hath put forth against him, and he is not able to bring it back unto him,
and the altar is rent, and the ashes poured forth from the altar, according to the sign that the man of God had given by the word of Jehovah.
And the king answereth and saith unto the man of God, 'Appease, I pray thee, the face of Jehovah thy God, and pray for me, and my hand doth come back unto me;' and the man of God appeaseth the face of Jehovah, and the hand of the king cometh back unto him, and it is as at the beginning.
And the king speaketh unto the man of God, 'Come in with me to the house, and refresh thyself, and I give to thee a gift.'
And the man of God saith unto the king, 'If thou dost give to me the half of thine house, I do not go in with thee, nor do I eat bread, nor do I drink water, in this place;
for so He commanded me by the word of Jehovah, saying, Thou dost not eat bread nor drink water, nor turn back in the way that thou hast come.'
And he goeth on in another way, and hath not turned back in the way in which he came in unto Beth-El.
And a certain aged prophet is dwelling in Beth-El, and his son cometh and recounteth to him all the deed that the man of God hath done to-day in Beth-El, the words that he hath spoken unto the king, — yea, they recount them to their father.
And their father saith unto them, 'Where [is] this — the way he hath gone?' and his sons see the way that the man of God hath gone who came from Judah.
And he saith unto his sons, 'Saddle for me the ass,' and they saddle for him the ass, and he rideth on it,
and goeth after the man of God, and findeth him sitting under the oak, and saith unto him, 'Art thou the man of God who hast come from Judah?' and he saith, 'I [am].'
And he saith unto him, 'Come with me to the house, and eat bread.'
And he saith, 'I am not able to turn back with thee, and to go in with thee, nor do I eat bread or drink with thee water in this place,
for a word [is] unto me by the word of Jehovah, Thou dost not eat bread nor drink there water, thou dost not turn back to go in the way in which thou camest.'
And he saith to him, 'I also [am] a prophet like thee, and a messenger spake unto me by the word of Jehovah, saying, Bring him back with thee unto thy house, and he doth eat bread and drink water;' — he hath lied to him.
And he turneth back with him, and eateth bread in his house, and drinketh water.
And it cometh to pass — they are sitting at the table — and a word of Jehovah is unto the prophet who brought him back,
and he calleth unto the man of God who came from Judah, saying, 'Thus said Jehovah, Because that thou hast provoked the mouth of Jehovah, and hast not kept the command that Jehovah thy God charged thee,
and turnest back and dost eat bread and drink water in the place of which He said unto thee, Thou dost not eat bread nor drink water — thy carcase cometh not in unto the burying-place of thy fathers.'
And it cometh to pass, after his eating bread, and after his drinking, that he saddleth for him the ass, for the prophet whom he had brought back,
and he goeth, and a lion findeth him in the way, and putteth him to death, and his carcase is cast in the way, and the ass is standing near it, and the lion is standing near the carcase.
And lo, men are passing by, and see the carcase cast in the way, and the lion standing near the carcase, and they come and speak [of it] in the city in which the old prophet is dwelling.
And the prophet who brought him back out of the way heareth and saith, 'It [is] the man of God who provoked the mouth of Jehovah, and Jehovah giveth him to the lion, and it destroyeth him, and putteth him to death, according to the word of Jehovah that he spake to him.'
And he speaketh unto his sons saying, 'Saddle for me the ass,' and they saddle [it].
And he goeth and findeth his carcase cast in the way, and the ass and the lion are standing near the carcase — the lion hath not eaten the carcase nor destroyed the ass.
And the prophet taketh up the carcase of the man of God, and placeth it on the ass, and bringeth it back, and the old prophet cometh in unto the city to mourn and to bury him,
and he placeth his carcase in his own grave, and they mourn for him, 'Oh, my brother!'
And it cometh to pass, after his burying him, that he speaketh unto his sons, saying, 'At my death — ye have buried me in the burying-place in which the man of God is buried; near his bones place my bones;
for the word certainly cometh to pass that he called by the word of Jehovah concerning the altar which [is] Beth-El, and concerning all the houses of the high places that [are] in cities of Samaria.'
After this thing Jeroboam hath not turned from his evil way, and turneth back, and maketh of the extremities of the people priests of high places; he who is desirous he consecrateth his hand, and he is of the priests of the high places.
And in this thing is the sin of the house of Jeroboam, even to cut [it] off, and to destroy [it] from off the face of the ground.
At that time was Abijah son of Jeroboam sick,
and Jeroboam saith to his wife, 'Rise, I pray thee, and change thyself, and they know not that thou [art] wife of Jeroboam, and thou hast gone to Shiloh; lo, there [is] Ahijah the prophet; he spake unto me of [being] king over this people;
and thou hast taken in thy hand ten loaves, and crumbs, and a bottle of honey, and hast gone in unto him; he doth declare to thee what becometh of the youth.'
And the wife of Jeroboam doth so, and riseth, and goeth to Shiloh, and entereth the house of Ahijah, and Ahijah is not able to see, for his eyes have stood because of his age.
And Jehovah said unto Ahijah, 'Lo, the wife of Jeroboam is coming to seek a word from thee concerning her son, for he is sick; thus and thus thou dost speak unto her, and it cometh to pass at her coming in, that she is making herself strange.'
And it cometh to pass, at Ahijah's hearing the sound of her feet [as] she came in to the opening, that he saith, 'Come in, wife of Jeroboam, why is this — thou art making thyself strange? and I am sent unto thee [with] a sharp thing:
Go, say to Jeroboam, Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, Because that I have made thee high out of the midst of the people, and appoint thee leader over my people Israel,
and rend the kingdom from the house of David, and give it to thee, — and thou hast not been as My servant David who kept My commands, and who walked after Me with all his heart, to do only that which [is] right in Mine eyes,
and thou dost evil above all who have been before thee, and goest, and makest to thee other gods and molten images to provoke Me to anger, and Me thou hast cast behind thy back:
'Therefore, lo, I am bringing in evil unto the house of Jeroboam, and have cut off to Jeroboam those sitting on the wall — shut up and left — in Israel, and have put away the posterity of the house of Jeroboam, as one putteth away the dung till its consumption;
him who dieth of Jeroboam in a city do the dogs eat, and him who dieth in a field do fowl of the heavens eat, for Jehovah hath spoken.
'And thou, rise, go to thy house; in the going in of thy feet to the city — hath the lad died;
and all Israel have mourned for him, and buried him, for this one — by himself — cometh of Jeroboam unto a grave, because there hath been found in him a good thing towards Jehovah, God of Israel, in the house of Jeroboam.
'And Jehovah hath raised up for Him a king over Israel who cutteth off the house of Jeroboam this day — and what? — even now!
And Jehovah hath smitten Israel as the reed is moved by the waters, and hath plucked Israel from off this good ground that He gave to their fathers, and scattered them beyond the River, because that they made their shrines, provoking Jehovah to anger;
and He giveth up Israel because of the sins of Jeroboam that he sinned, and that he caused Israel to sin.'
And the wife of Jeroboam riseth, and goeth, and cometh to Tirzah; she hath come in to the threshold of the house, and the youth dieth;
and they bury him, and mourn for him do all Israel, according to the word of Jehovah, that he spake by the hand of His servant Ahijah the prophet.
And the rest of the matters of Jeroboam, how he fought, and how he reigned, lo, they are written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel.
And the days that Jeroboam reigned [are] twenty and two years, and he lieth with his fathers, and reign doth Nadab his son in his stead.
And Rehoboam son of Solomon hath reigned in Judah; a son of forty and one years [is] Rehoboam in his reigning, and seventeen years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, the city that Jehovah chose to set His name there, out of all the tribes of Israel, and the name of his mother [is] Naamah the Ammonitess.
And Judah doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, and they make Him zealous above all that their fathers did by their sins that they have sinned.
And they build — also they — for themselves high places, and standing-pillars, and shrines, on every high height, and under every green tree;
and also a whoremonger hath been in the land; they have done according to all the abominations of the nations that Jehovah dispossessed from the presence of the sons of Israel.
And it cometh to pass, in the fifth year of king Rehoboam, gone up hath Shishak king of Egypt against Jerusalem,
and he taketh the treasures of the house of Jehovah, and the treasures of the house of the king, yea, the whole he hath taken; and he taketh all the shields of gold that Solomon made.
And king Rehoboam maketh in their stead shields of brass, and hath made [them] a charge on the hand of the heads of the runners, those keeping the opening of the house of the king,
and it cometh to pass, from the going in of the king to the house of Jehovah, the runners bear them, and have brought them back unto the chamber of the runners.
And the rest of the matters of Rehoboam, and all that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And war hath been between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all the days;
and Rehoboam lieth with his fathers, and is buried with his fathers, in the city of David, and the name of his mother [is] Naamah the Ammonitess, and reign doth Abijam his son in his stead.
And in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam son of Nebat, reigned hath Abijam over Judah;
three years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Maachah daughter of Abishalom;
and he walketh in all the sins of his father, that he did before him, and his heart hath not been perfect with Jehovah his God, as the heart of David his father;
but for David's sake hath Jehovah his God given to him a lamp in Jerusalem, to raise up his son after him, and to establish Jerusalem,
in that David did that which [is] right in the eyes of Jehovah, and turned not aside from all that He commanded him all days of his life — only in the matter of Uriah the Hittite;
and war hath been between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all the days of his life.
And the rest of the matters of Abijam, and all that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah? And war hath been between Abijam and Jeroboam;
and Abijam lieth with his fathers, and they bury him in the city of David, and reign doth Asa his son in his stead.
And in the twentieth year of Jeroboam king of Israel reigned hath Asa over Judah,
and forty and one years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Maachah daughter of Abishalom.
And Asa doth that which [is] right in the eyes of Jehovah, like David his father,
and removeth the whoremongers out of the land, and turneth aside all the idols that his fathers made;
and also Maachah his mother — he turneth her aside from being mistress, in that she made a horrible thing for a shrine, and Asa cutteth down her horrible thing, and burneth [it] by the brook Kidron;
and the high places have not turned aside; only, the heart of Asa hath been perfect with Jehovah all his days,
and he bringeth in the sanctified things of his father, and his own sanctified things, to the house of Jehovah, silver, and gold, and vessels.
And war hath been between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all their days,
and Baasha king of Israel goeth up against Judah, and buildeth Ramah, not to permit any one going out and coming in to Asa king of Judah.
And Asa taketh all the silver and the gold that are left in the treasures of the house of Jehovah, and the treasures of the house of the king, and giveth them into the hand of his servants, and king Asa sendeth them unto Ben-Hadad, son of Tabrimmon, son of Hezion king of Aram, who is dwelling in Damascus, saying,
'A covenant [is] between me and thee, between my father and thy father; lo, I have sent to thee a reward of silver and gold; go, break thy covenant with Baasha king of Israel, and he goeth up from off me.'
And Ben-Hadad hearkeneth unto king Asa, and sendeth the heads of the forces that he hath against cities of Israel, and smiteth Ijon, and Dan, and Abel-Beth-Maachah, and all Chinneroth, besides all the land of Naphtali;
and it cometh to pass at Baasha's hearing, that he ceaseth from building Ramah, and dwelleth in Tirzah.
And king Asa hath summoned all Judah — there is none exempt — and they lift up the stones of Ramah, and its wood, that Baasha hath built, and king Asa buildeth with them Geba of Benjamin, and Mizpah.
And the rest of all the matters of Asa, and all his might, and all that he did, and the cities that he built, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah? Only, at the time of his old age he was diseased in his feet;
and Asa lieth with his fathers, and is buried with his fathers in the city of David his father, and Jehoshaphat his son reigneth in his stead.
And Nadab son of Jeroboam hath reigned over Israel, in the second year of Asa king of Judah, and he reigneth over Israel two years,
and doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, and goeth in the way of his father, and in his sin that he made Israel to sin.
And conspire against him doth Baasha son of Ahijah, of the house of Issachar, and Baasha smiteth him in Gibbethon, which [is] to the Philistines — and Nadab and all Israel are laying siege against Gibbethon —
yea, Baasha putteth him to death in the third year of Asa king of Judah, and reigneth in his stead.
And it cometh to pass, at his reigning, he hath smitten the whole house of Jeroboam, he hath not left any breathing to Jeroboam till his destroying him, according to the word of Jehovah, that He spake by the hand of His servant Ahijah the Shilonite,
because of the sins of Jeroboam that he sinned, and that he caused Israel to sin, by his provocation with which he provoked to anger Jehovah, God of Israel.
And the rest of the matters of Nadab, and all that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel?
And war hath been between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all their days.
In the third year of Asa king of Judah reigned hath Baasha son of Ahijah over all Israel in Tirzah, twenty and four years,
and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, and walketh in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin that he caused Israel to sin.
And a word of Jehovah is unto Jehu son of Hanani, against Baasha, saying,
'Because that I have raised thee up out of the dust, and appoint thee leader over My people Israel, and thou walkest in the way of Jeroboam, and causest My people Israel to sin — to provoke Me to anger with their sins;
lo, I am putting away the posterity of Baasha, even the posterity of his house, and have given up thy house as the house of Jeroboam son of Nebat;
him who dieth of Baasha in a city do the dogs eat, and him who dieth of his in a field do fowl of the heavens eat.'
And the rest of the matters of Baasha, and that which he did, and his might, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel?
And Baasha lieth with his fathers, and is buried in Tirzah, and Elah his son reigneth in his stead.
And also by the hand of Jehu son of Hanani the prophet a word of Jehovah hath been concerning Baasha, and concerning his house, and concerning all the evil that he did in the eyes of Jehovah to provoke Him to anger with the work of his hands, to be like the house of Jeroboam, and concerning that for which he smote him.
In the twenty and sixth year of Asa king of Judah reigned hath Elah son of Baasha over Israel in Tirzah, two years;
and conspire against him doth his servant Zimri (head of the half of the chariots) and he [is] in Tirzah drinking — a drunkard in the house of Arza, who [is] over the house in Tirzah.
And Zimri cometh in and smiteth him, and putteth him to death, in the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah, and reigneth in his stead;
and it cometh to pass in his reigning, at his sitting on his throne, he hath smitten the whole house of Baasha; he hath not left to him any sitting on the wall, and of his redeemers, and of his friends.
And Zimri destroyeth the whole house of Baasha, according to the word of Jehovah, that He spake concerning Baasha, by the hand of Jehu the prophet:
concerning all the sins of Baasha, and the sins of Elah his son, that they sinned, and that they caused Israel to sin to provoke Jehovah, God of Israel, with their vanities.
And the rest of the matters of Elah, and all that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel?
In the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah, reigned hath Zimri seven days in Tirzah; and the people are encamping against Gibbethon, which [is] to the Philistines;
and the people who are encamping hear, saying, 'Zimri hath conspired, and also hath smitten the king;' and all Israel cause Omri head of the host to reign over Israel on that day in the camp.
And Omri goeth up, and all Israel with him, from Gibbethon, and they lay siege to Tirzah.
And it cometh to pass, at Zimri's seeing that the city hath been captured, that he cometh in unto a high place of the house of the king, and burneth over him the house of the king with fire, and dieth,
for his sins that he sinned, to do the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, to walk in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin that he did, to cause Israel to sin;
and the rest of the matters of Zimri, and his conspiracy that he made, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel?
Then are the sons of Israel parted into halves; half of the people hath been after Tibni son of Ginath to cause him to reign, and the half after Omri;
and stronger are the people that are after Omri than the people that are after Tibni son of Ginath, and Tibni dieth, and Omri reigneth.
In the thirty and first year of Asa king of Judah reigned hath Omri over Israel twelve years; in Tirzah he hath reigned six years,
and he buyeth the mount Samaria from Shemer, with two talents of silver, and buildeth [on] the mount, and calleth the name of the city that he hath built by the name of Shemer, lord of the hill — Samaria.
And Omri doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, and doth evil above all who [are] before him,
and walketh in all the way of Jeroboam son of Nebat, and in his sin that he caused Israel to sin, to provoke Jehovah, God of Israel, with their vanities.
And the rest of the matters of Omri that he did, and his might that he got, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel?
And Omri lieth with his fathers, and is buried in Samaria, and Ahab his son reigneth in his stead.
And Ahab son of Omri hath reigned over Israel in the thirty and eighth year of Asa king of Judah, and Ahab son of Omri reigneth over Israel in Samaria twenty and two years,
and Ahab son of Omri doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah above all who [are] before him.
And it cometh to pass — hath it been light his walking in the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat? — then he taketh a wife, Jezebel daughter of Ethbaal, king of the Zidonians, and goeth and serveth Baal, and boweth himself to it,
and raiseth up an altar for Baal, in the house of the Baal, that he built in Samaria;
and Ahab maketh the shrine, and Ahab addeth to do so as to provoke Jehovah, God of Israel, above all the kings of Israel who have been before him.
In his days hath Hiel the Beth-Elite built Jericho; in Abiram his first-born he laid its foundation, and in Segub his youngest he set up its doors, according to the word of Jehovah that He spake by the hand of Joshua son of Nun.
And Elijah the Tishbite, of the inhabitants of Gilead, saith unto Ahab, 'Jehovah, God of Israel, liveth, before whom I have stood, there is not these years dew and rain, except according to my word.'
And the word of Jehovah is unto him, saying,
'Go from this [place]; and thou hast turned for thee eastward, and been hidden by the brook Cherith, that [is] on the front of the Jordan,
and it hath been, from the brook thou dost drink, and the ravens I have commanded to sustain thee there.'
And he goeth and doth according to the word of Jehovah, yea, he goeth and dwelleth by the brook Cherith, that [is] on the front of the Jordan,
and the ravens are bringing to him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening, and of the brook he drinketh.
And it cometh to pass, at the end of days, that the brook drieth up, for there hath been no rain in the land,
and the word of Jehovah is unto him, saying,
'Rise, go to Zarephath, that [is] to Zidon, and thou hast dwelt there; lo, I have commanded there a widow woman to sustain thee.'
And he riseth, and goeth to Zarephath, and cometh in unto the opening of the city, and lo there, a widow woman gathering sticks, and he calleth unto her, and saith, 'Bring, I pray thee, to me, a little water in a vessel, and I drink.'
And she goeth to bring [it], and he calleth unto her and saith, 'Bring, I pray thee, to me a morsel of bread in thy hand.'
And she saith, 'Jehovah thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but the fulness of the hand of meal in a pitcher, and a little oil in a dish; and lo, I am gathering two sticks, and have gone in and prepared it for myself, and for my son, and we have eaten it — and died.'
And Elijah saith unto her, 'Fear not, go, do according to thy word, only make for me thence a little cake, in the first place, and thou hast brought out to me; and for thee and for thy son make — last;
for thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, The pitcher of meal is not consumed, and the dish of oil is not lacking, till the day of Jehovah's giving a shower on the face of the ground.'
And she goeth, and doth according to the word of Elijah, and she eateth, she and he, and her household — days;
the pitcher of meal was not consumed, and the dish of oil did not lack, according to the word of Jehovah that He spake by the hand of Elijah.
And it cometh to pass, after these things, the son of the woman, mistress of the house, hath been sick, and his sickness is very severe till that no breath hath been left in him.
And she saith unto Elijah, 'What — to me and to thee, O man of God? thou hast come unto me to cause mine iniquity to be remembered, and to put my son to death!'
And he saith unto her, 'Give to me thy son;' and he taketh him out of her bosom, and taketh him up unto the upper chamber where he is abiding, and layeth him on his own bed,
and crieth unto Jehovah, and saith, 'Jehovah my God, also on the widow with whom I am sojourning hast Thou done evil — to put her son to death?'
And he stretcheth himself out on the lad three times, and calleth unto Jehovah, and saith, 'O Jehovah my God, let turn back, I pray Thee, the soul of this lad into his midst;'
and Jehovah hearkeneth to the voice of Elijah, and the soul of the lad turneth back into his midst, and he liveth.
And Elijah taketh the lad, and bringeth him down from the upper chamber of the house, and giveth him to his mother, and Elijah saith, 'See, thy son liveth!'
And the woman saith unto Elijah, 'Now, this I have known, that a man of God thou [art], and the word of Jehovah in thy mouth [is] truth.'
And the days are many, and the word of Jehovah hath been unto Elijah in the third year, saying, 'Go, appear unto Ahab, and I give rain on the face of the ground;'
and Elijah goeth to appear unto Ahab. And the famine is severe in Samaria,
and Ahab calleth unto Obadiah, who [is] over the house — and Obadiah hath been fearing Jehovah greatly,
and it cometh to pass, in Jezebel's cutting off the prophets of Jehovah, that Obadiah taketh a hundred prophets, and hideth them, fifty men in a cave, and hath sustained them with bread and water —
and Ahab saith unto Obadiah, 'Go through the land, unto all fountains of waters, and unto all the brooks, if so be we find hay, and keep alive horse and mule, and do not cut off any of the cattle.'
And they apportion to themselves the land, to pass over into it; Ahab hath gone in one way by himself, and Obadiah hath gone in another way by himself;
and Obadiah [is] in the way, and lo, Elijah — to meet him; and he discerneth him, and falleth on his face, and saith, 'Art thou he — my lord Elijah?'
And he saith to him, 'I [am]; go, say to thy lord, Lo, Elijah.'
And he saith, 'What have I sinned, that thou art giving thy servant into the hand of Ahab — to put me to death?
Jehovah thy God liveth, if there is a nation and kingdom whither my lord hath not sent to seek thee; and they said, He is not, then he caused the kingdom and the nation to swear, that it doth not find thee;
and now, thou art saying, Go, say to thy lord, Lo, Elijah;
and it hath been, I go from thee, and the Spirit of Jehovah doth lift thee up, whither I know not, and I have come to declare to Ahab, and he doth not find thee, and he hath slain me; and thy servant is fearing Jehovah from my youth.
'Hath it not been declared to my lord that which I have done in Jezebel's slaying the prophets of Jehovah, that I hide of the prophets of Jehovah a hundred men, fifty by fifty in a cave, and sustained them with bread and water?
and now thou art saying, Go, say to my lord, Lo, Elijah — and he hath slain me!'
And Elijah saith, 'Jehovah of Hosts liveth, before whom I have stood, surely to-day I appear unto him.'
And Obadiah goeth to meet Ahab, and declareth [it] to him, and Ahab goeth to meet Elijah,
and it cometh to pass at Ahab's seeing Elijah, that Ahab saith unto him, 'Art thou he — the troubler of Israel?'
And he saith, 'I have not troubled Israel, but thou and the house of thy father, in your forsaking the commands of Jehovah, and thou goest after the Baalim;
and now, send, gather unto me all Israel, unto the mount of Carmel, and the prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty, and the prophets of the shrine, four hundred — eating at the table of Jezebel.'
And Ahab sendeth among all the sons of Israel, and gathereth the prophets unto the mount of Carmel;
and Elijah cometh nigh unto all the people, and saith, 'Till when are ye leaping on the two branches? — if Jehovah [is] God, go after Him; and if Baal, go after him;' and the people have not answered him a word.
And Elijah saith unto the people, 'I — I have been left a prophet of Jehovah — by myself; and the prophets of Baal [are] four hundred and fifty men;
and let them give to us two bullocks, and they choose for themselves the one bullock, and cut it in pieces, and place [it] on the wood, and place no fire; and I — I prepare the other bullock, and have put [it] on the wood, and fire I do not place; —
and ye have called in the name of your god, and I — I call in the name of Jehovah, and it hath been, the god who answereth by fire — He [is] the God.' And all the people answer and say, 'Good [is] the word.'
And Elijah saith to the prophets of Baal, 'Choose for you the one bullock, and prepare first, for ye [are] the multitude, and call ye in the name of your god, and place no fire.'
And they take the bullock that [one] gave to them, and prepare, and call in the name of Baal from the morning even till the noon, saying, 'O Baal, answer us!' and there is no voice, and there is none answering; and they leap on the altar that one had made.
And it cometh to pass, at noon, that Elijah playeth on them, and saith, 'Call with a loud voice, for he [is] a god, for he is meditating, or pursuing, or on a journey; it may be he is asleep, an doth awake.'
And they call with a loud voice, and cut themselves, according to their ordinance, with swords and with spears, till a flowing of blood [is] on them;
and it cometh to pass, at the passing by of the noon, that they feign themselves prophets till the going up of the present, and there is no voice, and there is none answering, and there is none attending.
And Elijah saith to all the people, 'Come nigh unto me;' and all the people come nigh unto him, and he repaireth the altar of Jehovah that is broken down;
and Elijah taketh twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, unto whom the word of Jehovah was, saying, 'Israel is thy name;'
and he buildeth with the stones an altar, in the name of Jehovah, and maketh a trench, as about the space of two measures of seed, round about the altar.
And he arrangeth the wood, and cutteth in pieces the bullock, and placeth [it] on the wood, and saith, 'Fill ye four pitchers of water, and pour on the burnt-offering, and on the wood;
and he saith, 'Do [it] a second time;' and they do [it] a second time; and he saith, 'Do [it] a third time;' and they do [it] a third time;
and the water goeth round about the altar, and also, the trench he hath filled with water.
And it cometh to pass, at the going up of the [evening -]present, that Elijah the prophet cometh nigh and saith, 'Jehovah, God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, to-day let it be known that Thou [art] God in Israel, and I Thy servant, that by Thy word I have done the whole of these things;
answer me, O Jehovah, answer me, and this people doth know that Thou [art] Jehovah God; and Thou hast turned their heart backward.'
And there falleth a fire of Jehovah, and consumeth the burnt-offering, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and the water that [is] in the trench it hath licked up.
And all the people see, and fall on their faces, and say, 'Jehovah, He [is] the God, Jehovah, He [is] the God.'
And Elijah saith to them, 'Catch ye the prophets of Baal; let not a man escape of them;' and they catch them, and Elijah bringeth them down unto the stream Kishon, and doth slaughter them there.
And Elijah saith to Ahab, 'Go up, eat and drink, because of the sound of the noise of the shower.'
And Ahab goeth up to eat, and to drink, and Elijah hath gone up unto the top of Carmel, and he stretcheth himself out on the earth, and he placeth his face between his knees,
and saith unto his young man, 'Go up, I pray thee, look attentively the way of the sea;' and he goeth up and looketh attentively, and saith, 'There is nothing;' and he saith, 'Turn back,' seven times.
And it cometh to pass, at the seventh, that he saith, 'Lo, a little thickness as the palm of a man is coming up out of the sea.' And he saith, 'Go up, say unto Ahab, 'Bind — and go down, and the shower doth not restrain thee.'
And it cometh to pass, in the meantime, that the heavens have become black — thick clouds and wind — and the shower is great; and Ahab rideth, and goeth to Jezreel,
and the hand of Jehovah hath been on Elijah, and he girdeth up his loins, and runneth before Ahab, till thine entering Jezreel.
And Ahab declareth to Jezebel all that Elijah did, and all how he slew all the prophets by the sword,
and Jezebel sendeth a messenger unto Elijah, saying, 'Thus doth the gods, and thus do they add, surely about this time to-morrow, I make thy life as the life of one of them.'
And he feareth, and riseth, and goeth for his life, and cometh in to Beer-Sheba, that [is] Judah's, and leaveth his young man there,
and he himself hath gone into the wilderness a day's Journey, and cometh and sitteth under a certain retem-tree, and desireth his soul to die, and saith, 'Enough, now, O Jehovah, take my soul, for I [am] not better than my fathers.'
And he lieth down and sleepeth under a certain retem-tree, and lo, a messenger cometh against him, and saith to him, 'Rise, eat;'
and he looketh attentively, and lo, at his bolster a cake [baken on] burning stones, and a dish of water, and he eateth, and drinketh, and turneth, and lieth down.
And the messenger of Jehovah turneth back a second time, and cometh against him, and saith, 'Rise, eat, for the way is too great for thee;'
and he riseth, and eateth, and drinketh, and goeth in the power of that food forty days and forty nights, unto the mount of God — Horeb.
And he cometh in there, unto the cave, and lodgeth there, and lo, the word of Jehovah [is] unto him, and saith to him, 'What — to thee, here, Elijah?'
And he saith, 'I have been very zealous for Jehovah, God of Hosts, for the sons of Israel have forsaken Thy covenant — Thine altars they have thrown down, and Thy prophets they have slain by the sword, and I am left, I, by myself, and they seek my life — to take it.'
And He saith, 'Go out, and thou hast stood in the mount before Jehovah.' And lo, Jehovah is passing by, and a wind — great and strong — is rending mountains, and shivering rocks before Jehovah: — not in the wind [is] Jehovah; and after the wind a shaking: — not in the shaking [is] Jehovah;
and after the shaking a fire: — not in the fire [is] Jehovah; and after the fire a voice still small;
and it cometh to pass, at Elijah's hearing [it], that he wrappeth his face in his robe, and goeth out, and standeth at the opening of the cave, and lo, unto him [is] a voice, and it saith, 'What — to thee, here, Elijah?'
And he saith, 'I have been very zealous for Jehovah, God of Hosts; for the sons of Israel have forsaken Thy covenant, Thine altars they have thrown down, and Thy prophets they have slain by the sword, and I am left, I, by myself, and they seek my life — to take it.'
And Jehovah saith unto him, 'Go turn back on thy way to the wilderness of Damascus, and thou hast gone in, and anointed Hazael for king over Aram,
and Jehu son of Nimshi thou dost anoint for king over Israel, and Elisha son of Shaphat, of Abel-Meholah, thou dost anoint for prophet in thy stead.
'And it hath been, him who is escaped from the sword of Hazael, put to death doth Jehu, and him who is escaped from the sword of Jehu put to death doth Elisha;
and I have left in Israel seven thousand, all the knees that have not bowed to Baal, and every mouth that hath not kissed him.'
And he goeth thence, and findeth Elisha son of Shaphat, and he is plowing; twelve yoke [are] before him, and he [is] with the twelfth; and Elijah passeth over unto him, and casteth his robe upon him,
and he forsaketh the oxen, and runneth after Elijah, and saith, 'Let me give a kiss, I pray thee, to my father and to my mother, and I go after thee.' And he saith to him, 'Go, turn back, for what have I done to thee?'
And he turneth back from after him, and taketh the yoke of oxen, and sacrificeth it, and with instruments of the oxen he hath boiled their flesh, and giveth to the people, and they eat, and he riseth, and goeth after Elijah, and serveth him.
And Ben-Hadad king of Aram hath gathered all his force, and thirty and two kings [are] with him, and horse and chariot, and he goeth up and layeth siege against Samaria, and fighteth with it,
and sendeth messengers unto Ahab king of Israel, to the city,
and saith to him, 'Thus said Ben-Hadad, 'Thy silver and thy gold are mine, and thy wives and thy sons — the best — are mine.'
And the king of Israel answereth and saith, 'According to thy word, my lord, O king: I [am] thine, and all that I have.'
And the messengers turn back and say, 'Thus spake Ben-Hadad, saying, Surely I sent unto thee, saying, Thy silver, and thy gold, and thy wives, and thy sons, to me thou dost give;
for if, at this time to-morrow, I send my servants unto thee then they have searched thy house, and the houses of thy servants, and it hath been, every desirable thing of thine eyes they place in their hand, and have taken away.'
And the king of Israel calleth to all the elders of the land, and saith, 'Know, I pray you, and see that evil this [one] is seeking, for he sent unto me for my wives, and for my sons, and for my silver, and for my gold, and I withheld not from him.'
And all the elders and all the people say unto him, 'Do not hearken, nor consent.'
And he saith to the messengers of Ben-Hadad, 'Say to my lord the king, All that thou didst send for unto thy servant at the first I do, and this thing I am not able to do;' and the messengers go and take him back word.
And Ben-Hadad sendeth unto him, and saith, 'Thus do the gods to me, and thus do they add, if the dust of Samaria suffice for handfuls for all the people who [are] at my feet.'
And the king of Israel answereth and saith, 'Speak ye: let not him who is girding on boast himself as him who is loosing [his armour].'
And it cometh to pass at the hearing of this word — and he is drinking, he and the kings, in the booths — that he saith unto his servants, 'Set yourselves;' and they set themselves against the city.
And lo, a certain prophet hath come nigh unto Ahab king of Israel, and saith, 'Thus said Jehovah, 'Hast thou seen all this great multitude? lo, I am giving it into thy hand to-day, and thou hast known that I [am] Jehovah.'
And Ahab saith, 'By whom?' and he saith, 'Thus said Jehovah, By the young men of the heads of the provinces;' and he saith, 'Who doth direct the battle?' and he saith, 'Thou.'
And he inspecteth the young men of the heads of the provinces, and they are two hundred, two and thirty, and after them he hath inspecteth the whole of the people, all the sons of Israel, seven thousand,
and they go out at noon, and Ben-Hadad is drinking — drunk in the booths, he and the kings, the thirty and two kings, helping him.
And the young men of the heads of the provinces go out at the first, and Ben-Hadad sendeth, and they declare to him, saying, 'Men have come out of Samaria.'
And he saith, 'If for peace they have come out — catch them alive; and if for battle they have come out — alive catch them.'
And these have gone out of the city — the young men of the heads of the provinces — and the force that [is] after them,
and smite each his man, and Aram fleeth, and Israel pursueth them, and Ben-Hadad king of Aram escapeth on a horse, and the horsemen;
and the king of Israel goeth out, and smiteth the horses, and the charioteers, and hath smitten among the Aramaeans a great smiting.
And the prophet cometh nigh unto the king of Israel, and saith to him, 'Go, strengthen thyself, and know and see that which thou dost, for at the turn of the year the king of Aram is coming up against thee.'
And the servants of the king of Aram said unto him, 'Gods of hills [are] their gods, therefore they were stronger than we; and yet, we fight with them in the plain — are we not stronger than they?
'And this thing do thou: turn aside the kings each out of his place, and set captains in their stead;
and thou, number to thee a force as the force that is fallen from thee, and horse for horse, and chariot for chariot, and we fight with them in the plain; are we not stronger than they?' and he hearkeneth to their voice, and doth so.
And it cometh to pass at the turn of the year, that Ben-Hadad inspecteth the Aramaeans, and goeth up to Aphek, to battle with Israel,
and the sons of Israel have been inspected, and supported, and go to meet them, and the sons of Israel encamp before them, like two flocks of goats, and the Aramaeans have filled the land.
And there cometh nigh a man of God, and speaketh unto the king of Israel, and saith, 'Thus said Jehovah, Because that the Aramaeans have said, God of hills [is] Jehovah, and He [is] not God of valleys — I have given the whole of this great multitude into thy hand, and ye have known that I [am] Jehovah.'
And they encamp one over-against another seven days, and it cometh to pass on the seventh day, that the battle draweth near, and the sons of Israel smite Aram — a hundred thousand footmen in one day.
And those left flee to Aphek, unto the city, and the wall falleth on twenty and seven chief men who are left, and Ben-Hadad hath fled, and cometh in unto the city, into the innermost part.
And his servants say unto him, 'Lo, we pray thee, we have heard that the kings of the house of Israel — that they are kind kings; let us put, we pray thee, sackcloth on our loins, and ropes on our heads, and we go out unto the king of Israel; it may be he doth keep thee alive.'
And they gird sackcloth on their loins, and ropes [are] on their heads, and they come in unto the king of Israel, and say, 'Thy servant Ben-Hadad hath said, Let me live, I pray thee;' and he saith, 'Is he yet alive? he [is] my brother.'
And the men observe diligently, and hasten, and catch it from him, and say, 'Thy brother Ben-Hadad;' and he saith, 'Go ye in, bring him;' and Ben-Hadad cometh out unto him, and he causeth him to come up on the chariot.
And he saith unto him, 'The cities that my father took from thy father, I give back, and streets thou dost make for thee in Damascus, as my father did in Samaria;' — 'and I, with a covenant, send thee away;' and he maketh with him a covenant, and sendeth him away.
And a certain man of the sons of the prophets said unto his neighbour by the word of Jehovah, 'Smite me, I pray thee;' and the man refuseth to smite him,
and he saith to him, 'Because that thou hast not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah, lo, thou art going from me, and the lion hath smitten thee;' and he goeth from him, and the lion findeth him, and smiteth him.
And he findeth another man, and saith, 'Smite me, I pray thee;' and the man smiteth him, smiting and wounding,
and the prophet goeth and standeth for the king on the way, and disguiseth himself with ashes on his eyes.
And it cometh to pass — the king is passing by — that he hath cried unto the king, and saith, 'Thy servant went out into the midst of the battle, and lo, a man hath turned aside and bringeth in unto me a man, and saith, Keep this man; if he be at all missing, then hath thy life been for his life, or a talent of silver thou dost weigh out;
and it cometh to pass, thy servant is working hither and thither, and he is not!' and the king of Israel saith unto him, Right [is] thy judgment; thou hast determined [it].'
And he hasteth and turneth aside the ashes from off his eyes, and the king of Israel discerneth him, that he [is] of the prophets,
and he saith unto him, 'Thus said Jehovah, Because thou hast sent away the man I devoted, out of [thy] hand, even thy life hath been for his life, and thy people for his people;'
and the king of Israel goeth unto his house, sulky and wroth, and cometh in to Samaria.
And it cometh to pass, after these things, a vineyard hath been to Naboth the Jezreelite, that [is] in Jezreel, near the palace of Ahab king of Samaria,
and Ahab speaketh unto Naboth, saying, 'Give to me thy vineyard, and it is to me for a garden of green herbs, for it [is] near by my house, and I give to thee in its stead a better vineyard than it; if good in thine eyes, I give to thee silver — its price.'
And Naboth saith unto Ahab, 'Far be it from me, by Jehovah, my giving the inheritance of my fathers to thee;'
and Ahab cometh in unto his house, sulky and wroth, because of the word that Naboth the Jezreelite hath spoken unto him when he saith, 'I do not give to thee the inheritance of my fathers,' and he lieth down on his bed, and turneth round his face, and hath not eaten bread.
And Jezebel his wife cometh in unto him, and speaketh unto him, 'What [is] this? — thy spirit sulky, and thou art not eating bread!'
And he saith unto her, 'Because I speak unto Naboth the Jezreelite, and say to him, Give to me thy vineyard for money, or if thou desire, I give to thee a vineyard in its stead; and he saith, I do not give to thee my vineyard.'
And Jezebel his wife saith unto him, 'Thou now dost execute rule over Israel! rise, eat bread, and let thy heart be glad, — I do give to thee the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite.'
And she writeth letters in the name of Ahab, and sealeth with his seal, and sendeth the letters unto the elders, and unto the freemen, who are in his city, those dwelling with Naboth,
and she writeth in the letters, saying, 'Proclaim a fast, and cause Naboth to sit at the head of the people,
and cause two men — sons of worthlessness — to sit over-against him, and they testify of him, saying, Thou hast blessed God and Melech; and they have brought him out, and stoned him, and he dieth.'
And the men of his city, the elders and the freemen who are dwelling in his city, do as Jezebel hath sent unto them, as written in the letters that she sent unto them,
they have proclaimed a fast, and caused Naboth to sit at the head of the people,
and two men — sons of worthlessness — come in, and sit over-against him, and the men of worthlessness testify of him, even Naboth, before the people, saying, 'Naboth blessed God and Melech;' and they take him out to the outside of the city, and stone him with stones, and he dieth;
and they send unto Jezebel, saying, 'Naboth was stoned, and is dead.'
And it cometh to pass, at Jezebel's hearing that Naboth hath been stoned, and is dead, that Jezebel saith unto Ahab, 'Rise, possess the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, that he refused to give to thee for money, for Naboth is not alive but dead.'
And it cometh to pass, at Ahab's hearing that Naboth is dead, that Ahab riseth to go down unto the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, to possess it.
And the word of Jehovah is unto Elijah the Tishbite, saying,
'Rise, go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, who [is] in Samaria, — lo, in the vineyard of Naboth, whither he hath gone down to possess it,
and thou hast spoken unto him, saying, Thus said Jehovah, Hast thou murdered, and also possessed? and thou hast spoken unto him, saying, Thus said Jehovah, In the place where the dogs licked the blood of Naboth, do the dogs lick thy blood, even thine.'
And Ahab saith unto Elijah, 'Hast thou found me, O mine enemy?' and he saith, 'I have found — because of thy selling thyself to do the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah;
lo, I am bringing in unto thee evil, and have taken away thy posterity, and cut off to Ahab those sitting on the wall, and restrained, and left, in Israel,
and given up thy house like the house of Jeroboam son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha son of Ahijah, for the provocation with which thou hast provoked [Me], and dost cause Israel to sin.
'And also of Jezebel hath Jehovah spoken, saying, The dogs do eat Jezebel in the bulwark of Jezreel;
him who dieth of Ahab in a city do the dogs eat, and him who dieth in a field do fowl of the heavens eat;
surely there hath none been like Ahab, who sold himself to do the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, whom Jezebel his wife hath moved,
and he doth very abominably to go after the idols, according to all that the Amorite did whom Jehovah dispossessed from the presence of the sons of Israel.'
And it cometh to pass, at Ahab's hearing these words, that he rendeth his garments, and putteth sackcloth on his flesh, and fasteth, and lieth in sackcloth, and goeth gently.
And the word of Jehovah is unto Elijah the Tishbite, saying,
'Hast thou seen that Ahab hath been humbled before Me? because that he hath been humbled before Me, I bring not in the evil in his days; in the days of his son I bring in the evil on his house.'
And they sit still three years, there is no war between Aram and Israel,
and it cometh to pass in the third year, that Jehoshaphat king of Judah cometh down unto the king of Israel,
and the king of Israel saith unto his servants, 'Have ye not known that ours [is] Ramoth-Gilead? and we are keeping silent from taking it out of the hand of the king of Aram!'
And he saith unto Jehoshaphat, 'Dost thou go with me to battle [to] Ramoth-Gilead?' and Jehoshaphat saith unto the king of Israel, 'As I am, so thou; as my people, so thy people; as my horses, so thy horses.'
And Jehoshaphat saith unto the king of Israel, 'Seek, I pray thee, to-day, the word of Jehovah;'
and the king of Israel gathereth the prophets, about four hundred men, and saith unto them, 'Do I go against Ramoth-Gilead to battle, or do I forbear?' and they say, 'Go up, and the Lord doth give [it] into the hand of the king.'
And Jehoshaphat saith, 'Is there not here a prophet of Jehovah besides, and we seek by him?'
And the king of Israel saith unto Jehoshaphat, 'Yet — one man to seek Jehovah by him, and I have hated him, for he doth not prophesy concerning me good, but evil — Micaiah son of Imlah;' and Jehoshaphat saith, 'Let not the king say so.'
And the king of Israel calleth unto a certain eunuch, and saith, 'Hasten Micaiah son of Imlah.'
And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah are sitting, each on his throne, clothed with garments, in a threshing-floor, at the opening of the gate of Samaria, and all the prophets are prophesying before them.
And Zedekiah son of Chenaanah maketh for himself horns of iron, and saith, 'Thus said Jehovah, By these thou dost push the Aramaeans till they are consumed;'
and all the prophets are prophesying so, saying, 'Go up to Ramoth-Gilead, and prosper, and Jehovah hath given [it] into the hand of the king.'
And the messenger who hath gone to call Micaiah hath spoken unto him, saying, 'Lo, I pray thee, the words of the prophets, with one mouth, [are] good towards the king; let it be, I pray thee, thy word as the word of one of them — and thou hast spoken good.'
And Micaiah saith, 'Jehovah liveth; surely that which Jehovah saith unto me — it I speak.'
And he cometh in unto the king, and the king saith unto him, 'Micaiah, do we go unto Ramoth-Gilead, to battle, or do we forbear?' and he saith unto him, 'Go up, and prosper, and Jehovah hath given [it] into the hand of the king.'
And the king saith unto him, 'How many times am I adjuring thee that thou speak nothing unto me but truth in the name of Jehovah?'
And he saith, 'I have seen all Israel scattered on the hills as sheep that have no shepherd, and Jehovah saith, These have no master; they turn back each to his house in peace.'
And the king of Israel saith unto Jehoshaphat, 'Have I not said unto thee, He doth not prophesy of me good, but evil?'
And he saith, 'Therefore, hear a word of Jehovah; I have seen Jehovah sitting on His throne, and all the host of the heavens standing by Him, on His right and on His left;
and Jehovah saith, Who doth entice Ahab, and he doth go up and fall in Ramoth-Gilead? and this one saith thus, and that one is saying thus.
'And the spirit goeth out, and standeth before Jehovah, and saith, I — I do entice him; and Jehovah saith unto him, By what?
and he saith, I go out, and have been a spirit of falsehood in the mouth of all his prophets; and He saith, Thou dost entice, and also thou art able; go out and do so.
And now, lo, Jehovah hath put a spirit of falsehood in the mouth of all these thy prophets, and Jehovah hath spoken concerning thee — evil.'
And Zedekiah son of Chenaanah draweth nigh, and smiteth Micaiah on the cheek, and saith, 'Where [is] this — he hath passed over — the Spirit of Jehovah — from me to speak with thee?'
And Micaiah saith, 'Lo, thou art seeing on that day, when thou goest in to the innermost chamber to be hidden.'
And the king of Israel saith, 'Take Micaiah, and turn him back unto Amon head of the city, and unto Joash son of the king,
and thou hast said, Thus said the king, Place ye this one in the house of restraint, and cause him to eat bread of oppression, and water of oppression, till my coming in peace.'
And Micaiah saith, 'If thou at all return in peace — Jehovah hath not spoken by me;' and he saith, 'Hear, O peoples, all of them.'
And the king of Israel goeth up, and Jehoshaphat king of Judah, to Ramoth-Gilead.
And the king of Israel saith unto Jehoshaphat to disguise himself, and to go into battle, 'And thou, put on thy garments.' And the king of Israel disguiseth himself, and goeth into battle.
And the king of Aram commanded the heads of the charioteers whom he hath — thirty and two — saying, 'Ye do not fight with small or with great, but with the king of Israel by himself.'
And it cometh to pass, at the heads of the charioteers seeing Jehoshaphat, that they said, 'He [is] only the king of Israel;' and they turn aside to him to fight, and Jehoshaphat crieth out,
and it cometh to pass, at the heads of the charioteers seeing that he [is] not the king of Israel, that they turn back from after him.
And a man hath drawn with a bow, in his simplicity, and smiteth the king of Israel between the joinings and the coat of mail, and he saith to his charioteer, 'Turn thy hand, and take me out from the camp, for I have become sick.'
And the battle increaseth on that day, and the king hath been caused to stand in the chariot, over-against Aram, and he dieth in the evening, and the blood of the wound runneth out unto the midst of the chariot,
and he causeth the cry to pass over through the camp, at the going in of the sun, saying, 'Each unto his city, and each unto his land.'
And the king dieth, and cometh into Samaria, and they bury the king in Samaria;
and [one] rinseth the chariot by the pool of Samaria, and the dogs lick his blood — when the armour they had washed — according to the word of Jehovah that He spake.
And the rest of the matters of Ahab, and all that he did, and the house of ivory that he built, and all the cities that he built, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel?
And Ahab lieth with his fathers, and Ahaziah his son reigneth in his stead.
And Jehoshaphat son of Asa hath reigned over Judah in the fourth year of Ahab king of Israel,
Jehoshaphat [is] a son of thirty and five years in his reigning, and twenty and five years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Azubah daughter of Shilhi.

And he walketh in all the way of Asa his father, he hath not turned aside from it, to do that which [is] right in the eyes of Jehovah; only the high places have not turned aside, yet are the people sacrificing and making perfume in high places.
And Jehoshaphat maketh peace with the king of Israel;
and the rest of the matters of Jehoshaphat, and his might that he got, and with which he fought, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And the remnant of the whoremongers who were left in the days of Asa his father he took away out of the land;
and there is no king in Edom; he set up a king.
Jehoshaphat made ships at Tarshish to go to Ophir for gold, and they went not, for the ships were broken in Ezion-Geber.
Then said Ahaziah son of Ahab unto Jehoshaphat, 'Let my servants go with thy servants in the ships;' and Jehoshaphat was not willing.
And Jehoshaphat lieth with his fathers, and is buried with his fathers in the city of David his father, and Jehoram his son reigneth in his stead.
Ahaziah son of Ahab hath reigned over Israel in Samaria in the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and reigneth over Israel two years,
and doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, and walketh in the way of his father, and in the way of his mother, and in the way of Jeroboam son of Nebat who caused Israel to sin,
and serveth the Baal, and boweth himself to it, and provoketh Jehovah, God of Israel, according to all that his father had done.
And Moab transgresseth against Israel after the death of Ahab,
and Ahaziah falleth through the lattice in his upper chamber that [is] in Samaria, and is sick, and sendeth messengers, and saith unto them, 'Go ye, inquire of Baal-Zebub god of Ekron if I recover from this sickness.'
And a messenger of Jehovah hath spoken unto Elijah the Tishbite, 'Rise, go up to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria, and speak unto them, Is it because there is not a God in Israel — ye are going to inquire of Baal Zebub god of Ekron?
and therefore, thus said Jehovah, The bed whither thou hast gone up, thou dost not come down from it, for thou dost certainly die;' and Elijah goeth on.
And the messengers turn back unto him, and he saith unto them, 'What [is] this — ye have turned back!'
And they say unto him, 'A man hath come up to meet us, and saith unto us, Go, turn back unto the king who sent you, and ye have said unto him, Thus said Jehovah, Is it because there is not a God in Israel — thou art sending to inquire of Baal-Zebub god of Ekron? therefore, the bed whither thou hast gone up, thou dost not come down from it, for thou dost certainly die.'
And he saith unto them, 'What [is] the fashion of the man who hath come up to meet you, and speaketh unto you these words?'
And they say unto him, 'A man — hairy, and a girdle of skin girt about his loins;' and he saith, 'He [is] Elijah the Tishbite.'
And he sendeth unto him a head of fifty and his fifty, and he goeth up unto him (and lo, he is sitting on the top of the hill), and he speaketh unto him, 'O man of God, the king hath spoken, Come down.'
And Elijah answereth and speaketh unto the head of the fifty, 'And if I [am] a man of God, fire doth come down from the heavens, and consume thee and thy fifty;' and fire cometh down from the heavens, and consumeth him and his fifty.
And he turneth and sendeth unto him another head of fifty and his fifty, and he answereth and speaketh unto him, 'O man of God, thus said the king, Haste, come down.'
And Elijah answereth and speaketh unto them, 'If I [am] a man of God, fire doth come down from the heavens, and consume thee and thy fifty;' and fire of God cometh down from the heavens, and consumeth him and his fifty.
And he turneth and sendeth a third head of fifty and his fifty, and the third head of fifty goeth up, and cometh in, and boweth on his knees over-against Elijah, and maketh supplication unto him, and speaketh unto him, 'O man of God, let be precious, I pray thee, my soul and the soul of thy servants — these fifty — in thine eyes.
Lo, come down hath fire from the heavens, and consumeth the two heads of the former fifties and their fifties; and, now, let my soul be precious in thine eyes.'
And a messenger of Jehovah speaketh unto Elijah, 'Go down with him, be not afraid of him;' and he riseth and goeth down with him unto the king,
and speaketh unto him, 'Thus said Jehovah, Because that thou hast sent messengers to inquire of Baal-Zebub god of Ekron — is it because there is not a God in Israel to inquire of His word? therefore, the bed whither thou hast gone up — thou dost not come down from it, for thou dost certainly die.'
And he dieth, according to the word of Jehovah that Elijah spake, and Jehoram reigneth in his stead, in the second year of Jehoram son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, for he had no son.
And the rest of the matters of Ahaziah that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel?
And it cometh to pass, at Jehovah's taking up Elijah in a whirlwind to the heavens, that Elijah goeth, and Elisha, from Gilgal,
and Elijah saith unto Elisha, 'Abide, I pray thee, here, for Jehovah hath sent me unto Beth-El;' and Elisha saith, 'Jehovah liveth, and thy soul liveth, if I leave thee;' and they go down to Beth-El.
And sons of the prophets who [are] in Beth-El come out unto Elisha, and say unto him, 'Hast thou known that to-day Jehovah is taking thy lord from thy head?' and he saith, 'I also have known — keep silent.'
And Elijah saith to him, 'Elisha, abide, I pray thee, here, for Jehovah hath sent me to Jericho;' and he saith, 'Jehovah liveth, and thy soul liveth, if I leave thee;' and they come in to Jericho.
And sons of the prophets who [are] in Jericho come nigh unto Elisha, and say unto him, 'Hast thou known that to-day Jehovah is taking thy lord from thy head?' and he saith, 'I also have known — keep silent.'
And Elijah saith to him, 'Abide, I pray thee, here, for Jehovah hath sent me to the Jordan;' and he saith, 'Jehovah liveth, and thy soul liveth, if I leave thee;' and they go on both of them,
— and fifty men of the sons of the prophets have gone on, and stand over-against afar off — and both of them have stood by the Jordan.
And Elijah taketh his robe, and wrappeth [it] together, and smiteth the waters, and they are halved, hither and thither, and they pass over both of them on dry land.
And it cometh to pass, at their passing over, that Elijah hath said unto Elisha, 'Ask, what do I do for thee before I am taken from thee?' and Elisha saith, 'Then let there be, I pray thee, a double portion of thy spirit unto me;'
and he saith, 'Thou hast asked a hard thing; if thou dost see me taken from thee, it is to thee so; and if not, it is not.'
And it cometh to pass, they are going, going on and speaking, and lo, a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and they separate between them both, and Elijah goeth up in a whirlwind, to the heavens.
And Elisha is seeing, and he is crying, 'My father, my father, the chariot of Israel, and its horsemen;' and he hath not seen him again; and he taketh hold on his garments, and rendeth them into two pieces.
And he taketh up the robe of Elijah, that fell from off him, and turneth back and standeth on the edge of the Jordan,
and he taketh the robe of Elijah that fell from off him, and smiteth the waters, and saith, 'Where [is] Jehovah, God of Elijah — even He?' and he smiteth the waters, and they are halved, hither and thither, and Elisha passeth over.
And they see him — the sons of the prophets who [are] in Jericho — over-against, and they say, 'Rested hath the spirit of Elijah on Elisha;' and they come to meet him, and bow themselves to him to the earth,
and say unto him, 'Lo, we pray thee, there are with thy servants fifty men, sons of valour: let them go, we pray thee, and they seek thy lord, lest the Spirit of Jehovah hath taken him up, and doth cast him on one of the hills, or into one of the valleys;' and he saith, 'Ye do not send.'
And they press upon him, till he is ashamed, and he saith, 'Send ye;' and they send fifty men, and they seek three days, and have not found him;
and they turn back unto him — and he is abiding in Jericho — and he saith unto them, 'Did I not say unto you, Do not go?'
And the men of the city say unto Elisha, 'Lo, we pray thee, the site of the city [is] good, as my lord seeth, and the waters [are] bad, and the earth sterile.'
And he saith, 'Bring to me a new dish, and place there salt;' and they bring [it] unto him,
and he goeth out unto the source of the waters, and casteth there salt, and saith, 'Thus said Jehovah, I have given healing to these waters; there is not thence any more death and sterility.'
And the waters are healed unto this day, according to the word of Elisha, that he spake.
And he goeth up thence to Beth-El, and he is going up in the way, and little youths have come out from the city, and scoff at him, and say to him, 'Go up, bald-head! go up, bald-head!'
And he looketh behind him, and seeth them, and declareth them vile in the name of Jehovah, and two bears come out of the forest, and rend of them forty and two lads.
And he goeth thence unto the hill of Carmel, and thence he hath turned back to Samaria.
And Jehoram son of Ahab hath reigned over Israel, in Samaria, in the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and he reigneth twelve years,
and doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, only not like his father, and like his mother, and he turneth aside the standing-pillar of Baal that his father made;
only to the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat that he caused Israel to sin he hath cleaved, he hath not turned aside from it.
And Mesha king of Moab was a sheep-master, and he rendered to the king of Israel a hundred thousand lambs, and a hundred thousand rams, [with] wool,
and it cometh to pass at the death of Ahab, that the king of Moab transgresseth against the king of Israel.
And king Jehoram goeth out in that day from Samaria, and inspecteth all Israel,
and goeth and sendeth unto Jehoshaphat king of Judah, saying, 'The king of Moab hath transgressed against me; dost thou go with me unto Moab for battle?' and he saith, 'I go up, as I, so thou; as my people, so thy people; as my horses, so thy horses.
And he saith, 'Where [is] this — the way we go up?' and he saith, 'The way of the wilderness of Edom.'
And the king of Israel goeth, and the king of Judah, and the king of Edom, and they turn round the way seven days, and there hath been no water for the camp, and for the cattle that [are] at their feet,
and the king of Israel saith, 'Alas, for Jehovah hath called for these three kings, to give them into the hand of Moab.'
And Jehoshaphat saith, 'Is there not here a prophet of Jehovah, and we seek Jehovah by him?' And one of the servants of the king of Israel answereth and saith, 'Here [is] Elisha son of Shaphat, who poured water on the hands of Elijah.'
And Jehoshaphat saith, 'The word of Jehovah is with him;' and go down unto him do the king of Israel, and Jehoshaphat, and the king of Edom.
And Elisha saith unto the king of Israel, 'What — to me and to thee? go unto the prophets of thy father, and unto the prophets of thy mother;' and the king of Israel saith to him, 'Nay, for Jehovah hath called for these three kings to give them into the hand of Moab.'
And Elisha saith, 'Jehovah of Hosts liveth, before whom I have stood; for unless the face of Jehoshaphat king of Judah I am lifting up, I do not look unto thee, nor see thee;
and now, bring to me a minstrel; and it hath been, at the playing of the minstrel, that the hand of Jehovah is on him,
and he saith, 'Thus said Jehovah, Make this valley ditches — ditches;
for thus said Jehovah, Ye do not see wind, nor do ye see rain, and that valley is full of water, and ye have drunk — ye, and your cattle, and your beasts.
'And this hath been light in the eyes of Jehovah, and he hath given Moab into your hand,
and ye have smitten every fenced city, and every choice city, and every good tree ye cause to fall, and all fountains of waters ye stop, and every good portion ye mar with stones.'
And it cometh to pass in the morning, at the ascending of the [morning] -present, that lo, waters are coming in from the way of Edom, and the land is filled with the waters,
and all Moab have heard that the kings have come up to fight against them, and they are called together, from every one girding on a girdle and upward, and they stand by the border.
And they rise early in the morning, and the sun hath shone on the waters, and the Moabites see, from over-against, the waters red as blood,
and say, 'Blood this [is]; the kings have been surely destroyed, and they smite each his neighbour; and now for spoil, Moab!'
And they come in unto the camp of Israel, and the Israelites rise, and smite the Moabites, and they flee from their face; and they enter into Moab, so as to smite Moab,
and the cities they break down, and [on] every good portion they cast each his stone, and have filled it, and every fountain of water they stop, and every good tree they cause to fall — till one had left its stones in Kir-Haraseth, and the slingers go round and smite it.
And the king of Moab seeth that the battle has been too strong for him, and he taketh with him seven hundred men, drawing sword, to cleave through unto the king of Edom, and they have not been able,
and he taketh his son, the first-born who reigneth in his stead, and causeth him to ascend — a burnt-offering on the wall, and there is great wrath against Israel, and they journey from off him, and turn back to the land.
And a certain woman of the wives of the sons of the prophets hath cried unto Elisha, saying, 'Thy servant, my husband, is dead, and thou hast known that thy servant was fearing Jehovah, and the lender hath come to take my two children to him for servants.'
And Elisha saith unto her, 'What do I do for thee? declare to me, what hast thou in the house?' and she saith, 'Thy maid-servant hath nothing in the house except a pot of oil.'
And he saith, 'Go, ask for thee vessels from without, from all thy neighbours — empty vessels — let [them] not be few;
and thou hast entered, and shut the door upon thee, and upon thy sons, and hast poured out into all these vessels, and the full ones thou dost remove.'
And she goeth from him, and shutteth the door upon her, and upon her sons; they are bringing nigh unto her, and she is pouring out,
and it cometh to pass, at the filling of the vessels, that she saith unto her son, 'Bring nigh unto me a vessel more,' and he saith unto her, 'There is not a vessel more;' and the oil stayeth.
And she cometh and declareth to the man of God, and he saith, 'Go, sell the oil, and repay thy loan; and thou [and] thy sons do live of the rest.'
And the day cometh that Elisha passeth over unto Shunem, and there [is] a great woman, and she layeth hold on him to eat bread, and it cometh to pass, at the time of his passing over, he turneth aside thither to eat bread,
and she saith unto her husband, 'Lo, I pray thee, I have known that a holy man of God he is, passing over by us continually;
let us make, I pray thee, a little upper chamber of the wall, and we set for him there a bed, and a table, and a high seat, and a candlestick; and it hath been, in his coming in unto us, he doth turn aside thither.'
And the day cometh, that he cometh in thither, and turneth aside unto the upper chamber, and lieth there,
and he saith unto Gehazi his young man, 'Call for this Shunammite;' and he calleth for her, and she standeth before him.
And he saith to him, 'Say, I pray thee, unto her, Lo, thou hast troubled thyself concerning us with all this trouble; what — to do for thee? is it to speak for thee unto the king, or unto the head of the host?' and she saith, 'In the midst of my people I am dwelling.'
And he saith, 'And what — to do for her?' and Gehazi saith, 'Verily she hath no son, and her husband [is] aged.'
And he saith, 'Call for her;' and he calleth for her, and she standeth at the opening,
and he saith, 'At this season, according to the time of life, thou art embracing a son;' and she saith, 'Nay, my lord, O man of God, do not lie unto thy maid-servant.'
And the woman conceiveth and beareth a son, at this season, according to the time of life, that Elisha spake of unto her.
And the lad groweth, and the day cometh that he goeth out unto his father, unto the reapers,
and he saith unto his father, 'My head, my head;' and he saith unto the young man, 'Bear him unto his mother;'
and he beareth him, and bringeth him in unto his mother, and he sitteth on her knees till the noon, and dieth.
And she goeth up, and layeth him on the bed of the man of God, and shutteth [the door] upon him, and goeth out,
and calleth unto her husband, and saith, 'Send, I pray thee, to me, one of the young men, and one of the asses, and I run unto the man of God, and return.'
And he saith, 'Wherefore art thou going unto him to-day? — neither new moon nor sabbath!' and she saith, 'Peace [to thee]!'
And she saddleth the ass, and saith unto her young man, 'Lead, and go, do not restrain riding for me, except I have said [so] to thee.'
And she goeth, and cometh in unto the man of God, unto the hill of Carmel, and it cometh to pass, at the man of God's seeing her from over-against, that he saith unto Gehazi his young man, 'Lo, this Shunammite;
now, run, I pray thee, to meet her, and say to her, Is there peace to thee? is there peace to thy husband? is there peace to the lad?' and she saith, 'Peace.'
And she cometh in unto the man of God, unto the hill, and layeth hold on his feet, and Gehazi cometh nigh to thrust her away, and the man of God saith, 'Let her alone, for her soul [is] bitter to her, and Jehovah hath hidden [it] from me, and hath not declared [it] to me.'
And she saith, 'Did I ask a son from my lord? did I not say, Do not deceive me?'
And he saith to Gehazi, 'Gird up thy loins, and take my staff in thy hand, and go; when thou dost meet a man, thou dost not salute him; and when a man doth salute thee, thou dost not answer him; and thou hast laid my staff on the face of the youth.'
And the mother of the youth saith, 'Jehovah liveth, and thy soul liveth — if I leave thee;' and he riseth and goeth after her.
And Gehazi hath passed on before them, and layeth the staff on the face of the youth, and there is no voice, and there is no attention, and he turneth back to meet him, and declareth to him, saying, 'The youth hath not awaked.'
And Elisha cometh in to the house, and lo, the youth is dead, laid on his bed,
and he goeth in and shutteth the door upon them both, and prayeth unto Jehovah.
And he goeth up, and lieth down on the lad, and putteth his mouth on his mouth, and his eyes on his eyes, and his hands on his hands, and stretcheth himself upon him, and the flesh of the lad becometh warm;
and he turneth back and walketh in the house, once hither and once thither, and goeth up and stretcheth himself upon him, and the youth sneezeth till seven times, and the youth openeth his eyes.
And he calleth unto Gehazi, and saith, 'Call unto this Shunammite;' and he calleth her, and she cometh in unto him, and he saith, 'Lift up thy son.'
And she goeth in, and falleth at his feet, and boweth herself to the earth, and lifteth up her son, and goeth out.
And Elisha hath turned back to Gilgal, and the famine [is] in the land, and the sons of the prophets are sitting before him, and he saith to his young man, 'Set on the great pot, and boil pottage for the sons of the prophets.'
And one goeth out unto the field to gather herbs, and findeth a vine of the field, and gathereth of it gourds of the field — the fulness of his garment — and cometh in and splitteth [them] into the pot of pottage, for they knew [them] not;
and they pour out for the men to eat, and it cometh to pass at their eating of the pottage, that they have cried out, and say, 'Death [is] in the pot, O man of God!' and they have not been able to eat.
And he saith, 'Then bring ye meal;' and he casteth into the pot, and saith, 'Pour out for the people, and they eat;' and there was no evil thing in the pot.
And a man hath come from Baal-Shalishah, and bringeth in to the man of God bread of first-fruits, twenty loaves of barley, and full ears of corn in its husk, and he saith, 'Give to the people, and they eat.'
And his minister saith, 'What — do I give this before a hundred men?' and he saith, 'Give to the people, and they eat, for thus said Jehovah, Eat and leave;'
and he giveth before them, and they eat and leave, according to the word of Jehovah.
And Naaman, head of the host of the king of Aram, was a great man before his lord, and accepted of face, for by him had Jehovah given salvation to Aram, and the man was mighty in valour — leprous.
And the Aramaeans have gone out [by] troops, and they take captive out of the land of Israel a little damsel, and she is before the wife of Naaman,
and she saith unto her mistress, 'O that my lord [were] before the prophet who [is] in Samaria; then he doth recover him from his leprosy.'
And [one] goeth in and declareth to his lord, saying, 'Thus and thus she hath spoken, the damsel who [is] from the land of Israel.'
And the king of Aram saith, 'Go thou, enter, and I send a letter unto the king of Israel;' and he goeth and taketh in his hand ten talents of silver, and six thousand [pieces] of gold, and ten changes of garments.
And he bringeth in the letter unto the king of Israel, saying, 'And now, at the coming in of this letter unto thee, lo, I have sent unto thee Naaman my servant, and thou hast recovered him from his leprosy.'
And it cometh to pass, at the king of Israel's reading the letter, that he rendeth his garments, and saith, 'Am I God, to put to death and to keep alive, that this [one] is sending unto me to recover a man from his leprosy? for surely know, I pray you, and see, for he is presenting himself to me.'
And it cometh to pass, at Elisha the man of God's hearing that the king of Israel hath rent his garments, that he sendeth unto the king, saying, 'Why hast thou rent thy garments? let him come, I pray thee, unto me, and he doth know that there is a prophet in Israel.'
And Naaman cometh, with his horses and with his chariot, and standeth at the opening of the house for Elisha;
and Elisha sendeth unto him a messenger, saying, 'Go, and thou hast washed seven times in Jordan, and thy flesh doth turn back to thee — and be thou clean.
And Naaman is wroth, and goeth on, and saith, 'Lo, I said, Unto me he doth certainly come out, and hath stood and called in the name of Jehovah his God, and waved his hand over the place, and recovered the leper.
Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? do I not wash in them and I have been clean?' and he turneth and goeth on in fury.
And his servants come nigh, and speak unto him, and say, 'My father, a great thing had the prophet spoken unto thee — dost thou not do [it]? and surely, when he hath said unto thee, Wash, and be clean.'
And he goeth down and dippeth in Jordan seven times, according to the word of the man of God, and his flesh doth turn back as the flesh of a little youth, and is clean.
And he turneth back unto the man of God, he and all his camp, and cometh in, and standeth before him, and saith, 'Lo, I pray thee, I have known that there is not a God in all the earth except in Israel; and now, take, I pray thee, a blessing from thy servant.'
And he saith, 'Jehovah liveth, before whom I have stood — if I take [it];' and he presseth on him to take, and he refuseth.
And Naaman saith, 'If not — let be given, I pray thee, to thy servant, a couple of mules' burden of earth, for thy servant doth make no more burnt-offering and sacrifice to other gods, but to Jehovah.
For this thing Jehovah be propitious to thy servant, in the coming in of my lord into the house of Rimmon to bow himself there, and he was supported by my hand, and I bowed myself [in] the house of Rimmon; for my bowing myself in the house of Rimmon Jehovah be propitious, I pray thee, to thy servant in this thing.'
And he saith to him, 'Go in peace.' And he goeth from him a kibrath of land,
And Gehazi, servant of Elisha the man of God, saith, 'Lo, my lord hath spared Naaman this Aramaean, not to receive from his hand that which he brought; Jehovah liveth; surely if I have run after him, then I have taken from him something.'
And Gehazi pursueth after Naaman, and Naaman seeth one running after him, and alighteth from off the chariot to meet him, and saith, 'Is there peace?'
And he saith, 'Peace; my lord hath sent me, saying, Lo, now, this, come unto me have two young men from the hill-country of Ephraim, of the sons of the prophets; give, I pray thee, to them, a talent of silver, and two changes of garments.'
And Naaman saith, 'Be pleased, take two talents;' and he urgeth on him, and bindeth two talents of silver in two purses, and two changes of garments, and giveth unto two of his young men, and they bear before him;
and he cometh in unto the high place, and taketh out of their hand, and layeth up in the house, and sendeth away the men, and they go.
And he hath come in, and doth stand by his lord, and Elisha saith unto him, 'Whence — Gehazi?' and he saith, 'Thy servant went not hither or thither.'
And he saith unto him, 'My heart went not when the man turned from off his chariot to meet thee; is it a time to take silver, and to take garments, and olives, and vines, and flock, and herd, and men-servants, and maid-servants?
yea, the leprosy of Naaman doth cleave to thee, and to thy seed, — to the age;' and he goeth out from before him — leprous as snow.
And sons of the prophet say unto Elisha, 'Lo, we pray thee, the place where we are dwelling before thee is too strait for us;
let us go, we pray thee, unto the Jordan, and we take thence each one beam, and we make for ourselves there a place to dwell there;' and he saith, 'Go.'
And the one saith, 'Be pleased, I pray thee, and go with thy servants;' and he saith, 'I — I go.'
And he goeth with them, and they come in to the Jordan, and cut down the trees,
and it cometh to pass, the one is felling the beam, and the iron hath fallen into the water, and he crieth and saith, 'Alas! my lord, and it asked!'
And the man of God saith, 'Whither hath it fallen?' and he sheweth him the place, and he cutteth a stick, and casteth thither, and causeth the iron to swim,
and saith, 'Raise to thee;' and he putteth forth his hand and taketh it.
And the king of Aram hath been fighting against Israel, and taketh counsel with his servants, saying, 'At such and such a place [is] my encamping.'
And the man of God sendeth unto the king of Israel, saying, 'Take heed of passing by this place, for thither are the Aramaeans coming down;
and the king of Israel sendeth unto the place of which the man of God spake to him, and warned him, and he is preserved there not once nor twice.
And the heart of the king of Aram is tossed about concerning this thing, and he calleth unto his servants, and saith unto them, 'Do ye not declare to me who of us [is] for the king of Israel?'
And one of his servants saith, 'Nay, my lord, O king, for Elisha the prophet, who [is] in Israel, declareth to the king of Israel the words that thou speakest in the inner part of thy bed-chamber.'
And he saith, 'Go ye and see where he [is], and I send and take him;' and it is declared to him, saying, 'Lo — in Dothan.'
And he sendeth thither horses and chariot, and a heavy force, and they come in by night, and go round against the city.
And the servant of the man of God riseth early, and goeth out, and lo, a force is surrounding the city, and horse and chariot, and his young man saith unto him, 'Alas! my lord, how do we do?'
And he saith, 'Fear not, for more [are] they who [are] with us than they who [are] with them.'
And Elisha prayeth, and saith, 'Jehovah, open, I pray Thee, his eyes, and he doth see;' and Jehovah openeth the eyes of the young man, and he seeth, and lo, the hill is full of horses and chariots of fire, round about Elisha.
And they come down unto it, and Elisha prayeth unto Jehovah, and saith, 'Smite, I pray Thee, this nation with blindness;' and He smiteth them with blindness, according to the word of Elisha.
And Elisha saith unto them, 'This [is] not the way, nor [is] this the city; come after me, and I lead you unto the man whom ye seek;' and he leadeth them to Samaria.
And it cometh to pass, at their coming in to Samaria, that Elisha saith, 'Jehovah, open the eyes of these, and they see;' and Jehovah openeth their eyes, and they see, and lo, in the midst of Samaria!
And the king of Israel saith unto Elisha, at his seeing them, 'Do I smite — do I smite — my father?'
And he saith, 'Thou dost not smite; those whom thou hast taken captive with thy sword and with thy bow art thou smiting? set bread and water before them, and they eat, and drink, and go unto their lord.'
And he prepareth for them great provision, and they eat and drink, and he sendeth them away, and they go unto their lord: and troops of Aram have not added any more to come in to the land of Israel.
And it cometh to pass afterwards, that Ben-Hadad king of Aram gathereth all his camp, and goeth up, and layeth siege to Samaria,
and there is a great famine in Samaria, and lo, they are laying siege to it, till the head of an ass is at eighty silverlings, and a forth of the cab of dovesdung at five silverlings.
And it cometh to pass, the king of Israel is passing by on the wall, and a woman hath cried unto him, saying, 'Save, my lord, O king.'
And he saith, 'Jehovah doth not save thee — whence do I save thee? out of the threshing-floor, or out of the wine-vat?'
And the king saith to her, 'What — to thee?' and she saith, 'This woman said unto me, Give thy son, and we eat him to-day, and my son we eat to-morrow;
and we boil my son and eat him, and I say unto her on the next day, Give thy son, and we eat him; and she hideth her son.'
And it cometh to pass, at the king's hearing the words of the woman, that he rendeth his garments, and he is passing by on the wall, and the people see, and lo, the sackcloth [is] on his flesh within.
And he saith, 'Thus doth God do to me, and thus He doth add — if it remain — the head of Elisha son of Shaphat — upon him this day.'
And Elisha is sitting in his house, and the elders are sitting with him, and [the king] sendeth a man from before him; before the messenger doth come unto him, even he himself said unto the elders, 'Have ye seen that this son of the murderer hath sent to turn aside my head? see, at the coming in of the messenger, shut the door, and ye have held him fast at the door, is not the sound of the feet of his lord behind him?'
He is yet speaking with them, and lo, the messenger is coming down unto him, and he saith, 'Lo, this [is] the evil from Jehovah: what — do I wait for Jehovah any more?'
And Elisha saith, 'Hear ye a word of Jehovah: thus said Jehovah, About this time to-morrow, a measure of fine flour [is] at a shekel, and two measures of barley at a shekel, in the gate of Samaria.'
And the captain whom the king hath, by whose hand he hath been supported, answereth the man of God and saith, 'Lo, Jehovah is making windows in the heavens — shall this thing be?' and he saith, 'Lo, thou art seeing it with thine eyes, and thereof thou dost not eat.'
And four men have been leprous, at the opening of the gate, and they say one unto another, 'What — we are sitting here till we have died;
if we have said, We go in to the city, then the famine [is] in the city, and we have died there; and if we have sat here, then we have died; and now, come and we fall unto the camp of Aram; if they keep us alive, we live, and if they put us to death — we have died.'
And they rise in the twilight, to go in unto the camp of Aram, and they come in unto the extremity of the camp of Aram, and lo, there is not a man there,
seeing Jehovah hath caused the camp of Aram to hear a noise of chariot and a noise of horse — a noise of great force, and they say one unto another, 'Lo, the king of Israel hath hired against us the kings of the Hittites, and the kings of Egypt, to come against us.'
And they rise and flee in the twilight, and forsake their tents, and their horses, and their asses — the camp as it [is] — and flee for their life.
And these lepers come in unto the extremity of the camp, and come in unto one tent, and eat, and drink, and lift up thence silver, and gold, and garments, and go and hide; and they turn back and go in unto another tent, and lift up thence, and go and hide.
And they say one unto another, 'We are not doing right this day; a day of tidings it [is], and we are keeping silent; and — we have waited till the light of the morning, then hath punishment found us; and now, come and we go in and declare to the house of the king.'
And they come in, and call unto the gatekeeper of the city, and declare for themselves, saying, 'We have come in unto the camp of Aram, and lo, there is not there a man, or sound of man, but the bound horse, and the bound ass, and tents as they [are].'
and he calleth the gatekeepers, and they declare to the house of the king within.
And the king riseth by night, and saith unto his servants, 'Let me declare, I pray you, to you that which the Aramaeans have done to us; they have known that we are famished, and they are gone out from the camp to be hidden in the field, saying, When they come out from the city, then we catch them alive, and unto the city we enter.'
And one of his servants answereth and saith, 'Then let them take, I pray thee, five of the horses that are left, that have been left in it — lo, they [are] as all the multitude of Israel who have been left in it; lo, they are as all the multitude of Israel who have been consumed — and we send and see.'
And they take two chariot-horses, and the king sendeth after the camp of Aram, saying, 'Go, and see.'
And they go after them unto the Jordan, and lo, all the way is full of garments and vessels that the Aramaeans have cast away in their haste, and the messengers turn back and declare to the king.
And the people go out and spoil the camp of Aram, and there is a measure of fine flour at a shekel, and two measures of barley at a shekel, according to the word of Jehovah.
And the king hath appointed the captain, by whose hand he is supported, over the gate, and the people tread him down in the gate, and he dieth, as the man of God spake, which he spake in the coming down of the king unto him,
yea, it cometh to pass, according to the speaking of the man of God unto the king, saying, 'Two measures of barley at a shekel, and a measure of fine flour at a shekel are, at this time to-morrow, in the gate of Samaria;'
and the captain answereth the man of God, and saith, 'And lo, Jehovah is making windows in the heavens — it is according to this word?' and he saith, 'Lo, thou art seeing with thine eyes, and thereof thou dost not eat;'
and it cometh to him so, and the people tread him down in the gate, and he dieth.
And Elisha spake unto the woman whose son he had revived, saying, 'Rise and go, thou and thy household, and sojourn where thou dost sojourn, for Jehovah hath called for a famine, and also, it is coming unto the land seven years.'
And the woman riseth, and doth according to the word of the man of God, and goeth, she and her household, and sojourneth in the land of the Philistines seven years.
And it cometh to pass, at the end of seven years, that the woman turneth back from the land of the Philistines, and goeth out to cry unto the king, for her house, and for her field.
And the king is speaking unto Gehazi, servant of the man of God, saying, 'Recount, I pray thee, to me, the whole of the great things that Elisha hath done.'
And it cometh to pass, he is recounting to the king how he had revived the dead, and lo, the woman whose son he had revived is crying unto the king, for her house and for her field, and Gehazi saith, 'My lord, O king, this [is] the woman, and this her son, whom Elisha revived.'
And the king asketh at the woman, and she recounteth to him, and the king appointeth to her a certain eunuch, saying, 'Give back all that she hath, and all the increase of the field from the day of her leaving the land even till now.'
And Elisha cometh in to Damascus, and Ben-Hadad king of Aram is sick, and it is declared to him, saying, 'The man of God hath come hither.'
And the king saith unto Hazael, 'Take in thy hand a present, and go to meet the man of God, and thou hast sought Jehovah by him, saying, Do I revive from this sickness?'
And Hazael goeth to meet him, and taketh a present in his hand, even of every good thing of Damascus, a burden of forty camels, and he cometh in and standeth before him, and saith, 'Thy son Ben-Hadad, king of Aram, hath sent me unto thee, saying, Do I revive from this sickness?'
And Elisha saith unto him, 'Go, say, Thou dost certainly not revive, seeing Jehovah hath shewed me that he doth surely die.'
And he setteth his face, yea, he setteth [it] till he is ashamed, and the man of God weepeth.
And Hazael saith, 'Wherefore is my lord weeping?' and he saith, 'Because I have known the evil that thou dost to the sons of Israel — their fenced places thou dost send into fire, and their young men with sword thou dost slay, and their sucklings thou dost dash to pieces, and their pregnant women thou dost rip up.'
And Hazael saith, 'But what, [is] thy servant the dog, that he doth this great thing?' And Elisha saith, 'Jehovah hath shewed me thee — king of Aram.'
And he goeth from Elisha, and cometh in unto his lord, and he saith unto him, 'What said Elisha to thee?' and he saith, 'He said to me, Thou dost certainly recover.'
And it cometh to pass on the morrow, that he taketh the coarse cloth, and dippeth in water, and spreadeth on his face, and he dieth, and Hazael reigneth in his stead.
And in the fifth year of Joram son of Ahab king of Israel — and Jehoshaphat [is] king of Judah — hath Jehoram son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah reigned;
a son of thirty and two years was he in his reigning, and eight years he hath reigned in Jerusalem.
And he walketh in the way of the kings of Israel, as did the house of Ahab, for a daughter of Ahab was to him for a wife, and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah,
and Jehovah was not willing to destroy Judah, for the sake of David his servant, as He said to him, to give to him a lamp — to his sons all the days.
In his days hath Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah, and they cause a king to reign over them,
and Joram passeth over to Zair, and all the chariots with him, and he himself hath risen by night, and smiteth Edom, that is coming round about unto him, and the heads of the chariots, and the people fleeth to its tents;
and Edom revolteth from under the hand of Judah till this day; then doth Libnah revolt at that time.
And the rest of the matters of Joram, and all that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And Joram lieth with his fathers, and is buried with his fathers in the city of David, and reign doth Ahaziah his son in his stead.
In the twelfth year of Joram son of Ahab king of Israel reigned hath Ahaziah son of Jehoram king of Judah;
a son of twenty and two years [is] Ahaziah in his reigning, and one year he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Athaliah daughter of Omri king of Israel,
and he walketh in the way of the house of Ahab, and doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, like the house of Ahab, for he [is] son-in-law of the house of Ahab.
And he goeth with Joram son of Ahab to battle with Hazael king of Aram in Ramoth-Gilead, and the Aramaeans smite Joram,
and Joram the king turneth back to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds with which the Arameans smite him in Ramah, in his fighting with Hazael king of Aram, and Ahaziah son of Jehoram king of Judah hath gone down to see Joram son of Ahab in Jezreel, for he is sick.
And Elisha the prophet hath called to one of the sons of the prophets, and saith to him, 'Gird up thy loins, and take this vial of oil in thy hand, and go to Ramoth-Gilead,
and thou hast gone in there, and see thou there Jehu son of Jehoshaphat, son of Nimshi, and thou hast gone in, and caused him to rise out of the midst of his brethren, and brought him in to the inner part of an inner-chamber,
and taken the vial of oil, and poured on his head, and said, Thus said Jehovah, I have anointed thee for king unto Israel; and thou hast opened the door, and fled, and dost not wait.'
And the young man goeth — the young man the prophet — to Ramoth-Gilead,
and cometh in, and lo, chiefs of the force are sitting, and he saith, 'I have a word unto thee, O chief!' and Jehu saith, 'Unto which of all of us?' and he saith, 'Unto thee, O chief.'
And he riseth and cometh in to the house, and he poureth the oil on his head, and saith to him, 'Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, I have anointed thee for king unto the people of Jehovah, unto Israel,
and thou hast smitten the house of Ahab thy lord, and I have required the blood of My servants the prophets, and the blood of all the servants of Jehovah, from the hand of Jezebel;
and perished hath all the house of Ahab, and I have cut off to Ahab those sitting on the wall, and restrained, and left, in Israel,
and I have given up the house of Ahab like the house of Jeroboam son of Nebat, and as the house of Baasha son of Ahijah,
and Jezebel do the dogs eat in the portion of Jezreel, and there is none burying;' and he openeth the door and fleeth.
And Jehu hath gone out unto the servants of his lord, and [one] saith to him, 'Is there peace? wherefore came this madman unto thee?' and he saith unto them, 'Ye have known the man and his talk.'
And they say, 'False, declare, we pray thee, to us;' and he saith, 'Thus and thus spake he unto me, saying, Thus said Jehovah, I have anointed thee for king unto Israel.'
And they haste and take each his garment, and put [it] under him at the top of the stairs, and blow with a trumpet, and say, 'Reigned hath Jehu!'
And Jehu son of Jehoshaphat, son of Nimshi, conspireth against Joram — (and Joram was keeping in Ramoth-Gilead, he and all Israel, from the presence of Hazael king of Aram,
and king Joram turneth back to be healed in Jezreel, of the wounds with which the Aramaeans smite him, in his fighting with Hazael king of Aram) — and Jehu saith, 'If it is your mind, let not an escaped one go out from the city, to go to declare [it] in Jezreel.'
And Jehu rideth, and goeth to Jezreel, for Joram is lying there, and Ahaziah king of Judah hath gone down to see Joram.
And the watchman is standing on the tower in Jezreel, and seeth the company of Jehu in his coming, and saith, 'A company I see;' and Joram saith, 'Take a rider and send to meet them, and let him say, Is there peace?'
and the rider on the horse goeth to meet him, and saith, 'Thus said the king, Is there peace?' and Jehu saith, 'What — to thee and to peace? turn round behind me.' And the watchman declareth, saying, 'The messenger came unto them, and he hath not returned.'
And he sendeth a second rider on a horse, and he cometh in unto them, and saith, 'Thus said the king, Is there peace?' and Jehu saith, 'What — to thee and to peace? turn round behind me.'
And the watchman declareth, saying, 'He came unto them, and he hath not returned, and the driving [is] like the driving of Jehu son of Nimshi, for with madness he driveth.'
And Jehoram saith, 'Harness;' and his chariot is harnessed, and Jehoram king of Israel goeth out, and Ahaziah king of Judah, each in his chariot, and they go out to meet Jehu, and find him in the portion of Naboth the Jezreelite.
And it cometh to pass, at Jehoram's seeing Jehu, that he saith, 'Is there peace, Jehu?' and he saith, 'What [is] the peace, while the whoredoms of Jezebel thy mother, and her witchcrafts, are many?'
And Jehoram turneth his hands, and fleeth, and saith unto Ahaziah, 'Deceit, O Ahaziah!'
And Jehu hath filled his hand with a bow, and smiteth Jehoram between his arms, and the arrow goeth out from his heart, and he boweth down in his chariot.
And [Jehu] saith unto Bidkar his captain, 'Lift up, cast him into the portion of the field of Naboth the Jezreelite — for, remember, I and thou were riding together after Ahab his father, and Jehovah lifted upon him this burden:
Have I not the blood of Naboth and the blood of his sons seen yesternight — the affirmation of Jehovah — yea, I have recompensed to thee in this portion — the affirmation of Jehovah; — and now, lift up, cast him into the portion, according to the word of Jehovah.'
And Ahaziah king of Judah hath seen, and fleeth the way of the garden-house, and Jehu pursueth after him, and saith, 'Smite him — also him — in the chariot,' in the going up to Gur, that [is] Ibleam, and he fleeth to Megiddo, and dieth there,
and his servants carry him in a chariot to Jerusalem, and bury him in his burying-place, with his fathers, in the city of David.
And in the eleventh year of Joram son of Ahab reign did Ahaziah over Judah.
And Jehu cometh in to Jezreel, and Jezebel hath heard, and putteth her eyes in paint and maketh right her head, and looketh out through the window.
And Jehu hath come into the gate, and she saith, 'Was there peace [to] Zimri — slayer of his lord?'
And he lifteth up his face unto the window, and saith, 'Who [is] with me? — who?' and look out unto him do two [or] three eunuchs;
And he saith, 'Let her go;' and they let her go, and [some] of her blood is sprinkled on the wall, and on the horses, and he treadeth her down.
And he cometh in, and eateth, and drinketh, and saith, 'Look after, I pray you, this cursed one, and bury her, for she [is] a king's daughter.'
And they go to bury her, and have not found of her except the skull, and the feet, and the palms of the hands.
And they turn back, and declare to him, and he saith, 'The word of Jehovah it [is], that He spake by the hand of this servant Elijah the Tishbite, saying, In the portion of Jezreel do the dogs eat the flesh of Jezebel,
and the carcase of Jezebel hath been as dung on the face of the field in the portion of Jezreel, that they say not, This [is] Jezebel.'
And Ahab hath seventy sons in Samaria, and Jehu writeth letters, and sendeth to Samaria, unto the heads of Jezreel, the elders, and unto the supporters of Ahab, saying,
'And now, at the coming in of this letter unto you, and with you [are] sons of your lord, and with you [are] the chariots and the horses, and a fenced city, and the armour,
and ye have seen the best and the uprightest of the sons of your lord, and have set [him] on the throne of his father, and fight ye for the house of your lord.'
And they fear very greatly, and say, 'Lo, the two kings have not stood before him, and how do we stand — we?'
And he who [is] over the house, and he who [is] over the city, and the elders, and the supporters, send unto Jehu, saying, 'Thy servants we [are], and all that thou sayest unto us we do; we do not make any one king — that which [is] good in thine eyes do.'
And he writeth unto them a letter a second time, saying, 'If ye [are] for me, and to my voice are hearkening, take the heads of the men — the sons of your lord, and come unto me about this time to-morrow, to Jezreel;' and the sons of the king [are] seventy men, with the great ones of the city those bringing them up.
And it cometh to pass, at the coming in of the letter unto them, that they take the sons of the king, and slaughter seventy men, and put their heads in baskets, and send unto him to Jezreel,
and the messenger cometh in, and declareth to him, saying, 'They have brought in the heads of the sons of the king,' and he saith, 'Make them two heaps at the opening of the gate till the morning.'
And it cometh to pass in the morning, that he goeth out, and standeth, and saith unto all the people, 'Righteous are ye; lo, I have conspired against my lord, and slay him — and who smote all these?
Know ye now, that nothing doth fall of the word of Jehovah to the earth that Jehovah spake against the house of Ahab, and Jehovah hath done that which He spake by the hand of His servant Elijah.'
And Jehu smiteth all those left to the house of Ahab in Jezreel, and all his great men, and his acquaintances, and his priests, till he hath not left to him a remnant.
And he riseth, and cometh in and goeth to Samaria; he [is] at the shepherds' shearing-house in the way,
and Jehu hath found the brethren of Ahaziah king of Judah, and saith, 'Who [are] ye?' and they say, 'Brethren of Ahaziah we [are], and we go down to salute the sons of the king, and the sons of the mistress.'
And he saith, 'Catch them alive;' and they catch them alive, and slaughter them at the pit of the shearing-house, forty and two men, and he hath not left a man of them.
And he goeth thence, and findeth Jehonadab son of Rechab — to meet him, and blesseth him, and saith unto him, 'Is thy heart right, as my heart [is] with thy heart?' and Jehonadab saith, 'It is;' — 'Then it is; give thy hand;' and he giveth his hand, and he causeth him to come up into him into the chariot,
and saith, 'Come with me, and look on my zeal for Jehovah;' and they cause him to ride in his chariot.
And he cometh in to Samaria, and smiteth all those left to Ahab in Samaria, till his destroying him, according to the word of Jehovah that He spake unto Elisha.
And Jehu gathereth the whole of the people, and saith unto them, 'Ahab served Baal a little — Jehu doth serve him much:
and now, all the prophets of Baal, all his servants, and all his priests, call ye unto me; let not a man be lacking, for a great sacrifice I have for Baal; every one who is lacking — he doth not live;' and Jehu hath done [it] in subtilty, in order to destroy the servants of Baal.
And Jehu saith, 'Sanctify a restraint for Baal;' and they proclaim [it].
And Jehu sendeth into all Israel, and all the servants of Baal come in, and there hath not been left a man who hath not come in; and they come in to the house of Baal, and the house of Baal is full — mouth to mouth.
And he saith to him who [is] over the wardrobe, 'Bring out clothing to all servants of Baal;' and he bringeth out to them the clothing.
And Jehu goeth in, and Jehonadab son of Rechab, to the house of Baal, and saith to the servants of Baal, 'Search and see, lest there be here with you of the servants of Jehovah — but, the servants of Baal by themselves.'
And they come in to make sacrifices and burnt-offerings, and Jehu hath set for himself in an out-place eighty men, and saith, 'The man who letteth escape [any] of the men whom I am bringing in unto your hand — his soul for his soul.'
And it cometh to pass at his finishing to make the burnt-offering, that Jehu saith to the runners, and to the captains, 'Go in, smite them, let none come out;' and they smite them by the mouth of the sword, and the runners and the captains cast [them] out; and they go unto the city, to the house of Baal,
and bring out the standing-pillars of the house of Baal, and burn them,
and break down the standing-pillar of Baal, and break down the house of Baal, and appoint it for a draught-house unto this day.
And Jehu destroyeth Baal out of Israel,
only — the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat, that he caused Israel to sin, Jehu hath not turned aside from after them — the calves of gold that [are] at Beth-El, and in Dan.
And Jehovah saith unto Jehu, 'Because that thou hast done well, to do that which [is] right in Mine eyes — according to all that [is] in My heart thou hast done to the house of Ahab — the sons of the fourth [generation] do sit for thee on the throne of Israel.'
And Jehu hath not taken heed to walk in the law of Jehovah, God of Israel, with all his heart, he hath not turned aside from the sins of Jeroboam, that he caused Israel to sin.
In those days hath Jehovah begun to cut off [some] in Israel, and Hazael smiteth them in all the border of Israel,
from the Jordan, at the sun-rising, the whole land of Gilead, of the Gadite, and the Reubenite, and the Manassahite (from Aroer, that [is] by the brook Arnon), even Gilead and Bashan.
And the rest of the matters of Jehu, and all that he did, and all his might, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel?
And Jehu lieth with his fathers, and they bury him in Samaria, and reign doth Jehoahaz his son in his stead.
And the days that Jehu hath reigned over Israel [are] twenty and eight years, in Samaria.
And Athaliah [is] mother of Ahaziah, and she hath seen that her son [is] dead, and she riseth, and destroyeth all the seed of the kingdom;
and Jehosheba daughter of king Joram, sister of Ahaziah, taketh Joash son of Ahaziah, and stealeth him out of the midst of the sons of the king who are put to death, him and his nurse, in the inner part of the bed-chambers, and they hide him from the presence of Athaliah, and he hath not been put to death,
and he is with her, in the house of Jehovah, hiding himself, six years, and Athaliah is reigning over the land.
And in the seventh year hath Jehoiada sent and taketh the heads of the hundreds, of the executioners and of the runners, and bringeth them in unto him, to the house of Jehovah, and maketh with them a covenant, and causeth them to swear in the house of Jehovah, and sheweth them the son of the king,
and commandeth them, saying, 'This [is] the thing that ye do; The third of you [are] going in on the sabbath, and keepers of the charge of the house of the king,
and the third [is] at the gate of Sur, and the third at the gate behind the runners, and ye have kept the charge of the house pulled down;
and two parts of you, all going out on the sabbath — they have kept the charge of the house of Jehovah about the king,
and ye have compassed the king round about, each with his weapons in his hand, and he who is coming unto the ranges is put to death; and be ye with the king in his going out and in his coming in.'
And the heads of the hundreds do according to all that Jehoiada the priest commanded, and take each his men going in on the sabbath, with those going out on the sabbath, and come in unto Jehoiada the priest,
and the priest giveth to the heads of the hundreds the spears and the shields that king David had, that [are] in the house of Jehovah.
And the runners stand, each with his weapons in his hand, from the right shoulder of the house unto the left shoulder of the house, by the altar and by the house, by the king round about;
and he bringeth out the son of the king, and putteth on him the crown, and the testimony, and they make him king, and anoint him, and smite the hand, and say, 'Let the king live.'
And Athaliah heareth the voice of the runners [and] of the people, and she cometh in unto the people, to the house of Jehovah,
and looketh, and lo, the king is standing by the pillar, according to the ordinance, and the heads, and the trumpets, [are] by the king, and all the people of the land are rejoicing, and blowing with trumpets, and Athaliah rendeth her garments, and calleth, 'Conspiracy! conspiracy!'
And Jehoiada the priest commandeth the heads of the hundreds, inspectors of the force, and saith unto them, 'Bring her out unto the outside of the ranges, and him who is going after her, put to death by the sword:' for the priest had said, 'Let her not be put to death in the house of Jehovah.'
And they make for her sides, and she entereth the way of the entering in of the horses to the house of the king, and is put to death there.
And Jehoiada maketh the covenant between Jehovah and the king and the people, to be for a people to Jehovah, and between the king and the people.
And all the people of the land go in to the house of Baal, and break it down, its altars and its images they have thoroughly broken, and Mattan priest of Baal they have slain before the altars; and the priest setteth inspectors over the house of Jehovah,
and taketh the heads of the hundreds, and the executioners, and the runners, and all the people of the land, and they bring down the king from the house of Jehovah, and come by the way of the gate of the runners, to the house of the king, and he sitteth on the throne of the kings.
And all the people of the land rejoice, and the city [is] quiet, and Athaliah they have put to death by the sword in the house of the king;
a son of seven years is Jehoash in his reigning.
In the seventh year of Jehu reigned hath Jehoash, and forty years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Zibiah of Beer-Sheba,
and Jehoash doth that which is right in the eyes of Jehovah all his days in which Jehoiada the priest directed him,
only, the high places have not turned aside, still are the people sacrificing and making perfume in high places.
And Jehoash saith unto the priests, 'All the money of the sanctified things that is brought in to the house of Jehovah, the money of him who is passing over, each the money of his valuation, all the money that it goeth up on the heart of a man to bring in to the house of Jehovah,
do the priests take to them, each from his acquaintance, and they strengthen the breach of the house, in all [places] where there is found a breach.'
And it cometh to pass, in the twenty and third year of king Jehoash, the priests have not strengthened the breach of the house,
and king Jehoash calleth to Jehoiada the priest, and to the priests, and saith unto them, 'Wherefore are ye not strengthening the breach of the house? and now, receive no money from your acquaintances, but for the breach of the house give it.'
And the priests consent not to receive money from the people, nor to strengthen the breach of the house,
and Jehoiada the priest taketh a chest, and pierceth a hole in its lid, and putteth it near the altar, on the right side, as one cometh in to the house of Jehovah, and the priests keeping the threshold have put there all the money that is brought in to the house of Jehovah.
And it cometh to pass, at their seeing that the money [is] abundant in the chest, that there goeth up a scribe of the king, and of the high priest, and they bind [it] up, and count the money that is found [in] the house of Jehovah,
and have given the weighed money into the hands of those doing the work, those inspecting the house of Jehovah, and they bring it out to those working in the wood, and to builders who are working in the house of Jehovah,
and to those [repairing] the wall, and to hewers of stone, and to buy wood and hewn stones to strengthen the breach of the house of Jehovah, and for all that goeth out on the house, to strengthen it.
Only, there is not made for the house of Jehovah basins of silver, snuffers, bowls, trumpets, any vessel of gold, and vessel of silver, out of the money that is brought into the house of Jehovah;
for to those doing the work they give it, and they have strengthened with it the house of Jehovah,
and they do not reckon with the men into whose hand they give the money to give to those doing the work, for in faithfulness they are dealing.
The money of a trespass-offering, and the money of sin-offerings is not brought in to the house of Jehovah — for the priests it is.
Then go up doth Hazael king of Aram, and fighteth against Gath, and captureth it, and Hazael setteth his face to go up against Jerusalem;
and Jehoash king of Judah taketh all the sanctified things that Jehoshaphat, and Jehoram, and Ahaziah, his fathers, kings of Judah, had sanctified, and his own sanctified things, and all the gold that is found in the treasures of the house of Jehovah and of the house of the king, and sendeth to Hazael king of Aram, and he goeth up from off Jerusalem.
And the rest of the matters of Joash, and all that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And his servants rise, and make a conspiracy, and smite Joash in the house of Millo, that is going down to Silla:
yea, Jozachar son of Shimeath, and Jehozabad son of Shemer, his servants, have smitten him, and he dieth, and they bury him with his fathers in the city of David, and reign doth Amaziah his son, in his stead.
In the twenty and third year of Joash son of Ahaziah king of Judah, hath Jehoahaz son of Jehu reigned over Israel, in Samaria — seventeen years,
and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, and goeth after the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat, that he caused Israel to sin — he turned not aside from it,
and the anger of Jehovah burneth against Israel, and He giveth them into the hand of Hazael king of Aram, and into the hand of Ben-Hadad son of Hazael, all the days.
And Jehoahaz appeaseth the face of Jehovah, and Jehovah hearkeneth unto him, for He hath seen the oppression of Israel, for oppressed them hath the king of Aram, —
and Jehovah giveth to Israel a saviour, and they go out from under the hand of Aram, and the sons of Israel dwell in their tents as heretofore;
only, they have not turned aside from the sins of the house of Jeroboam, that he caused Israel to sin, therein they walked, and also, the shrine hath remained in Samaria, —
for he left not to Jehoahaz of the people except fifty horsemen, and ten chariots, and ten thousand footmen, for the king of Aram hath destroyed them, and maketh them as dust for threshing.
And the rest of the matters of Jehoahaz, and all that he did, and his might, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel?
And Jehoahaz lieth with his fathers, and they bury him in Samaria, and reign doth Joash his son in his stead.
In the thirty and seventh year of Joash king of Judah reigned hath Jehoash son of Jehoahaz over Israel, in Samaria — sixteen years,
and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, he hath not turned aside from all the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat, that he caused Israel to sin, therein he walked.
And the rest of the matters of Joash, and all that he did, and his might with which he fought with Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel?
And Joash lieth with his fathers, and Jeroboam hath sat on his throne, and Joash is buried in Samaria, with the kings of Israel.
And Elisha hath been sick with his sickness in which he dieth, and come down unto him doth Joash king of Israel, and weepeth on his face, and saith, 'My father, my father, the chariot of Israel, and its horsemen.'
And Elisha saith to him, 'Take bow and arrows:' and he taketh unto him bow and arrows.
And he saith to the king of Israel, 'Place thy hand on the bow;' and he placeth his hand, and Elisha putteth his hands on the hands of the king,
and saith, 'Open the window eastward;' and he openeth, and Elisha saith, 'Shoot,' and he shooteth; and he saith, 'An arrow of salvation to Jehovah, and an arrow of salvation against Aram, and thou hast smitten Aram, in Aphek, till consuming.'
And he saith, 'Take the arrows,' and he taketh; and he saith to the king of Israel, 'Smite to the earth;' and he smiteth three times, and stayeth.
And the man of God is wroth against him, and saith, 'By smiting five or six times then thou hadst smitten Aram till consuming; and now, three times thou dost smite Aram.'
And Elisha dieth, and they bury him, and troops of Moab come in to the land, at the coming in of the year,
and it cometh to pass, they are burying a man, and lo, they have seen the troop, and cast the man into the grave of Elisha, and the man goeth and cometh against the bones of Elisha, and liveth, and riseth on his feet.
And Hazael king of Aram hath oppressed Israel all the days of Jehoahaz,
and Jehovah doth favour them, and pity them, and turn unto them, for the sake of His covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and hath not been willing to destroy them, nor to cast them from His presence as yet.
And Hazael king of Aram dieth, and reign doth Ben-Hadad his son in his stead,
and Jehoash son of Jehoahaz turneth and taketh the cities out of the hand of Ben-Hadad son of Hazael that he had taken out of the hand of Jehoahaz his father in war; three times hath Joash smitten him, and he bringeth back the cities of Israel.
In the second year of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel reigned hath Amaziah son of Joash king of Judah;
a son of twenty and five years was he in his reigning, and twenty and nine years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Jehoaddan of Jerusalem,
and he doth that which [is] right in the eyes of Jehovah, only not like David his father, according to all that Joash his father did he hath done,
only, the high places have not turned aside — yet are the people sacrificing and making perfume in high places.
And it cometh to pass, when the kingdom hath been strong in his hand, that he smiteth his servants, those smiting the king his father,
and the sons of those smiting [him] he hath not put to death, as it is written in the book of the law of Moses that Jehovah commanded, saying, 'Fathers are not put to death for sons, and sons are not put to death for fathers, but each for his own sin is put to death.'
He hath smitten Edom, in the valley of salt — ten thousand, and seized Selah in war, and [one] calleth its name Joktheel unto this day,
then hath Amaziah sent messengers unto Jehoash son of Jehoahaz, son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, 'Come, we look one another in the face.'
And Jehoash king of Israel sendeth unto Amaziah king of Judah, saying, 'The thorn that [is] in Lebanon hath sent unto the cedar that [is] in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son for a wife; and pass by doth a beast of the field that [is] in Lebanon, and treadeth down the thorn.
Thou hast certainly smitten Edom, and thy heart hath lifted thee up; be honoured, and abide in thy house; and why dost thou stir thyself up in evil, that thou hast fallen, thou, and Judah with thee?'
And Amaziah hath not hearkened, and go up doth Jehoash king of Israel, and they look one another in the face, he and Amaziah king of Judah, in Beth-Shemesh, that [is] Judah's,
and Judah is smitten before Israel, and they flee each to his tent.
And Amaziah king of Judah, son of Jehoash son of Ahaziah, caught hath Jehoash king of Israel in Beth-Shemesh, and they come in to Jerusalem, and he bursteth through the wall of Jerusalem, at the gate of Ephraim unto the gate of the corner, four hundred cubits,
and hath taken all the gold and the silver, and all the vessels that are found in the house of Jehovah, and in the treasures of the house of the king, and the sons of the pledges, and turneth back to Samaria.
And the rest of the matters of Jehoash that he did, and his might, and how he fought with Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel?
And Jehoash lieth with his fathers, and is buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel, and reign doth Jeroboam his son in his stead.
And Amaziah son of Joash king of Judah liveth after the death of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen years,
and the rest of the matters of Amaziah are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And they make a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem, and he fleeth to Lachish, and they send after him to Lachish, and put him to death there,
and lift him up on the horses, and he is buried in Jerusalem, with his fathers, in the city of David.
And all the people of Judah take Azariah, and he [is] a son of sixteen years, and cause him to reign instead of his father Amaziah;
he hath built Elath, and bringeth it back to Judah, after the lying of the king with his fathers.
In the fifteenth year of Amaziah son of Joash king of Judah, reigned hath Jeroboam son of Joash king of Israel in Samaria — forty and one years,
and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, he hath not turned aside from all the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat that he caused Israel to sin.
He hath brought back the border of Israel, from the entering in of Hamath unto the sea of the desert, according to the word of Jehovah, God of Israel, that He spake by the hand of His servant Jonah son of Amittai the prophet, who [is] of Gath-Hepher,
for Jehovah hath seen the affliction of Israel — very bitter, and there is none restrained, and there is none left, and there is no helper to Israel;
and Jehovah hath not spoken to blot out the name of Israel from under the heavens, and saveth them by the hand of Jeroboam son of Joash.
And the rest of the matters of Jeroboam, and all that he did, and his might with which he fought, and with which he brought back Damascus, and Hamath of Judah, into Israel, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel?
And Jeroboam lieth with his fathers, with the kings of Israel, and reign doth Zechariah his son in his stead.
In the twenty and seventh year of Jeroboam king of Israel reigned hath Azariah son of Amaziah king of Judah,
a son of sixteen years was he in his reigning, and fifty and two years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Jecholiah of Jerusalem,
and he doth that which [is] right in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that Amaziah his father did,
only, the high places have not turned aside — yet are the people sacrificing and making perfume in high places.
And Jehovah smiteth the king, and he is a leper unto the day of his death, and he dwelleth in a separate house, and Jotham son of the king [is] over the house, judging the people of the land.
And the rest of the matters of Azariah, and all that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And Azariah lieth with his fathers, and they bury him with his fathers, in the city of David, and reign doth Jotham his son in his stead.
In the thirty and eighth year of Azariah king of Judah reigned hath Zechariah son of Jeroboam over Israel, in Samaria, six months,
and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, as did his fathers, he hath not turned aside from the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat that he caused Israel to sin.
And Shallum son of Jabesh conspireth against him, and smiteth him before the people, and putteth him to death, and reigneth in his stead.
And the rest of the matters of Zechariah, lo, they are written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel.
It [is] the word of Jehovah that He spake unto Jehu, saying, 'Sons of the fourth [generation] do sit for thee on the throne of Israel;' and it is so.
Shallum son of Jabesh hath reigned in the thirty and ninth year of Uzziah king of Judah, and he reigneth a month of days in Samaria;
and go up doth Menahem son of Gadi from Tirzah and cometh in to Samaria, and smiteth Shallum son of Jabesh in Samaria, and putteth him to death, and reigneth in his stead.
And the rest of the matters of Shallum, and his conspiracy that he made, lo, they are written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel.
Then doth Menahem smite Tiphsah, and all who [are] in it, and its borders from Tirzah, for it opened not [to him], and he smiteth [it], all its pregnant women he hath ripped up.
In the thirty and ninth year of Azariah king of Judah reigned hath Menahem son of Gadi over Israel — ten years in Samaria.
And he doth the evil in the eyes of Jehovah, he hath turned not aside from the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat that he caused Israel to sin, all his days.
Pul king of Asshur hath come against the land, and Menahem giveth to Pul a thousand talents of silver, for his hand being with him to strengthen the kingdom in his hand.
And Menahem bringeth out the silver [from] Israel, [from] all the mighty men of wealth, to give to the king of Asshur, fifty shekels of silver for each one, and the king of Asshur turneth back and hath not stayed there in the land.
And the rest of the matters of Menahem, and all that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel?
And Menahem lieth with his fathers, and reign doth Pekahiah his son in his stead.
In the fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah hath Pekahiah son of Menahem reigned over Israel, in Samaria — two years,
and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, he hath not turned aside from the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat that he caused Israel to sin.
And Pekah son of Remaliah, his captain, doth conspire against him, and smiteth him in Samaria, in the high place of the house of the king with Argob and Arieh, and with him fifty men of the sons of the Gileadites, and he putteth him to death, and reigneth in his stead.
And the rest of the matters of Pekahiah, and all that he did, lo, they are written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel.
In the fifty and second year of Azariah king of Judah, reigned hath Pekah son of Remaliah over Israel, in Samaria — twenty years,
and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, he hath not turned aside from the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat, that he caused Israel to sin.
In the days of Pekah king of Israel hath Tiglath-Pileser king of Asshur come, and taketh Ijon, and Abel-Beth-Maachah, and Janoah, and Kedesh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and Galilee, all the land of Naphtali, and removeth them to Asshur.
And make a conspiracy doth Hoshea son of Elah against Pekah son of Remaliah, and smiteth him, and putteth him to death, and reigneth in his stead, in the twentieth year of Jotham son of Uzziah.
And the rest of the matters of Pekah, and all that he did, lo, they are written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel.
In the second year of Pekah son of Remaliah king of Israel reigned hath Jotham son of Uzziah king of Judah.
A son of twenty and five years was he in his reigning, and sixteen years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Jerusha daughter of Zadok,
and he doth that which [is] right in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that Uzziah his father did he hath done.
Only, the high places have not turned aside — yet are the people sacrificing and making perfume in high places; he hath built the high gate of the house of Jehovah.
And the rest of the matters of Jotham, and all that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah?
In those days hath Jehovah begun to send against Judah Rezin king of Amram and Pekah son of Remaliah.
And Jotham lieth with his fathers, and is buried with his fathers, in the city of David his father, and reign doth Ahaz his son in his stead.
In the seventeenth year of Pekah son of Remaliah reigned hath Ahaz son of Jotham king of Judah.
A son of twenty years [is] Ahaz in his reigning, and sixteen years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and he hath not done that which [is] right in the eyes of Jehovah his God, like David his father,
and he walketh in the way of the kings of Israel, and also his son he hath caused to pass over into fire, according to the abominations of the nations that Jehovah dispossessed from the presence of the sons of Israel,
and he sacrificeth and maketh perfume in high places, and on the heights, and under every green tree.
Then doth Rezin king of Aram go up, and Pekah son of Remaliah king of Israel, to Jerusalem, to battle, and they lay siege to Ahaz, and they have not been able to fight.
At that time hath Rezin king of Aram brought back Elath to Aram, and casteth out the Jews from Elath, and the Aramaeans have come in to Elath, and dwell there unto this day.
And Ahaz sendeth messengers unto Tiglath-Pileser king of Asshur, saying, 'Thy servant and thy son [am] I; come up and save me out of the hand of the king of Aram, and out of the hand of the king of Israel, who are rising up against me.'
And Ahaz taketh the silver and the gold that is found in the house of Jehovah, and in the treasures of the house of the king, and sendeth to the king of Asshur — a bribe.
And hearken unto him doth the king of Asshur, and the king of Asshur goeth up unto Damascus, and seizeth it, and removeth [the people of] it to Kir, and Rezin he hath put to death.
And king Ahaz goeth to meet Tiglath-Pileser king of Asshur [at] Damascus, and seeth the altar that [is] in Damascus, and king Ahaz sendeth unto Urijah the priest the likeness of the altar, and its pattern, according to all its work,
and Urijah the priest buildeth the altar according to all that king Ahaz hath sent from Damascus; so did Urijah the priest till the coming in of king Ahaz from Damascus.
And the king cometh in from Damascus, and the king seeth the altar, and the king draweth near on the altar, and offereth on it,
and perfumeth his burnt-offering, and his present, and poureth out his libation, and sprinkleth the blood of the peace-offerings that he hath, on the altar.
As to the altar of brass that [is] before Jehovah — he bringeth [it] near from the front of the house, from between the altar and the house of Jehovah, and putteth it on the side of the altar, northward.
And king Ahaz commandeth him — Urijah the priest — saying, 'On the great altar perfume the burnt-offering of the morning, and the present of the evening, and the burnt-offering of the king, and his present, and the burnt-offering of all the people of the land, and their present, and their libations; and all the blood of the burnt-offering, and all the blood of the sacrifice, on it thou dost sprinkle, and the altar of brass is to me to inquire [by].'
And Urijah the priest doth according to all that king Ahaz commanded.
And king Ahaz cutteth off the borders of the bases, and turneth aside from off them the laver, and the sea he hath taken down from off the brazen oxen that [are] under it, and putteth it on a pavement of stones.
And the covered place for the sabbath that they built in the house, and the entrance of the king without, he turned [from] the house of Jehovah, because of the king of Asshur.
And the rest of the matters of Ahaz that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And Ahaz lieth with his fathers, and is buried with his fathers, in the city of David, and reign doth Hezekiah his son in his stead.
In the twelfth year of Ahaz king of Judah reigned hath Hoshea son of Elah in Samaria, over Israel — nine years,
and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, only, not as the kings of Israel who were before him;
against him came up Shalmaneser king of Asshur, and Hoshea is to him a servant, and doth render to him a present.
And the king of Asshur findeth in Hoshea a conspiracy, in that he hath sent messengers unto So king of Egypt, and hath not caused a present to go up to the king of Asshur, as year by year, and the king of Asshur restraineth him, and bindeth him in a house of restraint.
And the king of Asshur goeth up into all the land, and he goeth up to Samaria, and layeth siege against it three years;
in the ninth year of Hoshea hath the king of Asshur captured Samaria, and removeth Israel to Asshur, and causeth them to dwell in Halah, and in Habor, [by] the river Gozan, and [in] the cities of the Medes.
And it cometh to pass, because the sons of Israel have sinned against Jehovah their God — who bringeth them up out of the land of Egypt, from under the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt — and fear other gods,
and walk in the statutes of the nations that Jehovah dispossessed from the presence of the sons of Israel, and of the kings of Israel that they made;
and the sons of Israel do covertly things that [are] not right against Jehovah their God, and build for them high places in all their cities, from a tower of the watchers unto the fenced city,
and set up for them standing-pillars and shrines on every high height, and under every green tree,
and make perfume there in all high places, like the nations that Jehovah removed from their presence, and do evil things to provoke Jehovah,
and serve the idols, of which Jehovah said to them, 'Ye do not do this thing;'
And Jehovah testifieth against Israel, and against Judah, by the hand of every prophet, and every seer, saying, 'Turn back from your evil ways, and keep My commands, My statutes, according to all the law that I commanded your fathers, and that I sent unto you by the hand of My servants the prophets;'
and they have not hearkened, and harden their neck, like the neck of their fathers, who did not remain stedfast in Jehovah their God,
and reject His statutes and His covenant that He made with their fathers, and His testimonies that He testified against them, and go after the vain thing, and become vain, and after the nations that are round about them, of whom Jehovah commanded them not to do like them;
And they forsake all the commands of Jehovah their God, and make to them a molten image — two calves, and make a shrine, and bow themselves to all the host of the heavens, and serve Baal,
and cause their sons and their daughters to pass over through fire, and divine divinations, and use enchantments, and sell themselves to do the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, to provoke Him;
That Jehovah sheweth himself very angry against Israel, and turneth them aside from His presence; none hath been left, only the tribe of Judah by itself.
Also Judah hath not kept the commands of Jehovah their God, and they walk in the statutes of Israel that they had made.
And Jehovah kicketh against all the seed of Israel, and afflicteth them, and giveth them into the hand of spoilers, till that He hath cast them out of His presence,
for He hath rent Israel from the house of David, and they make Jeroboam son of Nebat king, and Jeroboam driveth Israel from after Jehovah, and hath caused them to sin a great sin,
and the sons of Israel walk in all the sins of Jeroboam that he did, they have not turned aside therefrom,
till that Jehovah hath turned Israel aside from His presence, as He spake by the hand of all His servants the prophets, and Israel is removed from off its land to Asshur, unto this day.
And the king of Asshur bringeth in from Babylon and from Cutha, and from Ava, and from Hamath, and Sepharvaim, and causeth [them] to dwell in the cities of Samaria instead of the sons of Israel, and they possess Samaria, and dwell in its cities;
and it cometh to pass, at the commencement of their dwelling there, they have not feared Jehovah, and Jehovah doth send among them the lions, and they are destroying among them.
And they speak to the king of Asshur, saying, 'The nations that thou hast removed, and dost place in the cities of Samaria, have not known the custom of the God of the land, and He sendeth among them the lions, and lo, they are destroying them, as they do not know the custom of the God of the land.'
And the king of Asshur commandeth, saying, 'Cause to go thither one of the priests whom ye removed thence, and they go and dwell there, and he doth teach them the custom of the God of the land.'
And one of the priests whom they removed from Samaria cometh in, and dwelleth in Beth-El, and he is teaching them how they do fear Jehovah,
and they are making each nation its gods, and place [them] in the houses of the high places that the Samaritans have made, each nation in their cities where they are dwelling.
And the men of Babylon have made Succoth-Benoth, and the men of Cuth have made Nergal, and the men of Hamath have made Ashima,
and the Avites have made Nibhaz and Tartak, and the Sepharvites are burning their sons with fire to Adrammelech and Anammelech, gods of Sepharvim.
And they are fearing Jehovah, and make to themselves from their extremities priests of high places, and they are acting for them in the house of the high places.
Jehovah they are fearing, and their gods they are serving, according to the custom of the nations whence they removed them.
Unto this day they are doing according to the former customs — they are not fearing Jehovah, and are not doing according to their statutes, and according to their ordinances, and according to the law, and according to the command, that Jehovah commanded the sons of Jacob whose name He made Israel,
and Jehovah maketh with them a covenant, and chargeth them, saying, 'Ye do not fear other gods, nor bow yourselves to them, nor serve them, nor sacrifice to them,
but Jehovah who brought you up out of the land of Egypt with great power, and with a stretched-out arm, Him ye do fear, and to Him ye bow yourselves, and to Him ye do sacrifice;
and the statutes, and the judgments, and the law, and the command, that He wrote for you, ye observe to do all the days, and ye do not fear other gods;
and the covenant that I have made with you ye do not forget, and ye do not fear other gods;
but Jehovah your God ye do fear, and He doth deliver you out of the hand of all your enemies;'
and they have not hearkened, but according to their former custom they are doing,
and these nations are fearing Jehovah, and their graven images they have served, both their sons and their sons' sons; as their fathers did, they are doing unto this day.
And it cometh to pass, in the third year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, reigned hath Hezekiah son of Ahaz king of Judah;
a son of twenty and five years was he in his reigning, and twenty and nine years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Abi daughter of Zechariah.
And he doth that which [is] right in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that David his father did,
he hath turned aside the high places, and broken in pieces the standing-pillars, and cut down the shrine, and beaten down the brazen serpent that Moses made, for unto these days were the sons of Israel making perfume to it, and he calleth it 'a piece of brass.'
In Jehovah, God of Israel, he hath trusted, and after him there hath not been like him among all the kings of Judah, nor [among any] who were before him;
and he cleaveth to Jehovah, he hath not turned aside from after Him, and keepeth His commands that Jehovah commanded Moses.
And Jehovah hath been with him, in every place where he goeth out he acteth wisely, and he rebelleth against the king of Asshur, and hath not served him;
he hath smitten the Philistines unto Gaza, and its borders, from a tower of watchers unto the fenced city.
And it cometh to pass, in the fourth year of king Hezekiah — it [is] the seventh year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel — come up hath Shalmaneser king of Asshur against Samaria, and layeth siege to it,
and they capture it at the end of three years; in the sixth year of Hezekiah — it [is] the ninth year of Hoshea king of Israel — hath Samaria been captureth,
and the king of Asshur removeth Israel to Asshur, and placed them in Halah, and in Habor [by] the river Gozan, and [in] cities of the Medes,
because that they have not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah their God, and transgress His covenant — all that He commanded Moses, servant of Jehovah — yea, they have not hearkened nor done [it].
And in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah hath Sennacherib king of Asshur come up against all the fenced cities of Judah, and seizeth them,
and Hezekiah king of Judah sendeth unto the king of Asshur to Lachish, saying, 'I have sinned, turn back from off me; that which thou puttest on me I bear;' and the king of Asshur layeth on Hezekiah king of Judah three hundred talents of silver, and thirty talents of gold,
and Hezekiah giveth all the silver that is found in the house of Jehovah, and in the treasures of the house of the king;
at that time hath Hezekiah cut off the doors of the temple of Jehovah, and the pillars that Hezekiah king of Judah had overlaid, and giveth them to the king of Asshur.
And the king of Asshur sendeth Tartan, and the chief of the eunuchs, and the chief of the butlers, from Lachish, unto king Hezekiah, with a heavy force, to Jerusalem, and they go up and come in to Jerusalem, and they go up, and come in and stand by the conduit of the upper pool that [is] in the highway of the fuller's field.
And they call unto the king, and go out unto them doth Eliakim son of Hilkiah, who [is] over the house, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah son of Asaph the remembrancer.
And the chief of the butlers saith unto them, 'Say, I pray you, unto Hezekiah, Thus said the great king, the king of Asshur, What [is] this confidence in which thou hast confided?
Thou hast said: Only a word of the lips! counsel and might [are] for battle; now, on whom hast thou trusted that thou hast rebelled against me?
'Now, lo, thou hast trusted for thee on the staff of this broken reed, on Egypt; which a man leaneth on, and it hath gone into his hand, and pierced it! — so [is] Pharaoh king of Egypt to all those trusting on him.
'And when ye say unto me, Unto Jehovah our God we have trusted, is it not He whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath turned aside, and saith to Judah and to Jerusalem, Before this altar do ye bow yourselves in Jerusalem?
'And, now, give a pledge for thee, I pray thee, to my lord the king of Asshur, and I give to thee two thousand horses, if thou art able to give for thee riders on them.
And how dost thou turn back the face of one captain of the least of the servants of my lord, that thou dost trust for thee on Egypt for chariot, and for horsemen?
Now, without Jehovah have I come up against this place to destroy it? Jehovah said unto me, Go up against this land, and thou hast destroyed it.'
And Eliakim son of Hilkiah saith — and Shebna, and Joah — to the chief of the butlers, 'Speak, we pray thee, unto thy servants [in] Aramaean, for we are understanding, and do not speak with us [in] Jewish, in the ears of the people who [are] on the wall.'
And the chief of the butlers saith unto them, 'For thy lord, and unto thee, hath my lord sent me to speak these words? is it not for the men, those sitting on the wall to eat their own dung and to drink their own water, with you?'
And the chief of the butlers standeth and calleth with a great voice [in] Jewish, and speaketh and saith, 'Hear ye a word of the great king, the king of Asshur:
thus said the king, Let not Hezekiah lift you up, for he is not able to deliver you out of his hand;
and let not Hezekiah make you trust unto Jehovah, saying, Jehovah doth certainly deliver us, and this city is not given into the hand of the king of Asshur.
'Do not hearken unto Hezekiah, for thus said the king of Asshur, Make with me a blessing, and come out unto me, and eat ye each of his vine, and each of his fig-tree, and drink ye each the waters of his own well,
till my coming in, and I have taken you unto a land like your own land, a land of corn and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of oil olive, and honey, and live, and die not; and do not hearken unto Hezekiah, when he persuadeth you, saying, Jehovah doth deliver us.
'Have the gods of the nations delivered at all each his land out of the hand of the king of Asshur?
Where [are] the gods of Hamath and Arpad? where the gods of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivvah, that they have delivered Samaria out of my hand?
Who [are they] among all the gods of the lands that have delivered their land out of my hand, that Jehovah doth deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?'
And the people have kept silent, and have not answered him a word, for the command of the king is, saying, 'Do not answer him.'
And Eliakim son of Hilkiah, who [is] over the house, cometh in, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah son of Asaph the remembrancer, unto Hezekiah, with rent garments, and they declare to him the words of the chief of the butlers.
And it cometh to pass, at king Hezekiah's hearing, that he rendeth his garments, and covereth himself with sackcloth, and entereth the house of Jehovah,
and sendeth Eliakim, who [is] over the house, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests, covering themselves with sackcloth, unto Isaiah the prophet, son of Amoz,
and they say unto him, 'Thus said Hezekiah — A day of distress, and rebuke, and despising [is] this day; for come have sons unto the birth, and power there is not to bring forth.
'It may be Jehovah thy God doth hear all the words of the chief of the butlers with which the king of Asshur his lord hath sent him to reproach the living God, and hath decided concerning the words that Jehovah thy God hath heard, and thou hast lifted up prayer for the remnant that is found.'
And the servants of king Hezekiah come in unto Isaiah,
and Isaiah saith to them, 'Thus do ye say unto your lord: Thus said Jehovah, Be not afraid because of the words that thou hast heard, with which the servants of the king of Asshur have reviled Me.
Lo, I am giving in him a spirit, and he hath heard a report, and hath turned back to his land, and I have caused him to fall by the sword in his land.'
And the chief of the butlers turneth back and findeth the king of Asshur fighting against Libnah, for he hath heard that he hath journeyed from Lachish.
And he heareth concerning Tirhakah king of Cush, saying, 'Lo, he hath come out to fight with thee;' and he turneth and sendeth messengers unto Hezekiah, saying,
'Thus do ye speak unto Hezekiah king of Judah, saying, Let not thy God lift thee up in whom thou art trusting, saying, Jerusalem is not given into the hand of the king of Asshur.
Lo, thou hast heard that which the kings of Asshur have done to all the lands — to devote them; and thou art delivered!
did the gods of the nations deliver them whom my fathers destroyed — Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the sons of Eden, who [are] in Thelassar?
Where [is] the king of Hamath, and the king of Arpad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivvah?'
And Hezekiah taketh the letters out of the hand of the messengers, and readeth them, and goeth up to the house of Jehovah, and Hezekiah spreadeth it before Jehovah.
And Hezekiah prayeth before Jehovah, and saith, 'O Jehovah, God of Israel, inhabiting the cherubs, Thou [art] God Himself — Thyself alone — to all the kingdoms of the earth: Thou hast made the heavens and the earth.
Incline, O Jehovah, Thine ear, and hear; open, O Jehovah, Thine eyes, and see; and hear Thou the words of Sennacherib with which he hath sent him to reproach the living God.
'Truly, O Jehovah, kings of Asshur have laid waste the nations, and their land,
and have put their gods into fire, for they [are] no gods, but work of the hands of man, wood and stone, and destroy them.
And now, O Jehovah our God, save us, we pray Thee, out of his hand, and know do all kingdoms of the earth that Thou [art] Jehovah God — Thyself alone.'
And Isaiah son of Amoz sendeth unto Hezekiah, saying, 'Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, That which thou hast prayed unto Me concerning Sennacherib king of Asshur I have heard:
this [is] the word that Jehovah spake concerning him: 'Trampled on thee — laughed at thee, Hath the virgin daughter of Zion Behind thee shaken the head — Hath the daughter of Jerusalem?
Whom hast thou reproached and reviled? And against whom lifted up a voice? Yea, thou dost lift up on high thine eyes — Against the Holy One of Israel!
By the hand of thy messengers Thou hast reproached the Lord, and sayest: In the multitude of my chariots I have come up to a high place of mountains — The sides of Lebanon, And I cut down the height of its cedars, The choice of its firs, And I enter the lodging of its extremity, The forest of its Carmel.
I have digged, and drunk strange waters, And I dry up with the sole of my steps All floods of a bulwark.
Hast thou not heard from afar, it I made, From days of old that I formed it? Now I have brought it in, And it becometh a desolation, Ruinous heaps [are] fenced cities,
And their inhabitants [are] feeble-handed, They were broken down, and are dried up, They have been the herb of the field, And the greenness of the tender grass, Grass of the roofs, And blasted corn — before it hath risen up!
And thy sitting down, and thy going out, And thy coming in, I have known, And thine anger towards Me;
Because of thine anger towards Me, And thy noise — it came up into Mine ears, I have put My hook in thy nose, And My bridle in thy lips, And have caused thee to turn back, In the way in which thou camest.
And this to thee [is] the sign, Food of the year [is] the spontaneous growth, And in the second year the self-produced, And in the third year sow ye, and reap, And plant vineyards, and eat their fruits.
And it hath continued — The escaped of the house of Judah That hath been left — to take root beneath, And hath made fruit upward.
For from Jerusalem goeth out a remnant, And an escape from mount Zion; The zeal of Jehovah [of Hosts] doth this.
Therefore, thus said Jehovah, Concerning the king of Asshur: He doth not come in unto this city, Nor doth he shoot there an arrow, Nor doth he come before it with shield. Nor doth he pour out against it a mount.
In the way that he cometh in — In it he turneth back, And unto this city he doth not come in, The affirmation of Jehovah —
And I have covered over this city, To save it, for Mine own sake, And for the sake of David My servant.'
And it cometh to pass, in that night, that a messenger of Jehovah goeth out, and smiteth in the camp of Asshur a hundred eighty and five thousand, and they rise early in the morning, and lo, all of them [are] dead corpses.
And Sennacherib king of Asshur journeyeth, and goeth, and turneth back, and dwelleth in Nineveh;
and it cometh to pass, he is bowing himself in the house of Nisroch his god, and Adramelech and Sharezar [his sons] have smitten him with the sword, and they have escaped to the land of Ararat, and Esar-Haddon his son reigneth in his stead.
In those days hath Hezekiah been sick unto death, and come unto him doth Isaiah son of Amoz the prophet, and saith unto him, 'Thus said Jehovah: Give a charge to thy house, for thou art dying, and dost not live.'
And he turneth round his face unto the wall, and prayeth unto Jehovah, saying,
'I pray Thee, O Jehovah, remember, I pray Thee, how I have walked habitually before Thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and that which [is] good in Thine eyes I have done;' and Hezekiah weepeth — a great weeping.
And it cometh to pass — Isaiah hath not gone out to the middle court — that the word of Jehovah hath been unto him, saying,
'Turn back, and thou hast said unto Hezekiah, leader of My people: Thus said Jehovah, God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tear, lo, I give healing to thee, on the third day thou dost go up to the house of Jehovah;
and I have added to thy days fifteen years, and out of the hand of the king of Asshur I deliver thee and this city, and have covered over this city for Mine own sake, and for the sake of David My servant.'
And Isaiah saith, 'Take ye a cake of figs;' and they take and lay [it] on the boil, and he reviveth.
And Hezekiah saith unto Isaiah, 'What [is] the sign that Jehovah doth give healing to me, that I have gone up on the third day to the house of Jehovah?'
And Isaiah saith, 'This [is] to thee the sign from Jehovah, that Jehovah doth the thing that He hath spoken — The shadow hath gone on ten degrees, or it doth turn back ten degrees?'
And Hezekiah saith, 'It hath been light for the shadow to incline ten degrees: nay, but let the shadow turn backward ten degrees.'
And Isaiah the prophet calleth unto Jehovah, and He bringeth back the shadow by the degrees that it had gone down in the degrees of Ahaz — backward ten degrees.
At that time hath Berodach-Baladan son of Baladan king of Babylon sent letters and a present unto Hezekiah, for he heard that Hezekiah had been sick;
and Hezekiah hearkeneth unto them, and sheweth them all the house of his treasury, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the good ointment, and all the house of his vessels, and all that hath been found in his treasuries; there hath not been a thing that Hezekiah hath not shewed them, in his house, and in all his dominion.
And Isaiah the prophet cometh in unto king Hezekiah, and saith unto him, 'What said these men? and whence come they unto thee?' And Hezekiah saith, 'From a land afar off they have come — from Babylon.'
And he saith, 'What saw they in thy house?' and Hezekiah saith, 'All that [is] in my house they saw; there hath not been a thing that I have not shewed them among my treasures.'
And Isaiah saith unto Hezekiah, 'Hear a word of Jehovah:
Lo, days are coming, and borne hath been all that [is] in thy house, and that thy father have treasured up till this day, to Babylon; there is not left a thing, said Jehovah;
and of thy sons who go out from thee, whom thou begettest, they take away, and they have been eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.'
And Hezekiah saith unto Isaiah, 'Good [is] the word of Jehovah that thou hast spoken;' and he saith, 'Is it not — if peace and truth are in my days?'
And the rest of the matters of Hezekiah, and all his might, and how he made the pool, and the conduit, and bringeth in the waters to the city, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And Hezekiah lieth with his fathers, and reign doth Manasseh his son in his stead.
A son of twelve years [is] Manasseh in his reigning, and fifty and five years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Hephzi-Bah;
and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, according to the abominations of the nations that Jehovah dispossessed from the presence of the sons of Israel,
and he turneth and buildeth the high places that Hezekiah his father destroyed, and raiseth altars for Baal, and maketh a shrine, as did Ahab king of Israel, and boweth himself to all the host of the heavens, and serveth them.
And he hath built altars in the house of Jehovah, of which Jehovah said, 'In Jerusalem I put My name.'
And he buildeth altars to all the host of the heavens in the two courts of the house of Jehovah;
and he hath caused his son to pass through fire, and observed clouds, and used enchantment, and dealt with a familiar spirit and wizards; he hath multiplied to do the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah — to provoke to anger.
And he setteth the graven image of the shrine that he made in the house of which Jehovah said unto David and unto Solomon his son, 'In this house, and in Jerusalem, that I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, I put My name — to the age;
and I do not add to cause the foot of Israel to move from the ground that I gave to their fathers, only, if they observe to do according to all that I commanded them, and to all the law that My servant Moses commanded them.'
And they have not hearkened, and Manasseh causeth them to err, to do the evil thing above the nations that Jehovah destroyed from the presence of the sons of Israel.
And Jehovah speaketh by the hand of his servants the prophets, saying,
'Because that Manasseh king of Judah hath done these abominations — he hath done evil above all that the Amorites have done who [are] before him, and causeth also Judah to sin by his idols;
therefore thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, Lo, I am bringing in evil on Jerusalem and Judah, that whoever heareth of it, tingle do his two ears.
And I have stretched out over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab, and wiped Jerusalem as one wipeth the dish — he hath wiped, and hath turned [it] on its face.
'And I have left the remnant of Mine inheritance, and given them into the hand of their enemies, and they have been for a prey and for a spoil to all their enemies,
because that they have done the evil thing in Mine eyes, and are provoking Me to anger from the day that their fathers came out of Egypt, even unto this day.'
And also, innocent blood hath Manasseh shed very much, till that he hath filled Jerusalem — mouth to mouth; apart from his sin that he hath caused Judah to sin, to do the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah.
And the rest of the matters of Manasseh, and all that he did, and his sin that he sinned, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And Manasseh lieth with his fathers, and is buried in the garden of his house, in the garden of Uzza, and reign doth Amon his son in his stead.
A son of twenty and two years [is] Amon in his reigning, and two years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Meshullemeth daughter of Haruz of Jotbah,
and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, as did Manasseh his father,
and walketh in all the way that his father walked in, and serveth the idols that his father served, and boweth himself to them,
and forsaketh Jehovah, God of his fathers, and hath not walked in the way of Jehovah.
And the servants of Amon conspire against him, and put the king to death in his own house,
and the people of the land smite all those conspiring against king Amon, and the people of the land cause Josiah his son to reign in his stead.
And the rest of the matters of Amon that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah?
and [one] burieth him in his burying-place in the garden of Uzza, and reign doth Josiah his son in his stead.
A son of eight years [is] Josiah in his reigning, and thirty and one years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Jedidah daughter of Adaiah of Boskath,
and he doth that which is right in the eyes of Jehovah, and walketh in all the way of David his father, and hath not turned aside — right or left.
And it cometh to pass, in the eighteenth year of king Josiah, the king hath sent Shaphan son of Azaliah, son of Meshullam, the scribe, to the house of Jehovah, saying,
'Go up unto Hilkiah the high priest, and he doth complete the silver that is brought into the house of Jehovah, that the keepers of the threshold have gathered from the people,
and they give it into the hand of the doers of the work, the overseers, in the house of Jehovah, and they give it to the doers of the work that [is] in the house of Jehovah, to strengthen the breach of the house,
to artificers, and to builders, and [to repairers of] the wall, and to buy wood and hewn stones to strengthen the house;
only, the silver that is given into their hand is not reckoned with them, for in faithfulness they are dealing.
And Hilkiah the high priest saith unto Shaphan the scribe, 'A book of the law I have found in the house of Jehovah;' and Hilkiah giveth the book unto Shaphan, and he readeth it.
And Shaphan the scribe cometh in unto the king, and bringeth the king back word, and saith, 'Thy servants have poured out the silver that hath been found in the house, and give it into the hand of the doers of the work, the inspectors, in the house of Jehovah.'
And Shaphan the scribe declareth to the king, saying, 'A book hath Hilkiah the priest given to me;' and Shaphan readeth it before the king.
And it cometh to pass, at the king's hearing the words of the book of the law, that he rendeth his garments,
and the king commandeth Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam son of Shaphan, and Achbor son of Michaiah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asahiah servant of the king, saying,
'Go, seek Jehovah for me, and for the people, and for all Judah, concerning the words of this book that is found, for great [is] the fury of Jehovah that is kindled against us, because that our fathers have not hearkened unto the words of this book, to do according to all that is written for us.'
And Hilkiah the priest goeth, and Ahikam, and Achbor, and Shaphan, and Asahiah, unto Huldah the prophetess, wife of Shallum, son of Tikvah, son of Harhas, keeper of the garments, and she is dwelling in Jerusalem in the second, and they speak unto her.
And she saith unto them, 'Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, Say to the man who hath sent you unto me:
Thus said Jehovah, Lo, I am bringing in evil unto this place and on its inhabitants, all the words of the book that the king of Judah hath read,
because that they have forsaken Me, and make perfume to other gods, so as to provoke Me to anger with every work of their hands, and My wrath hath been kindled against this place, and it is not quenched.
'And unto the king of Judah, who is sending you to seek Jehovah, thus do ye say unto him, Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, The words that thou hast heard —
because thy heart [is] tender, and thou art humbled because of Jehovah, in thy hearing that which I have spoken against this place, and against its inhabitants, to be for a desolation, and for a reviling, and dost rend thy garments, and weep before Me — I also have heard — the affirmation of Jehovah —
therefore, lo, I am gathering thee unto thy fathers, and thou hast been gathered unto thy grave in peace, and thine eyes do not look on any of the evil that I am bringing in on this place;' and they bring the king back word.
And the king sendeth, and they gather unto him all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem,
and the king goeth up to the house of Jehovah, and every man of Judah, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with him, and the priests, and the prophets, and all the people, from small unto great, and he readeth in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant that is found in the house of Jehovah.
And the king standeth by the pillar, and maketh the covenant before Jehovah, to walk after Jehovah, and to keep His commands, and His testimonies, and His statutes, with all the heart, and with all the soul, to establish the words of this covenant that are written on this book, and all the people stand in the covenant.
And the king commandeth Hilkiah the high priest, and the priests of the second order, and the keepers of the threshold, to bring out from the temple of Jehovah all the vessels that are made for Baal, and for the shrine, and for all the host of the heavens, and he burneth them at the outside of Jerusalem, in the fields of Kidron, and hath borne their ashes to Beth-El.
And he hath caused to cease the idolatrous priests whom the kings of Judah have appointed, (and they make perfume in high places, in cities of Judah and suburbs of Jerusalem,) and those making perfume to Baal, to the sun, and to the moon, and to the planets, and to all the host of the heavens.
And he bringeth out the shrine from the house of Jehovah to the outside of Jerusalem, unto the brook Kidron, and burneth it at the brook Kidron, and beateth it small to dust, and casteth its dust on the grave of the sons of the people.
And he breaketh down the houses of the whoremongers that [are] in the house of Jehovah, where the women are weaving houses for the shrine.
And he bringeth in all the priests out of the cities of Judah, and defileth the high places where the priests have made perfume, from Geba unto Beer-Sheba, and hath broken down the high places of the gates that [are] at the opening of the gate of Joshua, head of the city, that [is] on a man's left hand at the gate of the city;
only, the priests of the high places come not up unto the altar of Jehovah in Jerusalem, but they have eaten unleavened things in the midst of their brethren.
And he hath defiled Topheth, that [is] in the valley of the son of Hinnom, so that no man doth cause his son and his daughter to pass over through fire to Molech.
And he causeth to cease the horses that the kings of Judah have given to the sun from the entering in of the house of Jehovah, by the chamber of Nathan-Melech the eunuch, that [is] in the suburbs, and the chariots of the sun he hath burnt with fire.
And the altars that [are] on the top of the upper chamber of Ahaz, that the kings of Judah made, and the altars that Manasseh made in the two courts of the house of Jehovah, hath the king broken down, and removeth thence, and hath cast their dust unto the brook Kidron.
And the high places that [are] on the front of Jerusalem, that [are] on the right of the mount of corruption, that Solomon king of Israel had built to Ashtoreth abomination of the Zidonians, and Chemosh abomination of Moab, and to Milcom abomination of the sons of Ammon, hath the king defiled.
And he hath broken in pieces the standing-pillars, and cutteth down the shrines, and filleth their place with bones of men;
and also the altar that [is] in Beth-El, the high place that Jeroboam son of Nebat made, by which he made Israel sin, both that altar and the high place he hath broken down, and doth burn the high place — he hath beat it small to dust, and hath burnt the shrine.
And Josiah turneth, and seeth the graves that [are] there in the mount, and sendeth and taketh the bones out of the graves, and burneth [them] on the altar, and defileth it, according to the word of Jehovah that the man of God proclaimed, who proclaimed these things.
And he saith, 'What [is] this sign that I see?' and the men of the city say unto him, 'The grave of the man of God who hath come from Judah, and proclaimeth these things that thou hast done concerning the altar of Beth-El.'
And he saith, 'Let him alone, let no man touch his bones;' and they let his bones escape, with the bones of the prophet who came out of Samaria.
And also all the houses of the high places that [are] in the cities of Samaria, that the kings of Israel made to provoke to anger, hath Josiah turned aside, and doth to them according to all the deeds that he did in Beth-El.
And he slayeth all the priests of the high places who [are] there by the altars, and burneth the bones of man upon them, and turneth back to Jerusalem.
And the king commandeth the whole of the people, saying, 'Make ye a passover to Jehovah your God, as it is written on this book of the covenant.'
Surely there hath not been made like this passover from the days of the judges who judged Israel, even all the days of the kings of Israel, and of the kings of Judah;
but in the eighteenth year of king Josiah, hath this passover been made to Jehovah in Jerusalem.
And also, those having familiar spirits, and the wizards, and the teraphim, and the idols, and all the abominations that were seen in the land of Judah, and in Jerusalem, hath Josiah put away, in order to establish the words of the law that are written on the book that Hilkiah the priest hath found in the house of Jehovah.
And like him there hath not been before him a king who turned back unto Jehovah with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the law of Moses, and after him there hath none risen like him.
Only, Jehovah hath not turned back from the fierceness of His great anger with which His anger burned against Judah, because of all the provocations with which Manasseh provoked him,
and Jehovah saith, 'Also Judah I turn aside from my presence, as I turned Israel aside, and I have rejected this city that I have chosen — Jerusalem, and the house of which I said, My name is there.'
And the rest of the matters of Josiah, and all that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah?
In his days hath Pharaoh-Nechoh king of Egypt come up against the king of Asshur, by the river Phrat, and king Josiah goeth out to meet him, and he putteth him to death in Megiddo, when he seeth him.
And his servants cause him to ride dying from Megiddo, and bring him in to Jerusalem, and bury him in his own grave, and the people of the land take Jehoahaz son of Josiah, and anoint him, and cause him to reign instead of his father.
A son of twenty and three years [is] Jehoahaz in his reigning, and three months he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Hamutal daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah,
and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that his fathers did,
and Pharaoh-Nechoh bindeth him in Riblah, in the land of Hamath, from reigning in Jerusalem, and he putteth a fine on the land — a hundred talents of silver, and a talent of gold.
And Pharaoh-Nechoh causeth Eliakim son of Josiah to reign instead of Josiah his father, and turneth his name to Jehoiakim, and Jehoahaz he hath taken away, and he cometh in to Egypt, and dieth there.
And the silver and the gold hath Jehoiakim given to Pharaoh; only he valued the land to give the silver by the command of Pharaoh; from each, according to his valuation, he exacted the silver and the gold, from the people of the land, to give to Pharaoh-Nechoh.
A son of twenty and five years [is] Jehoiakim in his reigning, and eleven years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Zebudah daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah,
and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that his fathers did.
In his days hath Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon come up, and Jehoiakim is to him a servant three years; and he turneth and rebelleth against him,
and Jehovah sendeth against him the troops of the Chaldeans, and the troops of Aram, and the troops of Moab, and the troops of the sons of Ammon, and He sendeth them against Judah to destroy it, according to the word of Jehovah, that He spake by the hand of His servants the prophets;
only, by the command of Jehovah it hath been against Judah to turn [them] aside from His presence, for the sins of Manasseh, according to all that he did,
and also the innocent blood that he hath shed, and he filleth Jerusalem with innocent blood, and Jehovah was not willing to forgive.
And the rest of the matters of Jehoiakim, and all that he did, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And Jehoiakim lieth with his fathers, and Jehoiachin his son reigneth in his stead.
And the king of Egypt hath not added any more to go out from his own land, for the king of Babylon hath taken, from the brook of Egypt unto the river Phrat, all that had been to the king of Egypt.
A son of eighteen years [is] Jehoiachin in his reigning, and three months he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Nehushta, daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem,
and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that his fathers did.
At that time come up have servants of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon to Jerusalem, and the city goeth into siege,
and Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon cometh against the city, and his servants are laying siege to it,
and Jehoiachin king of Judah goeth out unto the king of Babylon, he, and his mother, and his servants, and his chiefs, and his eunuchs, and the king of Babylon taketh him in the eighth year of his reign,
and bringeth out thence all the treasures of the house of Jehovah, and the treasures of the house of the king, and cutteth in pieces all the vessels of gold that Solomon king of Israel made in the temple of Jehovah, as Jehovah had spoken.
And he hath removed all Jerusalem, and all the chiefs, and all the mighty ones of valour — ten thousand [is] the removal — and every artificer and smith, none hath been left save the poor of the people of the land.
And he removeth Jehoiachin to Babylon, and the mother of the king, and the wives of the king, and his eunuchs, and the mighty ones of the land — he hath caused a removal to go from Jerusalem to Babylon,
and all the men of valour seven thousand, and the artificers and the smiths a thousand, the whole [are] mighty men, warriors; and the king of Babylon bringeth them in a captivity to Babylon.
And the king of Babylon causeth Mattaniah his father's brother to reign in his stead, and turneth his name to Zedekiah.
A son of twenty and one years [is] Zedekiah in his reigning, and eleven years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Hamutal daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah,
and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah according to all that Jehoiakim did,
for, by the anger of Jehovah it hath been against Jerusalem and against Judah, till he cast them out from His presence, that Zedekiah rebelleth against the king of Babylon.
And it cometh to pass, in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth of the month, come hath Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, he and all his force, against Jerusalem, and encampeth against it, and buildeth against it a fortification round about.
And the city entereth into siege till the eleventh year of king Zedekiah,
on the ninth of the month — when the famine is severe in the city, and there hath not been bread for the people of the land,
then the city is broken up, and all the men of war [go] by night the way of the gate, between the two walls that [are] by the garden of the king, and the Chaldeans [are] against the city round about, and [the king] goeth the way of the plain.
And the force of the Chaldeans pursue after the king, and overtake him in the plains of Jericho, and all his force have been scattered from him;
and they seize the king, and bring him up unto the king of Babylon, to Riblah, and they speak with him — judgment.
And the sons of Zedekiah they have slaughtered before his eyes, and the eyes of Zedekiah he hath blinded, and bindeth him with brazen fetters, and they bring him to Babylon.
And in the fifth month, on the seventh of the month (it [is] the nineteenth year of king Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon), hath Nebuzaradan chief of the executioners, servant of the king of Babylon, come to Jerusalem,
and he burneth the house of Jehovah, and the house of the king, and all the houses of Jerusalem, yea, every great house he hath burned with fire;
and the walls of Jerusalem round about have all the forces of the Chaldeans, who [are] with the chief of the executioners, broken down.
And the rest of the people, those left in the city, and those falling who have fallen to the king of Babylon, and the rest of the multitude, hath Nebuzaradan chief of the executioners removed;
and of the poor of the land hath the chief of the executioners left for vine-dressers and for husbandmen.
And the pillars of brass that [are] in the house of Jehovah, and the bases, and the sea of brass, that [is] in the house of Jehovah, have the Chaldeans broken in pieces, and bear away their brass to Babylon.
And the pots, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the spoons, and all the vessels of brass with which they minister they have taken,
and the fire-pans, and the bowls that [are] wholly of silver, hath the chief of the executioners taken.
The two pillars, the one sea, and the bases that Solomon made for the house of Jehovah, there was no weighing of the brass of all these vessels;
eighteen cubits [is] the height of the one pillar, and the chapiter on it [is] of brass, and the height of the chapiter [is] three cubits, and the net and the pomegranates [are] on the chapiter round about — the whole [is] of brass; and like these hath the second pillar, with the net.
And the chief of the executioners taketh Seraiah the head priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers of the threshold,
and out of the city he hath taken a certain eunuch who is appointed over the men of war, and five men of those seeing the king's face who have been found in the city, and the head scribe of the host, who mustereth the people of the land, and sixty men of the people of the land who are found in the city,
and Nebuzaradan chief of the executioners taketh them, and causeth them to go unto the king of Babylon, to Libnah,
and the king of Babylon smiteth them, and putteth them to death in Riblah, in the land of Hamath, and he removeth Judah from off its land.
And the people that is left in the land of Judah whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon hath left — he appointeth over them Gedaliah son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan.
And all the heads of the forces hear — they and the men — that the king of Babylon hath appointed Gedaliah, and they come in unto Gedaliah, to Mizpah, even Ishmael son of Nethaniah, and Johanan son of Kareah, and Seraiah son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite, and Jaazaniah son of the Maachathite — they and their men;
and Gedaliah sweareth to them, and to their men, and saith to them, 'Be not afraid of the servants of the Chaldeans, dwell in the land and serve the king of Babylon, and it is good for you.'
And it cometh to pass, in the seventh month, come hath Ishmael son of Nathaniah, son of Elishama of the seed of the kingdom, and ten men with him, and they smite Gedaliah, and he dieth, and the Jews and the Chaldeans who have been with him in Mizpah.
And all the people rise, from small even unto great, and the heads of the forces, and come in to Egypt, for they have been afraid of the presence of the Chaldeans.
And it cometh to pass, in the thirty and seventh year of the removal of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, in the twenty and seventh of the month hath Evil-Merodach king of Babylon lifted up, in the year of his reigning, the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah, out of the house of restraint,
and speaketh with him good things and putteth his throne above the throne of the kings who [are] with him in Babylon,
and hath changed the garments of his restraint, and he hath eaten bread continually before him all days of his life,
and his allowance — a continual allowance — hath been given to him from the king, the matter of a day in its day, all days of his life.
Adam, Sheth, Enosh,
Kenan, Mahalaleel, Jered,
Henoch, Methuselah, Lamech,
Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
Sons of Japheth: Gomer and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.
And sons of Gomer: Ashchenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.
And sons of Javan: Elisha, and Tarshishah, Kittim, and Dodanim.
Sons of Ham: Cush, and Mizraim, Put, and Canaan.
And sons of Cush: Seba and Havilah, and Sabta, and Raamah, and Sabtecka. And sons of Raamah: Sheba and Dedan.
And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be a mighty one in the land.
And Mizraim begat the Ludim, and the Anamim, and the Lehabim, and the Naphtuhim,
and the Pathrusim, and the Casluhim (from whom came out the Philistim), and the Caphtorim.
And Canaan begat Zidon his first born, and Heth,
and the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgashite,
and the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite,
and the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite.
Sons of Shem: Elam and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram, and Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Meshech.
And Arphaxad begat Shelah, and Shelah begat Eber.
And to Eber have been born two sons, the name of the one [is] Peleg, for in his days hath the land been divided, and the name of his brother is Joktan.
And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah,
and Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah,
and Ebal, and Abimael, and Sheba,
and Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab; all these [are] sons of Joktan.
Shem, Arphaxad, Shelah,
Eber, Peleg, Reu,
Serug, Nahor, Terah,
Abram — he [is] Abraham.
Sons of Abraham: Isaac and Ishmael.
These [are] their generations: first-born of Ishmael, Nebaioth, and Kedar, and Adheel, and Mibsam,
Mishma, and Dumah, Massa, Hadad, and Tema,
Jetur, Naphish, and Kedema. These are sons of Ishmael.
And sons of Keturah, Abraham's concubine: she bare Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah. And sons of Jokshan: Sheba and Dedan.
And sons of Midian: Ephah and Epher, and Henoch, and Abida, and Eldaah; all these [are] sons of Keturah.
And Abraham begetteth Isaac. Sons of Isaac: Esau and Israel.
Sons of Esau: Eliphaz, Reuel, and Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah.
Sons of Eliphaz: Teman, and Omar, Zephi, and Gatam, Kenaz, and Timna, and Amalek.
Sons of Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah.
And sons of Seir: Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah, and Dishon, and Ezar, and Dishan.
And sons of Lotan: Hori and Homam, and sister of Lotan [is] Timna.
Sons of Shobal: Alian, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shephi, and Onam. And sons of Zideon: Aiah and Anah.
The sons of Anah: Dishon. and sons of Dishon: Amram, and Eshban, and Ithran, and Cheran.
Sons of Ezer: Bilhan, and Zavan, Jakan. Sons of Dishan: Uz and Aran.
And these [are] the kings who reigned in the land of Edom before the reigning of a king of the sons of Israel: Bela son of Beor, and the name of his city [is] Dinhabah.
And Bela dieth, and reign in his stead doth Jobab son of Zerah from Bozrali;
and Jobab dieth, and reign in his stead doth Husham from the land of the Temanite;
and Husham dieth, and reign in his stead doth Hadad, son of Bedad (who smiteth Midian in the field of Moab) and the name of his city [is] Avith;
and Hadad dieth, and reign in his stead doth Samlah from Masrekah;
and Samlah dieth, and reign in his stead doth Shaul from Rehoboth of the River;
and Shaul dieth, and reign in his stead doth Baal-Hanan son of Achbor;
and Baal-Hanan dieth, and reign in his stead doth Hadad, and the name of his city [is] Pai, and the name of his wife [is] Mehetabel daughter of Matred, daughter of Me-Zahab; Hadad also dieth.
And chiefs of Edom are: chief Timnah, chief Aliah, chief Jetheth,
chief Aholibamah, chief Elah, chief Pinon,
chief Kenaz, chief Teman, chief Mibzar,
chief Magdiel, chief Iram. These [are] chiefs of Edom.
These [are] sons of Israel: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun,
Dan, Joseph, and Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.
Sons of Judah: Er, and Onan, and Shelah, three have been born to him of a daughter of Shua the Canaanitess. And Er, first-born of Judah, is evil in the eyes of Jehovah, and He putteth him to death.
And Tamar his daughter-in-law hath borne to him Pharez and Zerah. All the sons of Judah [are] five.
Sons of Pharez: Hezron, and Hamul.
And sons of Zerah: Zimri, and Ethan, and Heman, and Calcol, and Dara; all of them five.
And sons of Carmi: Achar, troubler of Israel, who trespassed in the devoted thing.
And sons of Ethan: Azariah.
And sons of Hezron who were born to him; Jerahmeel, and Ram, and Chelubai.
And Ram begat Amminadab, and Amminadab begat Nahshon, prince of the sons of Judah;
and Nahshon begat Salma, and Salma begat Boaz,
and Boaz begat Obed, and Obed begat Jesse;
and Jesse begat his first-born Eliab, and Abinadab the second, and Shimea the third,
Nethaneel the fourth, Raddai the fifth,
Ozem the sixth, David the seventh,
and their sisters Zeruiah and Abigail. And sons of Zeruiah: Abishai, and Joab, and Asah-El — three.
And Abigail hath borne Amasa, and the father of Amasa [is] Jether the Ishmeelite.
And Caleb son of Hezron hath begotten Azubah, Isshah, and Jerioth; and these [are] her sons: Jesher, and Shobab, and Ardon.
And Azubah dieth, and Caleb taketh to him Ephrath, and she beareth to him Hur.
And Hur begat Uri, and Uri begat Bezaleel.
And afterwards hath Hezron gone in unto a daughter of Machir father of Gilead, and he hath taken her, and he [is] a son of sixty years, and she beareth to him Segub.
And Segub begat Jair, and he hath twenty and three cities in the land of Gilead,
and he taketh Geshur and Aram, the small villages of Jair, from them, with Kenath and its small towns, sixty cities — all these [belonged to] the sons of Machir father of Gilead.
And after the death of Hezron in Caleb-Ephratah, then the wife of Hezron, Abijah, even beareth to him Asshur, father of Tekoa.
And sons of Jerahmeel, first-born of Hezron, are: the first-born Ram, and Bunah, and Oren, and Ozem, Ahijah.
And Jerahmeel hath another wife, and her name [is] Atarah, she [is] mother of Onam.
And sons of Ram, first-born of Jerahmeel, are Maaz, and Jamin, and Eker.
And sons of Onam are Shammai and Jada. And sons of Shammai: Nadab and Abishur.
And the name of the wife of Abishur [is] Abihail, and she beareth to him Ahban and Molid.
And sons of Nadab: Seled, and Appaim; and Seled dieth without sons.
And sons of Appaim: Ishi. And sons of Ishi: Sheshan. And sons of Sheshan: Ahlai.
And sons of Jada, brother of Shammai: Jether, and Jonathan: and Jether dieth without sons.
And sons of Jonathan: Peleth, and Zaza. These were sons of Jerahmeel.
And Sheshan had no sons, but daughters, and Sheshan hath a servant, an Egyptian, and his name [is] Jarha,
and Sheshan giveth his daughter to Jarha his servant for a wife, and she beareth to him Attai;
and Attai begat Nathan, and Nathan begat Zabad,
and Zabad begat Ephlal, and Ephlal begat Obed,
and Obed begat Jehu,
and Jehu begat Azariah, and Azariah begat Helez, and Helez begat Eleasah,
and Eleasah begat Sismai, and Sismai begat Shallum,
and Shallum begat Jekamiah, and Jekamiah begat Elishama.
And sons of Caleb brother of Jerahmeel: Mesha his first-born, he [is] father of Ziph; and sons of Mareshah: Abi-Hebron.
And sons of Hebron: Korah, and Tappuah, and Rekem, and Shema.
And Shema begat Raham father of Jorkoam, and Rekem begat Shammai.
And a son of Shammai [is] Maon, and Maon [is] father of Beth-Zur.
And Ephah concubine of Caleb bare Haran, and Moza, and Gazez; and Haran begat Gazez.
And sons of Jahdai: Regem, and Jotham, and Geshem, and Pelet, and Ephah, and Shaaph.
The concubine of Caleb, Maachah, bare Sheber and Tirhanah;
and she beareth Shaaph father of Madmannah, Sheva father of Machbenah, and father of Gibea; and a daughter of Caleb [is] Achsa.
These were sons of Caleb son of Hur, first-born of Ephrathah: Shobal father of Kirjath-Jearim,
Salma father of Beth-Lehem, Hareph father of Beth-Gader.
And there are sons to Shobal father of Kirjath-Jearim: Haroeh, half of the Menuhothite;
and the families of Kirjath-Jearim: the Ithrite, and the Puhite, and the Shumathite, and the Mishraite: from these went out the Zareathite, and the Eshtaulite.
Sons of Salma: Beth-Lehem, and the Netophathite, Atroth, Beth-Joab, and half of the Menuhothite, the Zorite;
and the families of the scribes the inhabitants of Jabez: Tirathites, Shimeathites, Suchathites. They [are] the Kenites, those coming of Hammath father of the house of Rechab.
And these were sons of David, who were born to him in Hebron: the first-born Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; second Daniel, of Abigail the Carmelitess;
the third Absalom, son of Maachah daughter of Talmai king of Geshur; the fourth Adonijah, son of Haggith;
the fifth Shephatiah, of Abital; the sixth Ithream, of Eglah his wife.
Six have been borne to him in Hebron, and he reigneth there seven years and six months, and thirty and three years he hath reigned in Jerusalem.
And these were born to him in Jerusalem: Shimea, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon — four, of Bath-Sheba daughter of Ammiel:
also Ibhar, and Elishama, and Eliphelet,
and Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia,
and Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphelet, nine.
All [are] sons of David, apart from sons of the concubines, and Tamar their sister.
And the son of Solomon [is] Rehoboam, Abijah his son, Asa his son, Jehoshaphat his son,
Joram his son, Ahaziah his son, Joash his son,
Amaziah his son, Azariah his son, Jotham his son,
Ahaz his son, Hezekiah his son, Manasseh his son,
Amon his son, Josiah his son.
And sons of Josiah: the first-born Johanan, the second Jehoiakim, the third Zedekiah, the fourth Shallum.
And sons of Jehoiakim: Jeconiah his son, Zedekiah his son.
And sons of Jeconiah: Assir; Salathiel his son;
also Malchiram and Pedaiah, and Shenazzar, Jecamiah, Hoshama, and Nedabiah.
And sons of Pedaiah: Zerubbabel, and Shimei. And sons of Zerubbabel: Meshullam, and Hananiah, and Shelomith their sister,
and Hashubah, and Ohel, and Berechiah, and Hasadiah, Jushab-Hesed, five.
And sons of Hananiah: Pelatiah, and Jesaiah, sons of Rephaiah, sons of Arnan, sons of Obadiah, sons of Shechaniah.
And sons of Shechaniah: Shemaiah; and sons of Shemaiah: Hattush, and Igeal, and Bariah, and Neariah, and Shaphat, six.
And sons of Neariah: Elioenai, and Hezekiah, and Azrikam, three.
And sons of Elioenai: Hodaiah, and Eliashib, and Pelaiah, and Akkub, and Johanan, and Delaiah, and Anani, seven.
Sons of Judah: Pharez, Hezron, and Carmi, and Hur, and Shobal.
And Reaiah son of Shobal begat Jahath, and Jahath begat Ahumai and Lahad; these [are] families of the Zorathite.
And these [are] of the father of Etam: Jezreel, and Ishma, and Idbash; and the name of their sister [is] Hazzelelponi,
and Penuel [is] father of Gedor, and Ezer father of Hushah. These [are] sons of Hur, first-born of Ephratah, father of Beth-Lehem.
And to Ashhur father of Tekoa were two wives, Helah and Naarah;
and Naarah beareth to him Ahuzzam, and Hepher, and Temeni, and Haahashtari: these [are] sons of Naarah.
And sons of Helah: Zereth, and Zohar, and Ethnan.
And Coz begat Anub, and Zobebah, and the families of Aharhel son of Harum.
And Jabez is honoured above his brethren, and his mother called his name Jabez, saying, 'Because I have brought forth with grief.'
And Jabez calleth to the God of Israel, saying, 'If blessing Thou dost bless me, then Thou hast made great my border, and Thy hand hath been with me, and Thou hast kept [me] from evil — not to grieve me;' and God bringeth in that which he asked.
And Chelub brother of Shuah begat Mehir; he [is] father of Eshton.
And Eshton begat Beth-Rapha, and Paseah, and Tehinnah father of Ir-Nahash; these [are] men of Rechah.
And sons of Kenaz: Othniel, and Seraiah; and sons of Othniel: Hathath.
And Meonothai begat Ophrah, and Seraiah begat Joab father of the valley of artificers, for they were artificers.
And sons of Caleb son of Jephunneh: Iru, Elah, and Naam; and sons of Elah, even Kenaz.
And sons of Jehaleleel: Ziph and Ziphah, Tiria, and Asareel.
And sons of Ezra [are] Jether, and Mered, and Epher, and Jalon: and she beareth Miriam, and Shammai, and Ishbah father of Eshtemoa.
And his wife Jehudijah bare Jered father of Gedor, and Heber father of Socho, and Jekuthiel father of Zanoah. And these [are] sons of Bithiah daughter of Pharaoh, whom Mered took,
and sons of the wife of Hodiah sister of Nahom: Abi-Keilah the Garmite, and Eshtemoa the Maachathite.
And sons of Shimon [are] Amnon, and Rinnah, Ben-Hanon, and Tilon; and sons of Ishi: Zoheth, and Ben-Zoheth.
Sons of Shelah son of Judah: Er father of Lecah, and Laadah father of Mareshah, and the families of the house of the service of fine linen, of the house of Ashbea;
and Jokim, and the men of Chozeba, and Joash, and Saraph, who ruled over Moab and Jashubi-Lehem; and these things [are] ancient.
They [are] the potters and inhabitants of Netaim and Gedera; with the king in his work they dwelt there.
Sons of Simeon: Nemuel, and Jamin, Jarib, Zerah, Shaul;
Shallum his son, Mibsam his son, Mishma his son.
And sons of Mishma: Hammuel his son, Zacchur his son, Shimei his son.
And to Shimei [are] sixteen sons and six daughters, and to his brethren there are not many sons, and none of their families have multiplied as much as the sons of Judah.
And they dwell in Beer-Sheba, and Moladah, and Hazar-Shaul,
and in Bilhah, and in Ezem, and in Tolad,
and in Bethuel, and in Hormah, and in Ziklag,
and in Beth-Marcaboth, and in Hazar-Susim, and in Beth-Birei, and in Shaarim; these [are] their cities till the reigning of David.
And their villages [are] Etam, and Ain, Rimmon, and Tochen, and Ashan, five cities,
and all their villages that [are] round about these cities unto Baal; these [are] their dwellings, and they have their genealogy:
even Meshobab, and Jamlech, and Joshah son of Amaziah,
and Joel, and Jehu son of Josibiah, son of Seraiah, son of Asiel,
and Elioenai, and Jaakobah, and Jeshohaiah, and Asaiah, and Adiel, and Jesimiel, and Benaiah,
and Ziza son of Shiphi, son of Allon, son of Jedaiah, son of Shimri, son of Shemaiah.
These who are coming in by name [are] princes in their families, and the house of their fathers have broken forth into a multitude;
and they go to the entrance of Gedor, unto the east of the valley, to seek pasture for their flock,
and they find pasture, fat and good, and the land broad of sides, and quiet, and safe, for of Ham are those dwelling there before.
And these who are written by name come in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and smite their tents, and the habitations that have been found there, and devote them to destruction unto this day, and dwell in their stead, because pasture for their flock [is] there.
And of them, of the sons of Simeon, there have gone to mount Seir, five hundred men, and Pelatiah, and Neariah, and Rephaiah, and Uzziel, sons of Ishi, at their head,
and they smite the remnant of those escaped of Amalek, and dwell there unto this day.
As to sons of Reuben, first-born of Israel — for he [is] the first-born, and on account of his profaning the couch of his father hath his birthright been given to the sons of Joseph son of Israel, and [he is] not to be reckoned by genealogy for the birthright,
for Judah hath been mighty over his brother, and for leader above him, and the birthright [is] to Joseph.
Sons of Reuben, first-born of Israel: Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi.
Sons of Joel: Shemaiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei his son,
Micah his son, Reaiah his son, Baal his son,
Beerah his son, whom Tilgath-Pilneser king of Asshur removed; he [is] prince of the Reubenite.
And his brethren, by their families, in the genealogy of their generations, [are] heads: Jeiel, and Zechariah,
and Bela son of Azaz, son of Shema, son of Joel — he is dwelling in Aroer, even unto Nebo and Baal-Meon;
and at the east he dwelt even unto the entering in of the wilderness, even from the river Phrat, for their cattle were multiplied in the land of Gilead.
And in the days of Saul they have made war with the Hagarites, who fall by their hand, and they dwell in their tents over all the face of the east of Gilead.
And the sons of Gad, over-against them have dwelt in the land of Bashan unto Salcah,
Joel the head, and Shapham the second, and Jaanai and Shaphat in Bashan;
and their brethren of the house of their fathers [are] Michael, and Meshullam, and Sheba, and Jorai, and Jachan, and Zia, and Heber, seven.
These [are] sons of Abihail son of Huri, son of Jaroah, son of Gilead, son of Michael, son of Jeshishai, son of Jahdo, son of Buz;
Ahi son of Abdiel, son of Guni, [is] head of the house of their fathers;
and they dwell in Gilead in Bashan, and in her small towns, and in all suburbs of Sharon, upon their outskirts;
all of them reckoned themselves by genealogy in the days of Jotham king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam king of Israel.
Sons of Reuben, and the Gadite, and the half of the tribe of Manasseh, of sons of valour, men bearing shield and sword, and treading bow, and taught in battle, [are] forty and four thousand and seven hundred and sixty, going out to the host.
And they make war with the Hagarites, and Jetur, and Naphish, and Nodab,
and they are helped against them, and the Hagarites are given into their hand, and all who [are] with them, for they cried to God in battle, and He was entreated of them, because they trusted in Him.
And they take captive their cattle, of their camels fifty thousand, and of sheep two hundred and fifty thousand, and of asses two thousand, and of human beings a hundred thousand;
for many have fallen pierced, for of God [is] the battle; and they dwell in their stead till the removal.
And the sons of the half of the tribe of Manasseh dwelt in the land, from Bashan unto Baal-Hermon, and Senir, and mount Hermon, they have multiplied.
And these [are] heads of the house of their fathers, even Epher, and Ishi, and Eliel, and Azriel, and Jeremiah, and Hodaviah, and Jahdiel, men mighty in valour, men of name, heads to the house of their fathers.
And they trespass against the God of their fathers, and go a-whoring after the gods of the peoples of the land whom God destroyed from their presence;
and stir up doth the God of Israel the spirit of Pul king of Asshur, and the spirit of Tilgath-Pilneser king of Asshur, and he removeth them — even the Reubenite, and the Gadite, and the half of the tribe of Manasseh — and bringeth them in to Halah, and Habor, and Hara, and the river of Gozan unto this day.
Sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
And the sons of Kohath; Amram, Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel.
And sons of Amram: Aaron, and Moses, and Miriam. And sons of Aaron: Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
Eleazar begat Phinehas, Phinehas begat Abishua,
and Abishua begat Bukki, and Bukki begat Uzzi,
and Uzzi begat Zerahiah, and Zerahiah begat Meraioth,
Meraioth begat Amariah, and Amariah begat Ahitub,
and Ahitub begat Zadok, and Zadok begat Ahimaaz,
and Ahimaaz begat Azariah, and Azariah begat Johanan,
and Johanan begat Azariah, him who acted as priest in the house that Solomon built in Jerusalem.
And Azariah begetteth Amariah, and Amariah begat Ahitub,
and Ahitub begat Zadok, and Zadok begat Shallum,
and Shallum begat Hilkiah, and Hilkiah begat Azariah,
and Azariah begat Seraiah, and Seraiah begat Jehozadak;
and Jehozadak hath gone in Jehovah's removing Judah and Jerusalem by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar.
Sons of Levi: Gershom, Kohath, and Merari.
And these [are] names of sons of Gershom: Libni and Shimei.
And sons of Kohath: Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel.
Sons of Merari; Mahli and Mushi. And these [are] families of the Levite according to their fathers;
of Gershom: Libni his son, Jahath his son, Zimmah his son,
Joah his son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son, Jeaterai his son.
Sons of Kohath: Amminadab his son, Korah his son, Assir his son,
Elkanah his son, and Ebiasaph his son, and Assir his son,
Tahath his son, Uriel his son, Uzziah his son, and Shaul his son.
And sons of Elkanah; Amasai and Ahimoth.
Elkanah; sons of Elkanah: Zophai his son, and Nahath his son,
Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, Elkanah his son.
And sons of Samuel: the first-born Vashni, and the second Abijah.
Sons of Merari: Mahli, Libni his son, Shimei his son, Uzzah his son,
Shimea his son, Haggiah his son, Asaiah his son.
And these [are] they whom David stationed over the parts of the song of the house of Jehovah, from the resting of the ark,
and they are ministering before the tabernacle of the tent of meeting, in song, till the building by Solomon of the house of Jehovah in Jerusalem; and they stand according to their ordinance over their service.
And these [are] those standing, and their sons: of the sons of the Kohathite: Heman the singer, son of Joel, son of Shemuel,
son of Elkanah, son of Jeroham, son of Eliel, son of Toah,
son of Zuph, son of Elkanah, son of Mahath, son of Amasai,
son of Elkanah, son of Joel, son of Azariah, son of Zephaniah,
son of Tahath, son of Assir, son of Ebiasaph, son of Korah,
son of Izhar, son of Kohath, son of Levi, son of Israel.
And his brother Asaph, who is standing on his right — Asaph, son of Berachiah, son of Shimea,
son of Michael, son of Baaseiah, son of Malchiah,
son of Ethni, son of Zerah, son of Adaiah,
son of Ethan, son of Zimmah, son of Shimei,
son of Jahath, son of Gershom, son of Levi.
And sons of Merari, their brethren, [are] on the left. Ethan son of Kishi, son of Abdi, son of Malluch,
son of Hashabiah, son of Amaziah, son of Hilkiah,
son of Amzi, son of Bani, son of Shamer,
son of Mahli, son of Mushi, son of Merari, son of Levi.
And their brethren the Levites are put to all the service of the tabernacle of the house of God.
And Aaron and his sons are making perfume on the altar of the burnt-offering, and on the altar of the perfume, for all the work of the holy of holies, and to make atonement for Israel, according to all that Moses servant of God commanded.
And these [are] sons of Aaron: Eleazar his son, Phinehas his son, Abishua his son,
Bukki his son, Uzzi his son, Zerahiah his son,
Meraioth his son, Amariah his son, Ahitub his son,
Zadok his son, Ahimaaz his son.
And these [are] their dwellings, throughout their towers, in their borders, of the sons of Aaron, of the family of the Kohathite, for theirs was the lot;
and they give to them Hebron in the land of Judah and its suburbs round about it;
and the field of the city and its villages they gave to Caleb son of Jephunneh.
And to the sons of Aaron they gave the cities of refuge: Hebron, and Libnah and its suburbs, and Jattir, and Eshtemoa and its suburbs,
and Hilen and its suburbs, Debir and its suburbs,
and Ashan and its suburbs, and Beth-Shemesh and its suburbs.
And from the tribe of Benjamin, Geba and its suburbs, and Allemeth and its suburbs, and Anathoth and its suburbs. All their cities [are] thirteen cities, for their families.
And to the sons of Kohath, those left of the family of the tribe, from the half of the tribe, the half of Manasseh, by lot, [are] ten cities.
And to the sons of Gershom, for their families, from the tribe of Issachar, and from the tribe of Asher, and from the tribe of Naphtali, and from the tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities.
To the sons of Merari, for their families, from the tribe of Reuben, and from the tribe of Gad, and from the tribe of Zebulun, by lot, twelve cities.
And the sons of Israel give to the Levites the cities and their suburbs.
And they give by lot from the tribe of the sons of Judah, and from the tribe of the sons of Simeon, and from the tribe of the sons of Benjamin, these cities which they call by name;
and some of the families of the sons of Kohath have cities of their border from the tribe of Ephraim;
and they give to them the cities of refuge, Shechem and its suburbs in the hill-country of Ephraim, and Gezer and its suburbs,
and Jokmeam and its suburbs, and Beth-Horan and its suburbs,
and Aijalon and its suburbs, and Gath-Rimmon and its suburbs;
and from the half tribe of Manasseh, Aner and its suburbs, and Bileam and its suburbs, for the family of the sons of Kohath who are left.
To the sons of Gershom from the family of the half of the tribe of Manasseh [are] Golan in Bashan and its suburbs, and Ashtaroth and its suburbs;
and from the tribe of Issachar; Kedesh and its suburbs, Daberath and its suburbs,
and Ramoth and its suburbs, and Anem and its suburbs;
and from the tribe of Asher; Mashal and its suburbs, and Abdon and its suburbs,
and Hukok and its suburbs, and Rehob and its suburbs;
and from the tribe of Naphtali: Kedesh in Galilee and its suburbs, and Hammon and its suburbs, and Kirjathaim and its suburbs.
To the sons of Merari who are left, from the tribe of Zebulun, [are] Rimmon and its suburbs, Tabor and its suburbs;
and from beyond the Jordan by Jericho, at the east of the Jordan, from the tribe of Reuben, Bezer in the wilderness and its suburbs, and Jahzah and its suburbs,
and Kedemoth and its suburbs, and Mephaath and its suburbs;
and from the tribe of Gad: Ramoth in Gilead and its suburbs, and Mahanaim and its suburbs,
and Heshbon and its suburbs, and Jazer and its suburbs.
And sons of Issachar; Tola, and Puah, Jashub, and Shimron, four.
And sons of Tola: Uzzi, and Rephaiah, and Jeriel, and Jahmai, and Jibsam, and Shemuel, heads of the house of their fathers, [even] of Tola, mighty of valour in their generations: their number in the days of David [is] twenty and two thousand and six hundred.
And sons of Uzzi: Izrahiah; and sons of Izrahiah: Michael, and Obadiah, and Joel, Ishiah, Hamishah — all of them heads.
And beside them, by their generations, of the house of their fathers, [are] troops of the host of battle, thirty and six thousand, for they multiplied wives and sons;
and their brethren of all the families of Issachar [are] mighty of valour, eighty and seven thousand, all have their genealogy.
Of Benjamin: Bela, and Becher, and Jediael, three.
And sons of Bela: Ezbon, and Uzzi, and Uzziel, and Jerimoth, and Iri, five; heads of a house of fathers, mighty of valour, with their genealogy, twenty and two thousand, and thirty and four.
And sons of Becher: Zemirah, and Joash, and Eliezar, and Elioenai, and Omri, and Jerimoth, and Abijah, and Anathoth, and Alameth. All these [are] sons of Becher,
with their genealogy, after their generations, heads of a house of their fathers, mighty of valour, twenty thousand and two hundred.
And sons of Jediael: Bilhan; and sons of Bilhan: Jeush, and Benjamin, and Ehud, and Chenaanah, and Zethan, and Tarshish, and Ahishahar.
All these [are] sons of Jediael, even heads of the fathers, mighty in valour, seventeen thousand and two hundred going out to the host for battle.
And Shuppim and Huppim [are] sons of Ir; Hushim son of Aher.
Sons of Naphtali: Jahziel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shallum, sons of Bilhah.
Sons of Manasseh: Ashriel, whom Jaladah his Aramaean concubine bare, with Machir father of Gilead.
And Machir took wives for Huppim and for Shuppim, and the name of the one [is] Maachah, and the name of the second Zelophehad, and Zelophehad hath daughters.
And Maachah wife of Machir beareth a son and calleth his name Peresh, and the name of his brother [is] Sheresh, and his sons [are] Ulam and Rakem.
And son of Ulam: Bedan. These [are] sons of Gilead son of Machir, son of Manasseh.
And his sister Hammolecheth bare Ishhod, and Abiezer, and Mahalah.
And the sons of Shemida are Ahian, and Shechem, and Likhi, and Aniam.
And sons of Ephraim: Shuthelah, and Bered his son, and Tahath his son, and Eladah his son, and Tahath his son,
and Zabad his son, and Shuthelah his son, and Ezer, and Elead; and slain them have men of Gath who are born in the land, because they came down to take their cattle.
And Ephraim their father mourneth many days, and his brethren come in to comfort him,
and he goeth in unto his wife, and she conceiveth and beareth a son, and he calleth his name Beriah, because in evil had been his house, —
and his daughter [is] Sherah, and she buildeth Beth-Horon, the lower and the upper, and Uzzen-Sherah —
and Rephah [is] his son, and Resheph, and Telah his son, and Tahan his son,
Laadan his son, Ammihud his son, Elishama his son,
Non his son, Jehoshua his son.
And their possession and their dwellings [are] Beth-El and its small towns, and to the east Naaran, and to the west Gezer and its small towns, and Shechem and its small towns, unto Gaza and its small towns;
and by the parts of the sons of Manasseh, Beth-Shean and its small towns, Taanach and its small towns, Megiddo and its small towns, Dor and its small towns; in these dwelt the sons of Joseph son of Israel.
Son of Asher: Imnah, and Ishve, and Ishvi, and Beriah, and Serah their sister.
And sons of Beriah: Heber, and Malchiel — he [is] father of Birzavith.
And Heber begat Japhlet, and Shomer, and Hotham, and Shua their sister.
And sons of Japhlet: Pasach, and Bimhal, and Ashvath; these [are] sons of Japhlet.
and sons of Shamer: Ahi, and Rohgah, Jehubbah, and Aram.
And son of Helem his brother: Zophah, and Imna, and Shelesh, and Amal.
Sons of Zophah: Suah, and Harnepher, and Shual, and Beri, and Imrah,
Bezer, and Hod, and Shamma, and Shilshah, and Ithran, and Beera.
And sons of Jether: Jephunneh, and Pispah, and Ara.
And sons of Ulla: Arah, and Hanniel, and Rezia.
All these [are] sons of Asher, heads of the house of the fathers, chosen ones, mighty in valour, heads of the princes, with their genealogy, for the host, for battle, their number [is] twenty and six thousand men.
And Benjamin begat Bela his first-born, Ashbel the second, and Aharah the third,
Nohah the fourth, and Rapha the fifth.
And there are sons to Bela: Addar, and Gera,
and Abihud, and Abishua, and Naaman, and Ahoah,
and Gera, and Shephuphan, and Huram.
And these [are] sons of Ehud: they are heads of fathers to the inhabitants of Geba, and they remove them unto Manahath;
and Naaman, and Ahiah, and Gera, he removed them, and begat Uzza and Ahihud.
And Shaharaim begat in the field of Moab, after his sending them away; Hushim and Baara [are] his wives.
And he begetteth of Hodesh his wife, Jobab, and Zibia, and Mesha, and Malcham,
and Jeuz, and Shachiah, and Mirmah. These [are] his sons, heads of fathers.
And of Hushim he begat Ahitub and Elpaal.
And sons of Elpaal: Eber, and Misheam, and Shamer, (he built Ono and Lod and its small towns),
and Beriah and Shema, (they [are] the heads of fathers to the inhabitants of Aijalon — they caused to flee the inhabitants of Gath),
and Ahio, Shashak, and Jeremoth,
and Zebadiah, and Arad, and Ader,
and Michael, and Ispah, and Joha, sons of Beriah,
and Zebadiah, and Meshullam, and Hezeki, and Heber,
and Ishmerai, and Jezliah, and Jobab, sons of Elpaal;
And Jakim, and Zichri, and Zabdi,
and Elienai, and Zillethai, and Eliel,
and Adaiah, and Beraiah, and Shimrath, sons of Shimei;
And Ishpan, and Heber, and Eliel,
and Abdon, and Zichri, and Hanan,
and Hananiah, and Elam, and Antothijah,
and Iphedeiah, and Penuel, sons of Shashak;
And Shamsherai, and Shehariah, and Athaliah,
and Jaareshiah, and Eliah, and Zichri, sons of Jeroham.
These [are] heads of fathers, by their generations, heads; these dwelt in Jerusalem.
And in Gibeon hath the father of Gibeon dwelt, and the name of his wife [is] Maachah;
and his son, the first-born, [is] Abdon, and Zur, and Kish, and Baal, and Nadab,
and Gedor, and Ahio, and Zacher;
and Mikloth begat Shimeah. And they also over-against their brethren dwelt in Jerusalem with their brethren.
And Ner begat Kish, and Kish begat Saul, and Saul begat Jonathan, and Malchi-Shua, and Abinadab, and Esh-Baal.
And a son of Jonathan [is] Merib-Baal, and Merib-Baal begat Micah;
and sons of Micah: Pithon, and Melech, and Tarea, and Ahaz:
and Ahaz begat Jehoadah, and Jehoadah begat Alemeth, and Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri begat Moza,
and Moza begat Binea, Raphah [is] his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son.
And to Azel [are] six sons, and these [are] their names: Azrikam, Bocheru, and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and Obadiah, and Hanan. All these [are] sons of Azel.
And sons of Eshek his brother: Ulam his first-born, Jehush the second, and Eliphelet the third.
And the sons of Ulam are men mighty in valour, treading bow, and multiplying sons and son's sons, a hundred and fifty. All these [are] of the sons of Benjamin.
And all Israel have reckoned themselves by genealogy, and lo, they are written on the book of the kings of Israel and Judah — they were removed to Babylon for their trespass.
And the first inhabitants, who [are] in their possession, in their cities, of Israel, [are] the priests, the Levites, and the Nethinim.
And in Jerusalem dwelt of the sons of Judah, and of the sons of Benjamin, and of the sons of Ephraim and Manasseh:
Uthai son of Ammihud, son of Omri, son of Imri, son of Bani, of the sons of Pharez, son of Judah.
And of the Shilonite: Asaiah the first-born, and his sons.
And of the sons of Zerah: Jeuel, and their brethren, six hundred and ninety.
And of the sons of Benjamin: Sallu son of Meshullam, son of Hodaviah, son of Hassenuah,
and Ibneiah son of Jeroham, and Elah son of Uzzi, son of Michri, and Meshullam son of Shephatiah, son of Reuel, son of Ibnijah.
And their brethren, according to their generations, [are] nine hundred and fifty and six. All these [are] men, heads of fathers, according to the house of their fathers.
And of the priests: Jedaiah, and Jehoiarib, and Jachin,
and Azariah son of Hilkiah, son of Meshullam, son of Zadok, son of Meraioth, son of Ahitub, leader in the house of God;
and Adaiah son of Jeroham, son of Pashhur, son of Malchijah, and Maasai son of Adiel, son of Jahzerah, son of Meshullam, son of Meshillemith, son of Immer.
And their brethren, heads to the house of their fathers, a thousand and seven hundred and sixty, mighty in valour, [are] for the work of the service of the house of God.
And of the Levites: Shemaiah son of Hashshub, son of Azrikam, son of Hashabiah, of the sons of Merari;
and Bakbakkar, Heresh, and Galal, and Mattaniah son of Micah, son of Zichri, son of Asaph;
and Obadiah son of Shemariah, son of Galal, son of Jeduthun, and Berechiah, son of Asa, son of Elkanah, who is dwelling in the villages of the Netophathite.
And the gatekeepers [are] Shallum, and Akkub, and Talmon, and Ahiman, and their brethren — Shallum [is] the head;
and hitherto they [are] at the gate of the king eastward; they [are] the gatekeepers for the companies of the sons of Levi.
And Shallum son of Kore, son of Ebiasaph, son of Korah, and his brethren, of the house of his father, the Korahites, [are] over the work of the service, keepers of the thresholds of the tent, and their fathers [are] over the camp of Jehovah, keepers of the entrance;
and Phinehas son of Eleazar hath been leader over them formerly; Jehovah [is] with him.
Zechariah son of Meshelemiah [is] gatekeeper at the opening of the tent of meeting.
All of those who are chosen for gatekeepers at the thresholds [are] two hundred and twelve; they [are] in their villages, by their genealogy; they whom David and Samuel the seer appointed in their office.
And they and their sons [are] over the gates of the house of Jehovah, even of the house of the tent, by watches.
At four sides are the gatekeepers, east, west, north, and south.
And their brethren in their villages [are] to come in for seven days from time to time with these.
For in office [are] the four chiefs of the gatekeepers, they are Levites, and they have been over the chambers, and over the treasuries of the house of God,
and round about the house of God they lodge, for on them [is] the watch, and they [are] over the opening, even morning by morning.
And [some] of them [are] over the vessels of service, for by number they bring them in, and by number they take them out.
And [some] of them are appointed over the vessels, even over all the vessels of the sanctuary, and over the fine flour, and the wine, and the oil, and the frankincense, and the spices.
And [some] of the sons of the priests are mixing the mixture for spices.
And Mattithiah, of the Levites (he [is] the first-born to Shallum the Korahite), [is] in office over the work of the pans.
And of the sons of the Kohathite, [some] of their brethren [are] over the bread of the arrangement, to prepare [it] sabbath by sabbath.
And these who sing, heads of fathers of the Levites, in the chambers, [are] free, for by day and by night [they are] over them in the work.
These heads of the fathers of the Levites throughout their generations [are] heads. These have dwelt in Jerusalem.
And in Gibeon dwelt hath the father of Gibeon, Jehiel, and the name of his wife [is] Maachah;
and his son, the first-born, [is] Abdon, and Zur, and Kish, and Baal, and Ner, and Nadab,
and Gedor, and Ahio, and Zechariah, and Mikloth.
And Mikloth begat Shimeam, and they also, over-against their brethren, have dwelt in Jerusalem with their brethren.
And Ner begat Kish, and Kish begat Saul, and Saul begat Jonathan, and Malchi-Shua, and Abinadab, and Esh-Baal.
And a son of Jonathan [is] Merib-Baal, and Merib-Baal begat Micah.
And sons of Micah: Pithon, and Melech, and Tahrea,
and Ahaz — he begat Jaarah, and Jaarah begat Alemeth, and Azmaveth, and Zimri, and Zimri begat Moza,
and Moza begat Binea, and Rephaiah [is] his son. Eleasah his son, Azel his son.
And to Azel [are] six sons, and these their names: Azrikam, Bocheru, and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and Obadiah, and Hanan: these [are] sons of Azel.
And the Philistines have fought with Israel, and the men of Israel flee from the face of the Philistines, and fall wounded in mount Gilboa,
and the Philistines pursue after Saul, and after his sons, and the Philistines smite Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Malchi-Shua, sons of Saul.
And the battle [is] heavy on Saul, and those shooting with the bow find him, and he is wounded by those shooting,
and Saul saith unto the bearer of his weapons, 'Draw thy sword, and pierce me with it, lest these uncircumcised come — and have abused me.' And the bearer of his weapons hath not been willing, for he feareth exceedingly, and Saul taketh the sword, and falleth upon it;
and the bearer of his weapons seeth that Saul [is] dead, and falleth, he also, on the sword, and dieth;
and Saul dieth, and his three sons, and all his house — together they died.
And all the men of Israel who [are] in the valley see that they have fled, and that Saul and his sons have died, and they forsake their cities and flee, and the Philistines come and dwell in them.
And it cometh to pass, on the morrow, that the Philistines come to strip the wounded, and find Saul and his sons fallen in mount Gilboa,
and strip him, and bear away his head, and his weapons, and send into the land of the Philistines round about to proclaim tidings [to] their idols and the people,
and put his weapons in the house of their gods, and his skull they have fixed in the house of Dagon.
And all Jabesh-Gilead hear of all that the Philistines have done to Saul,
and all the men of valour rise and bear away the body of Saul, and the bodies of his sons, and bring them in to Jabesh, and bury their bones under the oak in Jabesh, and fast seven days.
And Saul dieth because of his trespass that he trespassed against Jehovah, against the word of Jehovah that he kept not, and also for asking at a familiar spirit — to inquire, —
and he inquired not at Jehovah, and He putteth him to death, and turneth round the kingdom to David son of Jesse.
And gathered are all Israel unto David to Hebron, saying, 'Lo, thy bone and thy flesh [are] we;
even in time past, even in Saul's being king, it is thou who art taking out and bringing in Israel, and Jehovah thy God saith to thee: Thou dost feed My people Israel, and thou art leader over My people Israel.'
And all the elders of Israel come in unto the king to Hebron, and David maketh with them a covenant in Hebron before Jehovah, and they anoint David for king over Israel, according to the word of Jehovah by the hand of Samuel.
And David goeth, and all Israel, to Jerusalem — it [is] Jebus — and there the Jebusite, the inhabitants of the land.
And the inhabitants of Jebus say to David, 'Thou dost not come in hither;' and David captureth the fortress of Zion — it [is] the city of David.
And David saith, 'Whoever smiteth the Jebusite first doth become head and prince;' and go up first doth Joab son of Zeruiah and becometh head.
And David dwelleth in the fortress, therefore they have called it, 'City of David;'
and he buildeth the city round about, from Millo, and unto the circumference, and Joab restoreth the rest of the city.
And David goeth, going on and becoming great, and Jehovah of Hosts [is] with him.
And these [are] heads of the mighty ones whom David hath, who are strengthening themselves with him in his kingdom, with all Israel, to cause him to reign, according to the word of Jehovah, over Israel.
And this [is] an account of the mighty ones whom David hath: Jashobeam son of a Hachmonite [is] head of the thirty; he is lifting up his spear against three hundred — wounded, at one time.
And after him [is] Eleazar son of Dodo the Ahohite, he [is] among the three mighty;
he hath been with David in Pas-Dammim, and the Philistines have been gathered there to battle, and a portion of the field is full of barley, and the people have fled from the face of the Philistines,
and they station themselves in the midst of the portion, and deliver it, and smite the Philistines, and Jehovah saveth — a great salvation.
And three of the thirty heads go down on the rock unto David, unto the cave of Adullam, and the host of the Philistines is encamping in the valley of Rephaim,
and David [is] then in the fortress, and the station of the Philistines [is] then in Beth-Lehem,
and David longeth, and saith, 'Who doth give me to drink water from the well of Beth-Lehem, that [is] at the gate!'
And the three break through the camp of the Philistines, and draw water from the well of Beth-Lehem, that [is] at the gate, and bear and bring in unto David, and David hath not been willing to drink it, and poureth it out to Jehovah,
and saith, 'Far be it from me, by my God, to do this; the blood of these men do I drink with their lives? for with their lives they have brought it;' and he was not willing to drink it; these [things] did the three mighty ones.
And Abishai brother of Joab, he hath been head of the three: and he is lifting up his spear against three hundred — wounded, and hath a name among three.
Of the three by the two he is honoured, and becometh their head; and unto the [first] three he hath not come.
Benaiah son of Jehoiada, son of a man of valour, of great deeds, from Kabzeel: he hath smitten the two lion-like Moabites, and he hath gone down and smitten the lion in the midst of the pit, in the day of snow.
And he hath smitten the man, the Egyptian — a man of measure, five by the cubit — and in the hand of the Egyptian [is] a spear like a beam of weavers, and he goeth down unto him with a rod, and taketh violently away the spear out of the hand of the Egyptian, and slayeth him with his own spear.
These [things] hath Benaiah son of Jehoiada done, and hath a name among the three mighty ones.
Of the thirty, lo, he [is] honoured, and unto the [first] three he hath not come, and David setteth him over his guard.
And the mighty ones of the forces [are] Asahel brother of Joab, Elhanan son of Dodo of Beth-Lehem,
Shammoth the Harorite, Helez the Pelonite,
Ira son of Ikkesh the Tekoite, Abi-Ezer the Annethothite,
Sibbecai the Hushathite, Ilai the Ahohite,
Maharai the Netophathite, Heled son of Baanah the Netophathite,
Ithai son of Ribai of Gibeah, of the sons of Benjamin, Benaiah the Pirathonite,
Hurai of the brooks of Gaash, Abiel the Arbathite,
Azmaveth the Baharumite, Eliahba the Shaalbonite,
the sons of Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan son of Shage the Hararite,
Ahiam son of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal son of Ur,
Hepher the Mecherathite, Ahijah the Pelonite,
Hezor the Carmelite, Naarai son of Ezbai,
Joel brother of Nathan, Mibhar son of Haggeri,
Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Berothite, bearer of the weapons of Joab son of Zeruiah,
Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite,
Uriah the Hittite, Zabad son of Ahlai,
Adina son of Shiza the Reubenite, head of the Reubenites, and by him thirty,
Hanan son of Maachah, and Joshaphat the Mithnite,
Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jehiel sons of Hothan the Aroerite,
Jediael son of Shimri, and Joha his brother the Tizite,
Eliel the Mahavite, and Jeribai, and Joshaviah, sons of Elnaam, and Ithmah the Moabite,
Eliel, and Obed, and Jaasiel the Mesobaite.
And these [are] those coming in unto David to Ziklag, while shut up because of Saul son of Kish, and they [are] among the mighty ones, helping the battle,
armed with bow, right and left handed, with stones, and with arrows, with bows, of the brethren of Saul, of Benjamin.
The head [is] Ahiezer, and Joash, sons of Shemaab the Gibeathite, and Jeziel, and Pelet, sons of Azmaveth, and Berachah, and Jehu the Antothite,

and Ishmaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty one among the thirty, and over the thirty, and Jeremiah, and Jahaziel, and Johanan, and Josabad the Gederathite.
Eluzai, and Jerimoth, and Bealiah, and Shemariah, and Shephatiah the Haruphite;
Elkanah, and Jesiah, and Azareel, and Joezer, and Jashobeam the Korhites,
and Joelah, and Zebadiah, sons of Jeroham of Gedor.
And of the Gadite there have been separated unto David, to the fortress, to the wilderness, mighty of valour, men of the host for battle, setting in array target and buckler, and their faces the face of the lion, and as roes on the mountains for speed:
Ezer the head, Obadiah the second, Eliab the third,
Mishmannah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth,
Attai the sixth, Eliel the seventh,
Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the ninth,
Jeremiah the tenth, Machbannai the eleventh.
These [are] of the sons of Gad, heads of the host, one of a hundred [is] the least, and the greatest, of a thousand;
these [are] they who have passed over the Jordan in the first month, — and it is full over all its banks — and cause all [they of] the valley to flee to the east and to the west.
And there come of the sons of Benjamin and Judah unto the stronghold to David,
and David goeth out before them, and answereth and saith to them, 'If for peace ye have come in unto me, to help me, I have a heart to unite with you; and if to betray me to mine adversaries — without violence in my hands — the God of our fathers doth see and reprove.'
And the Spirit hath clothed Amasai, head of the captains: 'To thee, O David, and with thee, O son of Jesse — peace! peace to thee, and peace to thy helper, for thy God hath helped thee;' and David receiveth them, and putteth them among the heads of the troop.
And of Manasseh there have fallen unto David in his coming with the Philistines against Israel to battle — and they helped them not, for by counsel the princes of the Philistines sent him away, saying, 'With our heads he doth fall unto his master Saul.' —
In his going unto Ziglag there have fallen unto him of Manasseh, Adnah, and Jozabad, and Jediael, and Michael, and Jozabad, and Elihu, and Zillthai, heads of the thousands that [are] of Manasseh;
and they have helped with David over the troop, for mighty of valour [are] all of them, and they are captains in the host,
for at that time, day by day, they come in unto David to help him, till it is a great camp, like a camp of God.
And these [are] the numbers of the head, of the armed men of the host; they have come in unto David to Hebron to turn round the kingdom of Saul unto him, according to the mouth of Jehovah.
The sons of Judah, bearing target and spear, [are] six thousand and eight hundred, armed ones of the host.
Of the sons of Simeon, mighty ones of valour for the host, [are] seven thousand and a hundred.
Of the sons of Levi [are] four thousand and six hundred;
and Jehoiada [is] the leader of the Aaronite, and with him [are] three thousand and seven hundred,
and Zadok, a young man, mighty of valour, and of the house of his father [are] twenty and two heads.
And of the sons of Benjamin, brethren of Saul, [are] three thousand, and hitherto their greater part are keeping the charge of the house of Saul.
And of the sons of Ephraim [are] twenty thousand and eight hundred, mighty of valour, men of name, according to the house of their fathers.
And of the half of the tribe of Manasseh [are] eighteen thousand, who have been defined by name, to come in to cause David to reign.
And of the sons of Issachar, having understanding for the times, to know what Israel should do; their heads [are] two hundred, and all their brethren [are] at their command.
Of Zebulun, going forth to the host, arranging battle with all instruments of battle, [are] fifty thousand, and keeping rank without a double heart.
And of Naphtali, a thousand heads, and with them, with target and spear, [are] thirty and seven thousand.
And of the Danite, arranging battle, [are] twenty and eight thousand and six hundred.
And of Asher, going forth to the host, to arrange battle, [are] forty thousand.
And from beyond the Jordan, of the Reubenite, and of the Gadite, and of the half of the tribe of Manasseh, with all instruments of the host for battle, [are] a hundred and twenty thousand.
All these [are] men of war, keeping rank — with a perfect heart they have come to Hebron, to cause David to reign over all Israel, and also all the rest of Israel [are] of one heart, to cause David to reign,
and they are there, with David, three days, eating and drinking, for their brethren have prepared for them.
And also those near unto them, unto Issachar, and Zebulun, and Naphtali, are bringing in bread on asses, and on camels, and on mules, and on oxen — food of fine flour, fig-cakes and grape-cakes, and wine, and oil, and oxen, and sheep, in abundance, for joy [is] in Israel.
And David consulteth with the heads of the thousands, and of the hundreds, every leader,
and David saith to all the assembly of Israel, 'If unto you it be good, and from Jehovah our God it hath broken forth — we send unto our brethren, those left in all the lands of Israel, and with them the priests and the Levites, in the cities of their suburbs, and they are gathered unto us,
and we bring round the ark of our God unto us, for we sought Him not in the days of Saul.'
And all the assembly say to do so, for the thing is right in the eyes of all the people.
And David assembleth all Israel from Shihor of Egypt even unto the entering in of Hamath, to bring in the ark of God from Kirjath-Jearim,
and David goeth up, and all Israel, to Baalah, unto Kirjath-Jearim that [is] to Judah, to bring up thence the ark of God Jehovah, inhabiting the cherubs, where the Name is called on.
And they place the ark of God on a new cart, from the house of Abinadab, and Uzza and Ahio are leading the cart,
and David and all Israel are playing before God, with all strength, and with songs, and with harps, and with psalteries, and with timbrels, and with cymbals, and with trumpets.
And they come in unto the threshing-floor of Chidon, and Uzza putteth forth his hand to seize the ark, for the oxen were released,
and the anger of Jehovah is kindled against Uzza, and He smiteth him, because that he hath put forth his hand on the ark, and he dieth there before God.
And it is displeasing to David, because Jehovah hath made a breach upon Uzza, and one calleth that place 'Breach of Uzza' unto this day.
And David feareth God on that day, saying, 'How do I bring in unto me the ark of God?'
And David hath not turned aside the ark unto himself, unto the city of David, and turneth it aside unto the house of Obed-Edom the Gittite.
And the ark of God dwelleth with the household of Obed-Edom, in his house, three months, and Jehovah blesseth the house of Obed-Edom, and all that he hath.
And Huram king of Tyre sendeth messengers unto David, and cedar-wood, and artificers of walls, and artificers of wood, to build to him a house.
And David knoweth that Jehovah hath established him for king over Israel, because of the lifting up on high of his kingdom, for the sake of His people Israel.
And David taketh again wives in Jerusalem, and David begetteth again sons and daughters;
and these [are] the names of the children whom he hath in Jerusalem: Shammua, and Shobab, Nathan, and Solomon,
and Ibhar, and Elishua, and Elpalet,
and Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia,
and Elishama, and Beeliada, and Eliphalet.
And the Philistines hear that David hath been anointed for king over all Israel, and all the Philistines go up to seek David, and David heareth, and goeth out before them.
And the Philistines have come, and rush into the valley of Rephaim,
and David asketh of God, saying, 'Do I go up against the Philistines — and hast Thou given them into my hand?' And Jehovah saith to him, 'Go up, and I have given them into thy hand.'
And they go up into Baal-Perazim, and David smiteth them there, and David saith, 'God hath broken up mine enemies by my hand, like the breaking up of waters;' therefore they have called the name of that place Baal-Perazim.
And they leave there their gods, and David speaketh, and they are burnt with fire.
And the Philistines add again, and rush into the valley,
and David asketh again of God, and God saith to him, 'Do not go up after them, turn round from them, and thou hast come to them from over-against the mulberries;
and it cometh to pass, when thou hearest the sound of the stepping at the heads of the mulberries, then thou goest out into battle, for God hath gone out before thee to smite the camp of the Philistines.'
And David doth as God commanded him, and they smite the camp of the Philistines from Gibeon even unto Gazer;
and the name of David goeth out into all the lands, and Jehovah hath put his fear on all the nations.
And he maketh for himself houses in the city of David, and prepareth a place for the ark of God, and stretcheth out for it a tent.
Then said David, 'None [are] to carry the ark of God, except the Levites, for on them hath Jehovah fixed to carry the ark of God, and to serve Him — unto the age.'
And David assembleth all Israel unto Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of Jehovah unto its place that he had prepared for it.
And David gathereth the sons of Aaron, and the Levites.
Of sons of Kohath: Uriel the chief, and his brethren, a hundred and twenty.
Of sons of Merari: Asaiah the chief, and his brethren, two hundred and twenty.
Of sons of Gershom: Joel the chief, and his brethren, a hundred and thirty.
Of sons of Elizaphan: Shemaiah the chief, and his brethren, two hundred.
Of sons of Hebron: Eliel the chief, and his brethren, eighty.
Of sons of Uzziel: Amminadab the chief, and his brethren, a hundred and twelve.
And David calleth to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, and to the Levites, to Uriel, Asaiah, and Joel, Shemaiah, and Eliel, and Amminadab,
and saith to them, 'Ye [are] heads of the fathers of the Levites; sanctify yourselves, ye and your brethren, and ye have brought up the ark of Jehovah, God of Israel, unto [the place] I have prepared for it;
because at the first [it was] not ye, Jehovah our God made a breach upon us, because we sought Him not according to the ordinance.'
And the priests and the Levites sanctify themselves, to bring up the ark of Jehovah, God of Israel;
and sons of the Levites bear the ark of God, as Moses commanded, according to the word of Jehovah, on their shoulder, with staves, above them.
And David saith to the heads of the Levites to appoint their brethren the singers, with instruments of song, psalteries, and harps, and cymbals, sounding, to lift up with the voice for joy.
And the Levites appoint Heman son of Joel, and of his brethren, Asaph son of Berechiah, and of the sons of Merari their brethren, Ethan son of Kushaiah;
and with them their brethren, the seconds [in rank], Zechariah, Ben, and Jaaziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, Eliab, and Benaiah, and Maaseiah, and Mattithiah, and Elipheleh, and Mikneiah; and Obed-Edom and Jeiel the gatekeepers;
and the singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, with cymbals of brass to sound,
and Zechariah, and Aziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jeheil, and Unni, and Eliab, and Maaseiah, and Benaiah, with psalteries besides virgins,
and Mattithiah, and Elipheleh, and Mikneiah, and Obed-Edom, and Jeiel, and Azaziah, with harps, on the octave, to oversee.
And Chenaniah, head of the Levites, [is] over the burden; he instructeth about the burden, for he [is] intelligent.
And Berechiah and Elkanah [are] gatekeepers for the ark.
And Shebaniah, and Joshaphat, and Nethaneel, and Amasai, and Zechariah, and Benaiah, and Eliezer the priests, are blowing with trumpets before the ark of God; and Obed-Edom and Jehiah [are] gatekeepers for the ark.
And it is David, and the elders of Israel, and the heads of the thousands, who are going to bring up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah from the house of Obed-Edom with joy;
and it cometh to pass, in God's helping the Levites bearing the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, that they sacrifice seven bullocks and seven rams.
And David is wrapped in an upper robe of fine linen, and all the Levites who are bearing the ark, and the singers, and Chenaniah head of the burden of the singers; and on David [is] an Ephod of linen.
And all Israel are bringing up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah with shouting, and with the sound of a cornet, and with trumpets, and with cymbals, sounding with psalteries and harps,
and it cometh to pass, the ark of the covenant of Jehovah is entering in unto the city of David, and Michal daughter of Saul is looking through the window, and seeth king David dancing and playing, and despiseth him in her heart.
And they bring in the ark of God, and set it up in the midst of the tent that David hath stretched out for it, and they bring near burnt-offerings and peace-offerings before God;
and David ceaseth from offering the burnt-offering and the peace-offerings, and blesseth the people in the name of Jehovah,
and giveth a portion to every man of Israel, both man and woman: to each a cake of bread, and a measure of wine, and a grape-cake.
And he putteth before the ark of Jehovah, of the Levites, ministers, even to make mention of, and to thank, and to give praise to Jehovah, God of Israel,
Asaph the head, and his second Zechariah; Jeiel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Mattithiah, and Eliab, and Benaiah, and Obed-Edom, and Jeiel, with instruments of psalteries, and with harps; and Asaph with cymbals is sounding;
and Benaiah and Jahaziel the priests [are] with trumpets continually before the ark of the covenant of God.
On that day then hath David given at the beginning to give thanks to Jehovah by the hand of Asaph and his brethren: —
Give thanks to Jehovah, call in His name, Make known among the peoples His doings.
Sing ye to Him, sing psalms to Him, Meditate on all His wonders.
Boast yourselves in His holy name, Rejoice doth the heart of those seeking Jehovah.
Seek ye Jehovah and His strength, Seek His face continually.
Remember His wonders that He did, His signs, and the judgments of His mouth,
O seed of Israel, His servant, O sons of Jacob, His chosen ones!
He [is] Jehovah our God, In all the earth [are] His judgments.
Remember ye to the age His covenant, The word He commanded — To a thousand generations,
Which He hath made with Abraham, And His oath — to Isaac,
And He establisheth it to Jacob for a statute, To Israel — a covenant age-during.
Saying: To thee I give the land of Canaan, The portion of your inheritance,
When ye are few of number, As a little thing, and sojourners in it.
And they go up and down, From nation unto nation, And from a kingdom unto another people.
He hath not suffered any to oppress them, And reproveth on their account kings:
Come not against Mine anointed ones, And against My prophets do not evil.
Sing to Jehovah, all the earth, Proclaim from day unto day His salvation.
Rehearse among nations His glory, Among all the peoples His wonders.
For great [is] Jehovah, and praised greatly, And fearful He [is] above all gods.
For all gods of the peoples [are] nought, And Jehovah the heavens hath made.
Honour and majesty [are] before Him, Strength and joy [are] in His place.
Ascribe to Jehovah, ye families of peoples, Ascribe to Jehovah honour and strength.
Ascribe to Jehovah the honour of His name, Lift up a present, and come before Him. Bow yourselves to Jehovah, In the beauty of holiness.
Be pained before Him, all the earth:
Also, established is the world, It is not moved! The heavens rejoice, and the earth is glad, And they say among nations: Jehovah hath reigned.
Roar doth the sea, and its fulness, Exult doth the field, and all that [is] in it,
Then sing do trees of the forest, From the presence of Jehovah, For He hath come to judge the earth!
Give thanks to Jehovah, for good, For to the age, [is] His kindness,
And say, Save us, O God of our salvation, And gather us, and deliver us from the nations, To give thanks to Thy holy name, To triumph in Thy praise.
Blessed [is] Jehovah, God of Israel, From the age and unto the age;' And all the people say, 'Amen,' and have given praise to Jehovah.
And he leaveth there before the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, for Asaph and for his brethren, to minister before the ark continually, according to the matter of a day in its day,
both Obed-Edom and their brethren, sixty and eight, and Obed-Edom son of Jeduthun, and Hosah for gatekeepers,
and Zadok the priest, and his brethren the priests, before the tabernacle of Jehovah, in a high place that [is] in Gibeon,
to cause to ascend burnt-offerings to Jehovah, on the altar of burnt-offering continually, morning and evening, and for all that is written in the law of Jehovah, that He charged on Israel.
And with them [are] Heman and Jeduthun, and the rest of those chosen, who were defined by name, to give thanks to Jehovah, for to the age [is] His kindness,
and with them — Heman and Jeduthun — [are] trumpets and cymbals for those sounding, and instruments of the song of God, and the sons of Jeduthun [are] at the gate.
And all the people go, each to his house, and David turneth round to bless his house.
And it cometh to pass as David sat in his house, that David saith unto Nathan the prophet, 'Lo, I am dwelling in a house of cedars, and the ark of the covenant of Jehovah [is] under curtains;'
and Nathan saith unto David, 'All that [is] in thy heart do, for God [is] with thee.'
And it cometh to pass on that night that a word of God is unto Nathan, saying,
'Go, and thou hast said unto David My servant, Thus said Jehovah, Thou dost not build for Me the house to dwell in:
for I have not dwelt in a house from the day that I brought up Israel till this day, and I am from tent unto tent: and from the tabernacle,
whithersoever I have walked up and down among all Israel, a word spake I, with one of the judges of Israel, whom I commanded to feed My people, saying, Why have ye not built for Me a house of cedars?
'And now, thus dost thou say to My servant, to David, Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, I have taken thee from the habitation, from after the sheep, to be leader over My people Israel,
and I am with thee whithersoever thou hast walked, and I cut off all thine enemies from thy presence, and have made for thee a name like the name of the great ones who [are] in the earth.
'And I have prepared a place for My people Israel, and planted it, and it hath dwelt in its place, and is not troubled any more, and the sons of perverseness add not to wear it out as at first,
yea, even from the days that I appointed judges over My people Israel. 'And I have humbled all thine enemies, and I declare to thee that a house doth Jehovah build for thee,
and it hath come to pass, when thy days have been fulfilled to go with thy fathers, that I have raised up thy seed after thee, who is of thy sons, and I have established his kingdom,
he doth build for Me a house, and I have established his throne unto the age;
I am to him for a father, and he is to Me for a son, and My kindness I turn not aside from him as I turned it aside from him who was before thee,
and I have established him in My house, and in My kingdom unto the age, and his throne is established unto the age.'
According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so spake Nathan unto David.
And David the king cometh in and sitteth before Jehovah, and saith, 'Who [am] I, O Jehovah God, and what my house, that Thou hast brought me hitherto?
And this is small in Thine eyes, O God, and Thou speakest concerning the house of thy servant afar off, and hast seen me as a type of the man who is on high, O Jehovah God!
'What doth David add more unto Thee for the honour of Thy servant; and Thou Thy servant hast known.
O Jehovah, for Thy servant's sake, and according to Thine own heart Thou hast done all this greatness, to make known all these great things.
O Jehovah, there is none like Thee, and there is no god save Thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears.
'And who [is] as Thy people Israel, one nation in the earth whom God hath gone to ransom to Him for a people, to make for Thee a name great and fearful, to cast out from the presence of Thy people whom Thou hast ransomed out of Egypt — nations?
Yea, Thou dost appoint Thy people Israel to Thee for a people unto the age, and Thou, O Jehovah, hast been to them for God.
'And now, O Jehovah, the word that Thou hast spoken concerning Thy servant, and concerning his house, let be stedfast unto the age, and do as Thou hast spoken;
and let it be stedfast, and Thy name is great unto the age, saying, Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, is God to Israel, and the house of Thy servant David is established before Thee;
for Thou, O my God, Thou hast uncovered the ear of Thy servant — to build to him a house, therefore hath Thy servant found to pray before Thee.
'And now, Jehovah, Thou [art] God Himself, and Thou speakest concerning Thy servant this goodness;
and now, Thou hast been pleased to bless the house of Thy servant, to be to the age before Thee; for Thou, O Jehovah, hast blessed, and it is blessed to the age.'
And it cometh to pass after this, that David smiteth the Philistines, and humbleth them, and taketh Gath and its small towns out of the hand of the Philistines;
and he smiteth Moab, and the Moabites are servants to David, bringing a present.
And David smiteth Hadarezer king of Zobah, at Hamath, in his going to establish his power by the river Phrat,
and David captureth from him a thousand chariots, and seven thousand horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen, and David destroyeth utterly all the chariots, and leaveth of them a hundred chariots [only].
And Aram of Damascus cometh in to give help to Hadarezer king of Zobah, and David smiteth in Aram twenty and two thousand men,
and David putteth [garrisons] in Aram of Damascus, and the Aramaeans are to David for servants, bearing a present, and Jehovah giveth salvation to David whithersoever he hath gone.
And David taketh the shields of gold that have been on the servants of Hadarezer, and bringeth them in to Jerusalem;
and from Tibhath, and from Chun, cities of Hadarezer, hath David taken very much brass; with it hath Solomon made the brazen sea, and the pillars, and the vessels of brass.
And Tou king of Hamath heareth that David hath smitten the whole force of Hadarezer king of Zobah,
and he sendeth Hadoram his son unto king David, to ask of him of peace, and to bless him (because that he hath fought against Hadarezer, and smiteth him, for a man of wars with Tou had Hadarezer been,) and all kinds of vessels, of gold, and silver, and brass;
also them hath king David sanctified to Jehovah with the silver and the gold that he hath taken from all the nations, from Edom, and from Moab, and from the sons of Ammon, and from the Philistines, and from Amalek.
And Abishai son of Zeruiah hath smitten Edom in the valley of salt — eighteen thousand,
and he putteth in Edom garrisons, and all the Edomites are servants to David; and Jehovah saveth David whithersoever he hath gone.
And David reigneth over all Israel, and he is doing judgment and righteousness to all his people,
and Joab son of Zeruiah [is] over the host, and Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud [is] remembrancer,
and Zadok son of Ahitub, and Abimelech son of Abiathar, [are] priests, and Shavsha [is] scribe,
and Benaiah son of Jehoiada [is] over the Cherethite and the Pelethite, and the elder sons of David [are] at the hand of the king.
And it cometh to pass after this, that Nahash king of the sons of Ammon dieth, and his son reigneth in his stead,
and David saith, 'I do kindness with Hanun son of Nahash, for his father did with me kindness;' and David sendeth messengers to comfort him concerning his father. And the servants of David come in unto the land of the sons of Ammon, unto Hanun, to comfort him,
and the heads of the sons of Ammon say to Hanun, 'Is David honouring thy father, in thine eyes, because he hath sent to thee comforters? in order to search, and to overthrow, and to spy out, the land, have not his servants come in unto thee?'
And Hanun taketh the servants of David, and shaveth them, and cutteth their long robes in the midst, unto the buttocks, and sendeth them away.
And [some] go, and declare to David concerning the men, and he sendeth to meet them — for the men have been greatly ashamed — and the king saith, 'Dwell in Jericho till that your beard is grown, then ye have returned.'
And the sons of Ammon see that they have made themselves abhorred by David, and Hanun and the sons of Ammon send a thousand talents of silver, to hire to them, from Aram-Naharaim, and from Aram-Maachah, and from Zobah, chariots and horsemen;
and they hire to them two and thirty thousand chariots, and the king of Maachah and his people, and they come in and encamp before Medeba, and the sons of Ammon have been gathered out of their cities, and come in to the battle.
And David heareth, and sendeth Joab, and all the host of the mighty men,
and the sons of Ammon come out and set battle in array at the opening of the city, and the kings who have come [are] by themselves in the field.
And Joab seeth that the front of the battle hath been unto him, before and behind, and he chooseth out of all the choice in Israel, and setteth in array to meet Aram,
and the remnant of the people he hath given into the hand of Abishai his brother, and they set in array to meet the sons of Ammon.
And he saith, 'If Aram be stronger than I, then thou hast been to me for salvation; and if the sons of Ammon be stronger than thou, then I have saved thee;
be strong, and we strengthen ourselves, for our people, and for the cities of our God, and Jehovah doth that which is good in His eyes.'
And Joab draweth nigh, and the people who [are] with him, before Aram to battle, and they flee from his face;
and the sons of Ammon have seen that Aram hath fled, and they flee — they also — from the face of Abishai his brother, and go in to the city. And Joab cometh in to Jerusalem.
And Aram seeth that they have been smitten before Israel, and send messengers, and bring out Aram that [is] beyond the River, and Shophach head of the host of Hadarezer [is] before them.
And it is declared to David, and he gathereth all Israel, and passeth over the Jordan, and cometh in unto them, and setteth in array against them; yea, David setteth in array the battle to meet Aram, and they fight with him;
and Aram fleeth from the face of Israel, and David slayeth of Aram seven thousand charioteers, and forty thousand footmen, and Shophach head of the host he hath put to death.
And the servants of Hadarezer see that they have been smitten before Israel, and they make peace with David and serve him, and Aram hath not been willing to help the sons of Ammon any more.
And it cometh to pass, at the time of the turn of the year — at the time of the going out of the messengers — that Joab leadeth out the force of the host, and destroyeth the land of the sons of Ammon, and cometh in and beseigeth Rabbah — David is abiding in Jerusalem — and Joab smiteth Rabbah, and breaketh it down.
And David taketh the crown of their king from off his head, and findeth it [in] weight a talent of gold, and in it a precious stone, and it is on the head of David: and spoil of the city he hath brought out very much,
and the people who [are] in it he hath brought out, and setteth to the saw, and to cutting instruments of iron, and to axes; and thus doth David to all cities of the sons of Ammon, and David turneth back, and all the people, to Jerusalem.
And it cometh to pass, after this, that there remaineth war in Gezer with the Philistines, then hath Sibbechai the Hushathite smitten Sippai, of the children of the giant, and they are humbled.
And there is again war with the Philistines, and Elhanan son of Jair smiteth Lahmi, brother of Goliath the Gittite, the wood of whose spear [is] like a beam of weavers.
And there is again war in Gath, and there is a man of measure, and his fingers and his toes [are] six and six, twenty and four, and also, he hath been born to the giant.
And he reproacheth Israel, and smite him doth Jonathan son of Shimea, brother of David.
These were born to the giant in Gath, and they fall by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants.
And there standeth up an adversary against Israel, and persuadeth David to number Israel,
And David saith unto Joab, and unto the heads of the people, 'Go, number Israel from Beer-Sheba even unto Dan, and bring unto me, and I know their number.'
And Joab saith, 'Jehovah doth add to His people as they are a hundred times; are they not, my lord, O king, all of them to my lord for servants? why doth my lord seek this? why is he for a cause of guilt to Israel?'
And the word of the king [is] severe against Joab, and Joab goeth out, and goeth up and down in all Israel, and cometh in to Jerusalem.
And Joab giveth the account of the numbering of the people unto David, and all Israel is a thousand thousand and a hundred thousand, each drawing sword, and Judah [is] four hundred and seventy thousand, each drawing sword.
And Levi and Benjamin he hath not numbered in their midst, for the word of the king was abominable with Joab.
And it is evil in the eyes of God concerning this thing, and He smiteth Israel,
and David saith unto God, 'I have sinned exceedingly, in that I have done this thing; and now, cause to pass away, I pray Thee, the iniquity of Thy servant, for I have acted very foolishly.'
And Jehovah speaketh unto Gad, seer of David, saying:
'Go, and thou hast spoken unto David, saying, Thus said Jehovah, Three — I am stretching out unto thee; choose for thee one of these, and I do [it] to thee.'
And Gad cometh in unto David, and saith to him, 'Thus said Jehovah, Take for thee —
either for three years — famine, or three months to be consumed from the face of thine adversaries, even the sword of thine enemies to overtake, or three days the sword of Jehovah, even pestilence in the land, and a messenger of Jehovah destroying in all the border of Israel; and now, see; what word do I return to Him who is sending me?'
And David saith unto Gad, 'I am greatly distressed, let me fall, I pray thee, into the hand of Jehovah, for very many [are] His mercies, and into the hand of man let me not fall.'
And Jehovah giveth a pestilence in Israel, and there fall of Israel seventy thousand men,
and God sendeth a messenger to Jerusalem to destroy it, and as he is destroying Jehovah hath seen, and is comforted concerning the evil, and saith to the messenger who [is] destroying, 'Enough, now, cease thy hand.' And the messenger of Jehovah is standing by the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite,
and David lifteth up his eyes, and seeth the messenger of Jehovah standing between the earth and the heavens, and his sword drawn in his hand, stretched out over Jerusalem, and David falleth, and the elders, covered with sackcloth, on their faces.
And David saith unto God, 'Did not I — I say to number the people? Yea, I it [is] who have sinned, and done great evil: and these, the flock, what did they? O Jehovah, my God, let, I pray Thee, Thy hand be on me, and on the house of my father, and not on Thy people — to be plagued.'
And the messenger of Jehovah spake unto Gad, saying for David, 'Surely David doth go up to raise an altar to Jehovah in the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite.'
And David goeth up by the word of Gad, that he spake in the name of Jehovah.
And Ornan turneth back, and seeth the messenger, and his four sons [are] with him, hiding themselves, and Ornan is threshing wheat.
And David cometh in unto Ornan, and Ornan looketh attentively, and seeth David, and goeth out from the threshing-floor, and boweth himself to David — face to the earth.
And David saith unto Ornan, 'Give to me the place of the threshing-floor, and I build in it an altar to Jehovah; for full silver give it to me, and the plague is restrained from the people.'
And Ornan saith unto David, 'Take to thee — and my lord the king doth that which is good in his eyes: see, I have given the oxen for burnt-offerings, and the threshing instruments for wood, and the wheat for a present; the whole I have given.'
And king David saith to Ornan, 'Nay, for I surely buy for full silver; for I do not lift up that which is thine to Jehovah, so as to offer a burnt-offering without cost.'
And David giveth to Ornan for the place shekels of gold [in] weight six hundred;
and David buildeth there an altar to Jehovah, and offereth burnt-offerings and peace-offerings, and calleth unto Jehovah, and He answereth him with fire from the heavens on the altar of the burnt-offering.
And Jehovah saith to the messenger, and he turneth back his sword unto its sheath.
At that time when David seeth that Jehovah hath answered him in the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite, then he sacrificeth there;
and the tabernacle of Jehovah that Moses made in the wilderness, and the altar of the burnt-offering, [are] at that time in a high place, in Gibeon;
and David is not able to go before it to seek God, for he hath been afraid because of the sword of the messenger of Jehovah.
And David saith, 'This is the house of Jehovah God, and this the altar for burnt-offering for Israel.'
And David saith to gather the sojourners who [are] in the land of Israel, and appointeth hewers to hew hewn-stones to build a house of God.
And iron in abundance for nails for leaves of the gates, and for couplings, hath David prepared, and brass in abundance — there is no weighing.
And cedar-trees even without number, for the Zidonians and the Tyrians brought in cedar-trees in abundance to David.
And David saith, 'Solomon my son [is] a youth and tender, and the house to be built to Jehovah [is] to be made exceedingly great, for name and for beauty to all the lands; let me prepare, I pray Thee, for it;' and David prepareth in abundance before his death.
And he calleth for Solomon his son, and chargeth him to build a house to Jehovah, God of Israel,
and David saith to Solomon his son, 'As for me, it hath been with my heart to build a house to the name of Jehovah my God,
and the word of Jehovah [is] against me, saying, Blood in abundance thou hast shed, and great wars thou hast made: thou dost not build a house to My name, for much blood thou hast shed to the earth before Me.
'Lo, a son is born to thee; he is a man of rest, and I have given rest to him from all his enemies round about, for Solomon is his name, and peace and quietness I give unto Israel in his days;
he doth build a house to My name, and he is to Me for a son, and I [am] to him for a father, and I have established the throne of his kingdom over Israel unto the age.
'Now, my son, Jehovah is with thee, and thou hast prospered, and hast built the house of Jehovah thy God, as He spake concerning thee.
Only, Jehovah give to thee wisdom and understanding, and charge thee concerning Israel, even to keep the law of Jehovah thy God;
then thou dost prosper, if thou dost observe to do the statutes and the judgments that Jehovah charged Moses with concerning Israel; be strong and courageous; do not fear, nor be cast down.
'And lo, in mine affliction, I have prepared for the house of Jehovah of gold talents a hundred thousand, and of silver a thousand thousand talents; and of brass and of iron there is no weighing, for in abundance it hath been, and wood and stones I have prepared, and to them thou dost add.
'And with thee in abundance [are] workmen, hewers and artificers of stone and of wood, and every skilful man for every work.
To the gold, to the silver, and to the brass, and to the iron, there is no number; arise and do, and Jehovah is with thee.'
And David giveth charge to all heads of Israel to give help to Solomon his son,
'Is not Jehovah your God with you? yea, He hath given rest to you round about, for He hath given into my hand the inhabitants of the land, and subdued hath been the land before His people.
'Now, give your heart and your soul to seek to Jehovah your God, and rise and build the sanctuary of Jehovah God, to bring in the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, and the holy vessels of God, to the house that is built to the name of Jehovah.'
And David is old, and satisfied with days, and causeth his son Solomon to reign over Israel,
and gathereth all the heads of Israel, and the priests, and the Levites;
and the Levites are numbered from a son of thirty years and upward, and their number, by their polls, is of mighty men thirty and eight thousand.
Of these to preside over the work of the house of Jehovah [are] twenty and four thousand, and officers and judges six thousand,
and four thousand gatekeepers, and four thousand giving praise to Jehovah, 'with instruments that I made for praising,' [saith David.]
And David distributeth them into courses: Of the sons of Levi: of Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
Of the Gershonite: Laadan and Shimei.
Sons of Laadan: the head [is] Jehiel, and Zetham, and Joel, three.
Sons of Shimei [are] Shelomith, and Haziel, and Haran, three; these [are] heads of the fathers of Laadan.
And sons of Shimei [are] Jahath, Zina, and Jeush, and Beriah; these [are] sons of Shimei, four.
And Jahath is the head, and Zizah the second, and Jeush and Beriah have not multiplied sons, and they become the house of a father by one numbering.
Sons of Kohath [are] Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel, four.
Sons of Amram: Aaron and Moses; and Aaron is separated for his sanctifying the holy of holies, he and his sons — unto the age, to make perfume before Jehovah, to serve Him, and to bless in His name — unto the age.
As to Moses, the man of God, his sons are called after the tribe of Levi.
Sons of Moses: Gershom and Eliezer.
Sons of Gershom: Shebuel the head.
And sons of Eliezer are Rehabiah the head, and Eliezer had no other sons, and the sons of Rehabiah have multiplied exceedingly.
Sons of Izhar: Shelomith the head.
Sons of Hebron: Jeriah the head, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth.
Sons of Uzziel: Micah the head, and Ishshiah, the second.
Sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi; sons of Mahli: Eleazar and Kish.
And Eleazar dieth, and he had no sons, but daughters, and sons of Kish their brethren take them.
Sons of Mushi: Mahli, and Eder, and Jerimoth, three.
These [are] sons of Levi, by the house of their fathers, heads of the fathers, by their appointments, in the number of names, by their polls, doing the work for the service of the house of Jehovah, from a son of twenty years and upward,
for David said, 'Jehovah, God of Israel, hath given rest to His people, and He doth tabernacle in Jerusalem unto the age;'
and also of the Levites, 'None [are] to bear the tabernacle and all its vessels for its service;'
for by the last words of David they [took] the number of the sons of Levi from a son of twenty years and upward,
for their station [is] at the side of the sons of Aaron, for the service of the house of Jehovah, over the courts, and over the chambers, and over the cleansing of every holy thing, and the work of the service of the house of God,
and for the bread of the arrangement, and for fine flour for present, and for the thin unleavened cakes, and for [the work of] the pan, and for that which is fried, and for all [liquid] measure and [solid] measure;
and to stand, morning by morning, to give thanks, and to give praise to Jehovah, and so at evening;
and for all the burnt-offerings — burnt-offerings to Jehovah for sabbaths, for new moons, and for appointed seasons, by number, according to the ordinance upon them continually, before Jehovah.
And they have kept the charge of the tent of meeting, and the charge of the sanctuary, and the charge of the sons of Aaron, their brethren, for the service of the house of Jehovah.
And to the sons of Aaron [are] their courses: sons of Aaron [are] Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar,
and Nadab dieth, and Abihu, in the presence of their father, and they had no sons, and Eleazar and Ithamar act as priests.
And David distributeth them, and Zadok of the sons of Eleazar, and Ahimelech of the sons of Ithamar, according to their office in their service;
and there are found of the sons of Eleazar more for heads of the mighty men than of the sons of Ithamar; and they distribute them: Of the sons of Eleazar, heads for a house of fathers, sixteen; and of the sons of Ithamar, for a house of their fathers, eight.
And they distribute them, by lots, one with another, for princes of the sanctuary, and princes of God, have been of the sons of Eleazar, and of the sons of Ithamar.
And Shemaiah son of Nethaneel the scribe, of the Levites, writeth them before the king and the princes, and Zadok the priest, and Ahimelech son of Abiathar, and heads of the fathers, for priests and for Levites: one house of a father being taken possession of for Eleazar, and one being taken possession of for Ithamar.
And the first lot goeth out for Jehoiarib, for Jedaiah the second,
for Harim the third, for Seorim the fourth,
for Malchijah the fifth, for Mijamin the sixth,
for Hakkoz the seventh, for Abijah the eighth,
for Jeshuah the ninth, for Shecaniah the tenth,
for Eliashib the eleventh, for Jakim the twelfth,
for Huppah the thirteenth, for Jeshebeab the fourteenth,
for Bilgah the fifteenth, for Immer the sixteenth,
for Hezir the seventeenth, for Aphses the eighteenth,
for Pethahiah the nineteenth, for Jehezekel the twentieth,
for Jachin the one and twentieth, for Gamul the two and twentieth,
for Delaiah the three and twentieth, for Maaziah the four and twentieth.
These [are] their appointments for their service, to come in to the house of Jehovah, according to their ordinance by the hand of Aaron their father, as Jehovah God of Israel, commanded them.
And for the sons of Levi who are left: for sons of Amram, Shubael; for sons of Shubael: Jehdeiah.
For Rehabiah: for sons of Rehabiah, the head Ishshiah.
For the Izharite: Shelomoth; for sons of Shelomoth: Jahath.
And sons of Jeriah: Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, Jekameam the fourth.
Sons of Uzziel: Michah; for sons of Michah: Shamir.
A brother of Michah [is] Ishshiah; for sons of Ishshiah: Zechariah;
sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi; sons of Jaaziah: Beno;
sons of Merari: of Jaaziah: Beno, and Shoham, and Zaccur, and Ibri.
For Mahli: Eleazar, who had no sons;
for Kish: sons of Kish: Jerahmeel.
And sons of Mushi [are] Mahli, and Eder, and Jerimoth; these [are] sons of the Levites, for the house of their fathers,
and they cast, they also, lots over-against their brethren the sons of Aaron, before David the king, and Zadok, and Ahimelech, and heads of the fathers, for priests and for Levites; the chief father over-against his younger brother.
And David and the heads of the host separate for service, of the sons of Asaph, and Heman, and Jeduthun, who are prophesying with harps, with psalteries, and with cymbals, and the number of the workmen is according to their service.
Of sons of Asaph: Zaccur, and Joseph, and Nethaniah, and Asharelah, sons of Asaph, [are] by the side of Asaph, who is prophesying by the side of the king.
Of Jeduthun: sons of Jeduthun, Gedaliah, and Zeri, and Jeshaiah, Hashabiah, and Mattithiah, Shisshah, [are] by the side of their father Jeduthun; with a harp he is prophesying, for giving of thanks and of praise to Jehovah.
Of Heman: sons of Heman: Bukkiah, Mattaniah, Uzziel, Shebuel, and Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, Giddalti, and Romamti-Ezer, Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, Mahazioth;
all these [are] sons of Heman — seer of the king in the things of God — to lift up a horn; and God giveth to Heman fourteen sons and three daughters.
All these [are] by the side of their father in the song of the house of Jehovah, with cymbals, psalteries, and harps, for the service of the house of God; by the side of the king [are] Asaph, and Jeduthun, and Heman.
And their number, with their brethren — taught in the song of Jehovah, all who are intelligent — is two hundred, eighty and eight.
And they cause to fall lots — charge over-against [charge], as well the small as the great, the intelligent with the learner.
And the first lot goeth out for Asaph to Joseph; [to] Gedaliah the second; he, and his brethren and his sons, twelve;
the third [to] Zaccur, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
the fourth to Izri, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
the fifth [to] Nethaniah, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
the sixth [to] Bukkiah, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
the seventh [to] Jesharelah, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
the eighth [to] Jeshaiah, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
the ninth [to] Mattaniah, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
the tenth [to] Shimei, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
eleventh [to] Azareel, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
the twelfth [to] Hashabiah, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
at the thirteenth [to] Shubael, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
at the fourteenth [to] Mattithiah, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
at the fifteenth [to] Jeremoth, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
at the sixteenth [to] Hananiah, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
at the seventeenth [to] Joshbekashah, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
at the eighteenth [to] Hanani, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
at the nineteenth [to] Mallothi, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
at the twentieth [to] Eliathah, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
at the one and twentieth [to] Hothir, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
at the two and twentieth [to] Giddalti, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
at the three and twentieth [to] Mahazioth, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
at the four and twentieth [to] Romamti-Ezer, his sons and his brethren, twelve.
For the courses of the gatekeepers: of the Korhites [is] Meshelemiah son of Kore, of the sons of Asaph;
and to Meshelemiah [are] sons, Zechariah the first-born, Jediael the second, Zebadiah the third, Jathniel the fourth,
Elam the fifth, Jehohanan the sixth, Elioenai the seventh.
And to Obed-Edom [are] sons, Shemaiah the first-born, Jehozabad the second, Joah the third, and Sacar the fourth, and Nethaneel the fifth,
Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the seventh, Peullethai the eighth, for God hath blessed him.
And to Shemaiah his son have sons been born, who are ruling throughout the house of their father, for they [are] mighty of valour.
Sons of Shemaiah [are] Othni, and Rephael, and Obed, Elzabad; his brethren [are] sons of valour, Elihu and Semachiah,
all these [are] of the sons of Obed-Edom; they, and their sons, and their brethren, men of valour with might for service, [are] sixty and two of Obed-Edom.
And to Meshelemiah [are] sons and brethren, sons of valour, eighteen;
and to Hosah, of the sons of Merari, [are] sons: Shimri the head (though he was not first-born, yet his father setteth him for head),
Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah the third, Zechariah the fourth; all the sons and brethren of Hosah [are] thirteen.
According to these [are] the courses of the gatekeepers; to the heads of the mighty ones [are] charges over-against their brethren, to minister in the house of Jehovah,
and they cause to fall lots, as well the small as the great, according to the house of their fathers, for gate and gate.
And the lot falleth eastward to Shelemiah; and [for] Zechariah his son — a counsellor with understanding — they cause to fall lots, and his lot goeth out northward:
to Obed-Edom southward, and to his sons, the house of the gatherings;
to Shuppim and to Hosah to the west, with the gate Shallecheth, in the highway, the ascent, charge over-against charge;
to the east the Levites [are] six; to the north daily four, to the south daily four, and to the gatherings two by two,
at Parbar, to the west, [are] four at the highway, two at Parbar.
These are the courses of the gatekeepers, of the sons of the Korhite, and of the sons of Merari.
And of the Levites, Ahijah [is] over the treasures of the house of God, even for the treasures of the holy things.
Sons of Laadan: sons of the Gershonite, of Laadan, heads of the fathers of Laadan the Gershonite: Jehieli.
Sons of Jehieli: Zetham, and Joel his brother, over the treasures of the house of Jehovah,
for the Amramite, for the Izharite, for the Hebronite, for the Uzzielite.
And Shebuel son of Gershom, son of Moses, [is] president over the treasures.
And his brethren, of Eliezer, [are] Rehabiah his son, and Jeshaiah his son, and Joram his son, and Zichri his son, and Shelomith his son.
This Shelomith and his brethren [are] over all the treasures of the holy things, that David the king, and heads of the fathers, even heads of thousands, and of hundreds, and heads of the host, sanctified;
from the battles, even from the spoil they sanctified to strengthen the house of Jehovah;
and all that Samuel the seer, and Saul son of Kish, and Abner son of Ner, and Joab son of Zeruiah sanctified, every one sanctifying [any thing — it is] by the side of Shelomith and his brethren.
Of the Izharite, Chenaniah and his sons [are] for the outward work over Israel, for officers and for judges.
Of the Hebronite, Hashabiah and his brethren, sons of valour, a thousand and seven hundred, [are] over the inspection of Israel, beyond the Jordan westward, for all the work of Jehovah, and for the service of the king.
Of the Hebronite, Jerijah [is] the head, of the Hebronite, according to his generations, for the fathers — in the fortieth year of the reign of David they have been sought out, and there are found among them mighty ones of valour, in Jazer of Gilead —
and his brethren, sons of valour, two thousand and seven hundred, [are] heads of the fathers, and king David appointeth them over the Reubenite, and the Gadite, and the half of the tribe of Manasseh, for every matter of God and matter of the king.
And the sons of Israel, after their number, heads of the fathers, and princes of the thousands and of the hundreds, and their officers, those serving the king in any matter of the courses, that are coming in and going out month by month, throughout all months of the year — [are] in each course twenty and four thousand.
Over the first course, for the first month, [is] Jashobeam son of Zabdiel, and on his course [are] twenty and four thousand;
of the sons of Perez [is] the head of all princes of the hosts for the first month.
And over the course of the second month [is] Dodai the Ahohite, and his course, and Mikloth [is] the president, and on his course [are] twenty and four thousand.
Head of the third host, for the third month, [is] Benaiah son of Jehoiada, the head priest, and on his course [are] twenty and four thousand.
This Benaiah [is] a mighty one of the thirty, and over the thirty, and [in] his course [is] Ammizabad his son.
The fourth, for the fourth month, [is] Asahel brother of Joab, and Zebadiah his son after him, and on his course [are] twenty and four thousand.
The fifth, for the fifth month, [is] the prince Shamhuth the Izrahite, and on his course [are] twenty and four thousand.
The sixth, for the sixth month, [is] Ira son of Ikkesh the Tekoite, and on his course [are] twenty and four thousand.
The seventh, for the seventh month, [is] Helez the Pelonite, of the sons of Ephraim, and on his course [are] twenty and four thousand.
The eighth, for the eighth month, [is] Sibbecai the Hushathite, of the Zarhite, and on his course [are] twenty and four thousand.
The ninth, for the ninth month, [is] Abiezer the Antothite, of the Benjamite, and on his course [are] twenty and four thousand.
The tenth, for the tenth month, [is] Maharai the Netophathite, of the Zarhite, and on his course [are] twenty and four thousand.
Eleventh, for the eleventh month, [is] Benaiah the Pirathonite, of the sons of Ephraim, and on his course [are] twenty and four thousand.
The twelfth, for the twelfth month, [is] Heldai the Netophathite, of Othniel, and on his course [are] twenty and four thousand.
And over the tribes of Israel: Of the Reubenite, a leader [is] Eliezer son of Zichri; of the Simeonite, Shephatiah son of Maachah;
of the Levite, Hashabiah son of Kemuel; of the Aaronite, Zadok;
of Judah, Elihu, of the brethren of David; of Issachar, Omri son of Michael;
of Zebulun, Ishmaiah son of Obadiah; of Naphtali, Jerimoth son of Azriel;
of the sons of Ephraim, Hoshea son of Azaziah; of the half of the tribe of Manasseh, Joel son of Pedaiah;
of the half of Manasseh in Gilead, Iddo son of Zechariah; of Benjamin, Jaasiel son of Abner; of Dan, Azareel son of Jeroham:
these [are] heads of the tribes of Israel.
And David hath not taken up their number from a son of twenty years and under, for Jehovah said to multiply Israel as the stars of the heavens.
Joab son of Zeruiah hath begun to number — and hath not finished — and there is for this wrath against Israel, and the number hath not gone up in the account of the Chronicles of king David.
And over the treasures of the king [is] Azmaveth son of Adiel; and over the treasures in the field, in the cities, and in the villages, and in the towers, [is] Jehonathan son of Uzziah;
and over workmen of the field for the service of the ground [is] Ezri son of Chelub;
and over the vineyards [is] Shimei the Ramathite; and over what [is] in the vineyards for the treasures of wine [is] Zabdi the Shiphmite;
and over the olives, and the sycamores, that [are] in the low country, [is] Baal-Hanan the Gederite; and over the treasures of oil [is] Joash;
and over the herds that are feeding in Sharon [is] Shitrai the Sharonite; and over the herds in the valleys [is] Shaphat son of Adlai;
and over the camels [is] Obil the Ishmeelite; and over the asses [is] Jehdeiah the Meronothite;
and over the flock [is] Jaziz the Hagerite; all these [are] heads of the substance that king David hath.
And Jonathan, uncle of David, [is] counsellor, a man of understanding, he is also a scribe; and Jehiel son of Hachmoni [is] with the sons of the king;
and Ahithophel [is] counsellor to the king; and Hushai the Archite [is] the friend of the king;
and after Ahithophel [is] Jehoiada son of Benaiah, and Abiathar; and the head of the host of the king [is] Joab.
And David assembleth all the heads of Israel, heads of the tribes, and heads of the courses who are serving the king, and heads of the thousands, and heads of the hundreds, and heads of all the substance and possessions of the king, and of his sons, with the officers and the mighty ones, even to every mighty one of valour — unto Jerusalem.
And David the king riseth on his feet, and saith, 'Hear me, my brethren and my people, I — with my heart — to build a house of rest for the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, and for the footstool of our God, and I prepared to build,
and God hath said to me, Thou dost not build a house to My name, for a man of wars thou [art], and blood thou hast shed.
'And Jehovah, God of Israel, doth fix on me out of all the house of my father to be for king over Israel to the age, for on Judah He hath fixed for a leader, and in the house of Judah, the house of my father, and among the sons of my father, on me, [me] He hath been pleased to make king over all Israel;
and out of all my sons — for many sons hath Jehovah given to me — He also fixeth on Solomon my son, to sit on the throne of the kingdom of Jehovah over Israel,
and saith to me, Solomon thy son, he doth build My house, and My courts, for I have fixed on him to Me for a son, and I — I am to him for a father,
and I have established his kingdom to the age, if he is strong to do My commands, and My judgments, as at this day.
'And now, before the eyes of all Israel, the assembly of Jehovah, and in the ears of our God, keep and seek all the commands of Jehovah your God, so that ye possess this good land, and have caused your sons to inherit after you unto the age.
'And thou, Solomon, my son, know the God of thy father, and serve Him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind, for all hearts is Jehovah seeking, and every imagination of the thoughts He is understanding; if thou dost seek Him, He is found of thee, and if thou dost forsake Him, He casteth thee off for ever.
See, now, for Jehovah hath fixed on thee to build a house for a sanctuary; be strong, and do.'
And David giveth to Solomon his son the pattern of the porch, and of its houses, and of its treasures, and of its upper chambers, and of its innermost chambers, and of the house of the atonement;
and the pattern of all that hath been by the Spirit with him, for the courts of the house of Jehovah, and for all the chambers round about, for the treasures of the house of God, and for the treasures of the things sacrificed;
and for the courses of the priests and of the Levites, and for all the work of the service of the house of Jehovah, and for all vessels of service of the house of Jehovah,
even gold by weight, for [things of] gold, for all instruments of service and service; for all instruments of silver by weight, for all instruments of service and service;
and [by] weight for the candlesticks of gold, and their lamps of gold, by weight [for] candlestick and candlestick, and its lamps; and for the candlesticks of silver, by weight for a candlestick and its lamps, according to the service of candlestick and candlestick;
and the gold [by] weight for tables of the arrangement, for table and table, and silver for the tables of silver;
and the forks, and the bowls, and the cups of pure gold, and for the basins of gold, by weight for basin and basin, and for the basins of silver, by weight for basin and basin,
and for the altar of perfume refined gold by weight, and for the pattern of the chariot of the cherubs of gold — spreading and covering over the ark of the covenant of Jehovah.
The whole [is] in writing from the hand of Jehovah, 'He caused me to understand all the work of the pattern,' [said David.]
And David saith to Solomon his son, 'Be strong, and courageous, and do; do not fear nor be affrighted, for Jehovah God, my God, [is] with thee; He doth not fail thee, nor forsake thee, unto the completion of all the work of the service of the house of Jehovah.
'And lo, courses of the priests and of the Levites [are] for all the service of the house of God; and with thee in all work [is] every willing one with wisdom, for every service; and the heads and all the people [are] according to all thy words.'
And David the king saith to all the assembly, 'Solomon my son — the one on whom God hath fixed — [is] young and tender, and the work [is] great, for not for man is the palace, but for Jehovah God;
and with all my power I have prepared for the house of my God, the gold for [things of] gold, and the silver for [those of] silver, and the brass for [those of] brass, the iron for [those of] iron, and the wood for [those of] wood, shoham stones, and settings, and stones of painting and of diverse colours, and all [kinds of] precious stone, and stones of white marble, in abundance.
'And again, because of my delighting in the house of my God, the substance I have — a peculiar treasure of gold and silver — I have given for the house of my God, even over and above all I have prepared for the house of the sanctuary:
three thousand talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir, and seven thousand talents of refined silver, to overlay the walls of the houses,
even gold for [things of] gold, and silver for [those of] silver, and for all the work by the hand of artificers; and who [is] he that is offering willingly to consecrate his hand to-day to Jehovah?'
And the heads of the fathers, and the heads of the tribes of Israel, and the heads of the thousands, and of the hundreds, even to the heads of the work of the king, offer willingly.
And they give for the service of the house of God, of gold — talents five thousand, and drams a myriad; and of silver — talents ten thousand, and of brass — a myriad and eight thousand talents; and of iron — a hundred thousand talents;
and he with whom stones are found hath given to the treasury of the house of Jehovah, by the hand of Jehiel the Gershonite.
And the people rejoice because of their offering willingly, for with a perfect heart they have offered willingly to Jehovah; and also David the king hath rejoiced — great joy.
And David blesseth Jehovah before the eyes of all the assembly, and David saith, 'Blessed [art] Thou, Jehovah, God of Israel our father, from age even unto age.
To Thee, O Jehovah, [is] the greatness, and the might, and the beauty, and the victory, and the honour, because of all in the heavens and in the earth; to Thee, O Jehovah, [is] the kingdom, and he who is lifting up himself over all for head;
and the riches, and the honour [are] from before Thee, and Thou art ruling over all, and in Thy hand [is] power and might, and in Thy hand, to make great, and to give strength to all.
'And now, our God, we are giving thanks to Thee, and giving praise to Thy beauteous name;
yea, because, who [am] I, and who [are] my people, that we retain power to offer thus willingly? but of Thee [is] the whole, and out of Thy hand we have given to Thee;
for sojourners we [are] before Thee, and settlers, like all our fathers; as a shadow [are] our days on the land, and there is none abiding.
'O Jehovah our God, all this store that we have prepared to build to Thee a house, for Thy holy name, [is] out of Thy hand, and of Thee [is] the whole.
'And I have known, my God, that Thou art trying the heart, and uprightness dost desire; I, in the uprightness of my heart, have willingly offered all these: and now, Thy people who are found here I have seen with joy to offer willingly to Thee.
'O Jehovah, God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, our fathers, keep this to the age for the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of Thy people, and prepare their heart unto Thee;
and to Solomon my son give a perfect heart, to keep Thy commands, Thy testimonies, and Thy statutes, and to do the whole, even to build the palace [for] which I have prepared.'
And David saith to all the assembly, 'Bless, I pray you, Jehovah your God;' and all the assembly bless Jehovah, God of their fathers, and bow and do obeisance to Jehovah, and to the king.
And they sacrifice to Jehovah sacrifices, and cause to ascend burnt-offerings to Jehovah on the morrow of that day, bullocks a thousand, rams a thousand, lambs a thousand, and their oblations, even sacrifices in abundance, for all Israel.
And they eat and drink before Jehovah on that day with great joy, and cause Solomon son of David to reign a second time, and anoint [him] before Jehovah for leader, and Zadok for priest.
And Solomon sitteth on the throne of Jehovah for king instead of David his father, and prospereth, and all Israel hearken unto him,
and all the heads, and the mighty men, and also all the sons of king David have given a hand under Solomon the king;
and Jehovah maketh Solomon exceedingly great before the eyes of all Israel, and putteth upon him the honour of the kingdom that hath not been on any king over Israel before him.
And David son of Jesse hath reigned over all Israel,
and the days that he hath reigned over Israel [are] forty years; in Hebron he reigned seven years, and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three;
and he dieth in a good old age, satisfied with days, riches, and honour, and reign doth Solomon his son in his stead.
And the matters of David the king, the first and the last, lo, they are written beside the matters of Samuel the seer, and beside the matters of Nathan the prophet, and beside the matters of Gad the seer,
with all his reign, and his might, and the times that went over him, and over Israel, and over all kingdoms of the lands.
And strengthen himself doth Solomon son of David over his kingdom, and Jehovah his God [is] with him, and maketh him exceedingly great.
And Solomon saith to all Israel, to heads of the thousands, and of the hundreds, and to judges, and to every honourable one of all Israel, heads of the fathers,
and they go — Solomon, and all the assembly with him — to the high place that [is] in Gibeon, for there hath been God's tent of meeting, that Moses, servant of Jehovah, made in the wilderness,
but the ark of God had David brought up from Kirjath-Jearim, when David prepared for it, for he stretched out for it a tent in Jerusalem;
and the altar of brass that Bezaleel son of Uri, son of Hur made, he put before the tabernacle of Jehovah; and Solomon and the assembly seek to it.
And Solomon goeth up thither, on the altar of brass, before Jehovah, that [is] at the tent of meeting, and causeth to ascend upon it a thousand burnt-offerings.
In that night hath God appeared to Solomon, and saith to him, 'Ask — what do I give to thee?'
And Solomon saith to God, 'Thou hast done with David my father great kindness, and hast caused me to reign in his stead.
Now, O Jehovah God, is Thy word with David my father stedfast, for Thou hast caused me to reign over a people numerous as the dust of the earth;
now, wisdom and knowledge give to me, and I go out before this people, and I come in, for who doth judge this Thy great people?'
And God saith to Solomon, 'Because that this hath been with thy heart, and thou hast not asked riches, wealth, and honour, and the life of those hating thee, and also many days hast not asked, and dost ask for thyself wisdom and knowledge, so that thou dost judge My people over which I have caused thee to reign —
the wisdom and the knowledge is given to thee, and riches and wealth and honour I give to thee, that there hath not been so to the kings who [are] before thee, and after thee it is not so.'
And Solomon cometh in [from] the high place that [is] in Gibeon to Jerusalem, from before the tent of meeting, and reigneth over Israel,
and Solomon gathereth chariots and horsemen, and he hath a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, and he placeth them in the cities of the chariots, and with the king in Jerusalem.
And the king maketh the silver and the gold in Jerusalem as stones, and the cedars he made as sycamores that [are] in the low country, for abundance.
And the source of the horses that [are] to Solomon [is] from Egypt and from Keva; merchants of the king from Keva take at a price,
and they come up, and bring out from Egypt a chariot for six hundred silverlings, and a horse for fifty and a hundred, and so for all the kings of the Hittites, and the kings of Aram — by their hand they bring out.
And Solomon saith to build a house for the name of Jehovah, and a house for his kingdom,
and Solomon numbereth seventy thousand men bearing burden, and eighty thousand men hewing in the mountain, and overseers over them — three thousand and six hundred.
And Solomon sendeth unto Huram king of Tyre, saying, 'When thou hast dealt with David my father, then thou dost send to him cedars to build for him a house to dwell in;
lo, I am building a house to the name of Jehovah my God, to sanctify [it] to Him, to make perfume before Him, perfume of spices, and a continual arrangement, and burnt-offerings at morning and at evening, at sabbaths, and at new moons, and at appointed seasons of Jehovah our God; to the age this [is] on Israel.
'And the house that I am building [is] great, for greater [is] our God than all gods;
and who doth retain strength to build to Him a house, for the heavens, even the heavens of the heavens, do not contain Him? and who [am] I that I do build to Him a house, except to make perfume before Him?
'And now, send to me a wise man to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass, and in iron, and in purple, and crimson, and blue, and knowing to grave gravings with the wise men who [are] with me in Judah and in Jerusalem, whom David my father prepared;
and send to me cedar-trees, firs, and algums from Lebanon, for I have known that thy servants know to cut down trees of Lebanon, and lo, my servants [are] with thy servants,
even to prepare for me trees in abundance, for the house that I am building [is] great and wonderful.
'And lo, to hewers, to those cutting the trees, I have given beaten wheat to thy servants, cors twenty thousand, and barley, cors twenty thousand, and wine, baths twenty thousand, and oil, baths twenty thousand.'
And Huram king of Tyre saith in writing, and sendeth unto Solomon: 'In the love of Jehovah to His people He hath given thee king over them.'
And Huram saith, 'Blessed [is] Jehovah, God of Israel, who made the heavens and the earth, who hath given to David the king a wise son, knowing wisdom and understanding, who doth build a house for Jehovah, and a house for his kingdom.
'And now, I have sent a wise man having understanding, of Huram my father,
(son of a woman of the daughters of Dan, and his father a man of Tyre), knowing to work in gold, and in silver, in brass, in iron, in stones, and in wood, in purple, in blue, and in fine linen, and in crimson, and to grave any graving, and to devise any device that is given to him, with thy wise men, and the wise men of my lord David thy father.
'And, now, the wheat, and the barley, the oil, and the wine, as my lord said, let him send to his servants,
and we — we cut trees out of Lebanon, according to all thy need, and bring them in to thee — floats by sea, to Joppa, and thou dost take them up to Jerusalem.'
And Solomon numbereth all the men, the sojourners who [are] in the land of Israel, after the numbering with which David his father numbered them, and they are found a hundred and fifty thousand, and three thousand, and six hundred;
and he maketh of them seventy thousand burden-bearers, and eighty thousand hewers in the mountain, and three thousand and six hundred overseers, to cause the people to work.
And Solomon beginneth to build the house of Jehovah, in Jerusalem, in the mount of Moriah, where He appeared to David his father, in the place that David had prepared, in the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite,
and he beginneth to build in the second [day], in the second month, in the fourth year of his reign.
And [in] these hath Solomon been instructed to build the house of God: The length [in] cubits by the former measure [is] sixty cubits, and the breadth twenty cubits.
As to the porch that [is] on the front, the length [is] by the front of the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the height a hundred and twenty, and he overlayeth it within with pure gold.
And the large house he hath covered with fir-trees, and he doth cover it with good gold, and causeth to ascend on it palms and chains,
and he overlayeth the house with precious stone for beauty, and the gold [is] gold of Parvaim,
and he covereth the house, the beams, the thresholds, and its walls, and its doors, with gold, and hath graved cherubs on the walls.
And he maketh the most holy house: its length [is] by the front of the breadth of the house twenty cubits, and its breadth twenty cubits, and he covereth it with good gold, to six hundred talents;
and the weight of the nails [is] fifty shekels of gold, and the upper chambers he hath covered with gold.
And he maketh in the most holy house two cherubs, image work, and he overlayeth them with gold;
as to the wings of the cherubs, their length [is] twenty cubits, the wing of the one [is] five cubits, touching the wall of the house, and the other wing [is] five cubits, touching the wing of the other cherub.
And the wing of the other cherub [is] five cubits touching the wall of the house, and the other wing [is] five cubits, adhering to the wing of the other cherub.
The wings of these cherubs are spreading forth twenty cubits, and they are standing on their feet and their faces [are] inward.
And he maketh the vail of blue, and purple, and crimson, and fine linen, and causeth cherubs to go up on it.
And he maketh at the front of the house two pillars, thirty and five cubits in length, and the ornament that [is] on their heads five cubits.
And he maketh chains in the oracle, and putteth on the heads of the pillars, and maketh a hundred pomegranates, and putteth on the chains.
And he raiseth up the pillars on the front of the temple, one on the right, and one on the left, and calleth the name of that on the right Jachin, and the name of that on the left Boaz.
And he maketh an altar of brass, twenty cubits its length, and twenty cubits its breadth, and ten cubits its height.
And he maketh the molten sea; ten by the cubit, from its edge unto its edge, round in compass, and five by the cubit its height, and a line of thirty by the cubit doth compass it, round about.
And the likeness of oxen [is] under it, all round about encompassing it, ten in the cubit, compassing the sea round about; two rows of oxen are cast in its being cast.
It is standing on twelve oxen, three facing the north, and three facing the west, and three facing the south, and three facing the east, and the sea [is] upon them above, and all their hinder parts [are] within.
And its thickness [is] a handbreadth, and its lip as the work of the lip of a cup flowered with lilies; taking hold — baths three thousand it containeth.
And he maketh ten lavers, and putteth five on the right, and five on the left, to wash with them; the work of the burnt-offering they purge with them; and the sea [is] for priests to wash with.
And he maketh the ten candlesticks of gold, according to their ordinance, and placeth in the temple, five on the right, and five on the left.
And he maketh ten tables, and placeth in the temple, five on the right, and five on the left; and he maketh bowls of gold a hundred.
And he maketh the court of the priests, and the great court, and doors for the court, and their doors he hath overlaid with brass.
And the sea he hath placed on the right shoulder eastward, over-against the south.
And Huram maketh the pots, and the shovels, and the bowls, and Huram finisheth to make the work that he made for king Solomon in the house of God;
two pillars, and the bowls, and the crowns on the heads of the two pillars, and the two wreaths to cover the two bowls of the crowns that [are] on the heads of the pillars;
and the pomegranates four hundred to the two wreaths, two rows of pomegranates to the one wreath, to cover the two bowls of the crowns that [are] on the front of the pillars.
And the bases he hath made; and the lavers he hath made on the bases;
the one sea, and the twelve oxen under it,
and the pots, and the shovels, and the forks, and all their vessels, hath Huram his father made for king Solomon, for the house of Jehovah, of brass purified.
In the circuit of the Jordan hath the king cast them, in the thick soil of the ground, between Succoth and Zeredathah.
And Solomon maketh all these vessels in great abundance, that the weight of the brass hath not been searched out.
And Solomon maketh all the vessels that [are for] the house of God, and the altar of gold, and the tables, and on them [is] bread of the presence;
and the candlesticks, and their lamps, for their burning according to the ordinance, before the oracle, of gold refined;
and the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs of gold — it [is] the perfection of gold;
and the snuffers, and the bowls, and the spoons, and the censers, of gold refined, and the opening of the house, its innermost doors to the holy of holies, and the doors of the house to the temple, of gold.
And all the work that Solomon made for the house of Jehovah is finished, and Solomon bringeth in the sanctified things of David his father, and the silver, and the gold, and all the vessels he hath put among the treasures of the house of God.
Then doth Solomon assemble the elders of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, princes of the fathers of the sons of Israel, unto Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah from the city of David — it [is] Zion.
And assembled unto the king are all the men of Israel in the feast — it [is] the seventh month;
and all the elders of Israel come in, and the Levites lift up the ark,
and they bring up the ark, and the tent of meeting, and all the vessels of the sanctuary that [are] in the tent; brought them up have the priests, the Levites;
and king Solomon and all the company of Israel who are convened unto him before the ark are sacrificing sheep and oxen, that are not counted nor numbered from multitude.
And the priests bring in the ark of the covenant of Jehovah unto its place, unto the oracle of the house, unto the holy of holies, unto the place of the wings of the cherubs;
and the cherubs are spreading out wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubs cover over the ark, and over its staves, from above;
and they lengthen the staves, and the heads of the staves are seen out of the ark on the front of the oracle, and they are not seen without; and it is there unto this day.
There is nothing in the ark but the two tables that Moses gave in Horeb, where Jehovah covenanted with the sons of Israel, in their going out from Egypt.
And it cometh to pass, in the going out of the priests from the sanctuary — for all the priests who are present have sanctified themselves, there is none to watch by courses,
and the Levites, the singers, to all of them, to Asaph, to Heman, to Jeduthun, and to their sons, and to their brethren, clothed in white linen, with cymbals, and with psalteries, and harps, are standing on the east of the altar, and with them priests, to a hundred and twenty, blowing with trumpets —
yea, it cometh to pass, as one [are] trumpeters and singers, to sound — one voice — to praise and to give thanks to Jehovah, and at the lifting up of the sound with trumpets, and with cymbals, and with instruments of song, and at giving praise to Jehovah, for good, for to the age [is] His kindness, that the house is filled with a cloud — the house of Jehovah,
and the priests have not been able to stand to minister from the presence of the cloud, for the honour of Jehovah hath filled the house of God.
Then said Solomon, 'Jehovah said — to dwell in thick darkness,
and I — I have built a house of habitation for Thee, and a fixed place for Thy dwelling to the ages.'
And the king turneth round his face, and blesseth the whole assembly of Israel, and the whole assembly of Israel is standing,
and he saith, 'Blessed [is] Jehovah, God of Israel, who hath spoken with His mouth with David my father, and with His hands hath fulfilled [it], saying:
'From the day that I brought out My people from the land of Egypt, I have not fixed on a city out of any of the tribes of Israel to build a house for my name being there, and I have not fixed on a man to be leader over My people Israel;
and I fix on Jerusalem for My name being there, and I fix on David to be over My people Israel.
'And it is with the heart of David my father to build a house for the name of Jehovah God of Israel,
and Jehovah saith unto David my father, Because that it hath been with thy heart to build a house for My name, thou hast done well that it hath been with thy heart,
but thou dost not build the house, for thy son who cometh forth out from thy loins, he doth build the house for My name.
'And Jehovah doth establish His word that He spake, and I rise up in the stead of David my father, and sit on the throne of Israel, as Jehovah spake, and I build the house for the name of Jehovah, God of Israel,
and I place there the ark, where [is] the covenant of Jehovah that He made with the sons of Israel.'
And he standeth before the altar of Jehovah, over-against all the assembly of Israel, and spreadeth out his hand, —
for Solomon hath made a scaffold of brass, and putteth it in the midst of the court, five cubits its length, and five cubits its breadth, and three cubits its height, and he standeth upon it, and kneeleth on his knees over-against all the assembly of Israel, and spreadeth forth his hands towards the heavens —
and saith, 'O Jehovah God of Israel, there is not like Thee a god in the heavens and in the earth, keeping the covenant and the kindness for Thy servants who are walking before Thee with all their heart;
who hast kept for Thy servant David my father that which Thou didst speak to him; yea, Thou dost speak with Thy mouth, and with Thy hand hast fulfilled [it], as at this day.
'And now, O Jehovah, God of Israel, keep for Thy servant David my father that which Thou didst speak to him, saying, There is not cut off to thee a man from before Me, sitting on the throne of Israel, only, if thy sons watch their way to walk in My law, as thou hast walked before Me.
'And now, O Jehovah, God of Israel, is Thy word stedfast that Thou hast spoken to Thy servant, to David,
(for is it true? — God dwelleth with man on the earth! Lo, the heavens, and the heavens of the heavens, do not contain Thee, how much less this house that I have built?)
'And Thou hast turned unto the prayer of Thy servant, and unto his supplication, O Jehovah my God, to hearken unto the cry and unto the prayer that Thy servant is praying before Thee,
for Thine eyes being open towards this house by day and by night, towards the place that Thou hast said to put Thy name there, to hearken unto the prayer that Thy servant prayeth towards this place.
'And Thou hast hearkened unto the supplications of Thy servant, and of Thy people Israel, that they pray towards this place, and Thou dost hear from the place of Thy dwelling, from the heavens, and hast hearkened, and forgiven.
'If a man doth sin against his neighbour, and he hath lifted up on him an oath to cause him to swear, and the oath hath come in before Thine altar in this house —
then Thou dost hear from the heavens, and hast done, and hast judged Thy servants, to give back to the wicked, to put his way on his head, and to declare righteous the righteous, to give to him according to his righteousness.
'And if Thy people Israel is smitten before an enemy, because they sin against Thee, and they have turned back and confessed Thy name, and prayed and made supplication before Thee in this house —
then Thou dost hear from the heavens, and hast forgiven the sin of Thy people Israel, and caused them to turn back unto the ground that Thou hast given to them, and to their fathers.
'In the heavens being restrained, and there is no rain, because they sin against Thee, and they have prayed towards this place, and confessed Thy name — from their sin they turn back because Thou dost afflict them —
then Thou dost hear in the heavens, and hast forgiven the sin of Thy servants, and of Thy people Israel, because Thou directest them unto the good way in which they walk, and hast given rain on Thy land that Thou hast given to Thy people for an inheritance.
'Famine, when it is in the land, pestilence, when it is, blasting, and mildew, locust, and caterpillar, when they are, when its enemies have distressed it in the land — its gates, any plague and any sickness;
any prayer, any supplication that is for any man, and for all Thy people Israel, when they know each his own plague, and his own pain, and he hath spread out his hands towards this house:
then Thou dost hear from the heavens, the settled place of Thy dwelling, and hast forgiven, and hast given to each according to all his ways (because Thou knowest his heart, for Thou — Thou only — hast known the heart of the sons of men),
so that they fear Thee, to walk in Thy ways, all the days that they are living on the face of the ground that Thou hast given to our fathers.
'And also, unto the stranger who is not of Thy people Israel, and he hath come from a land afar off for the sake of Thy great name, and Thy strong hand, and Thy stretched-out arm, and they have come in and prayed towards this house:
then Thou dost hear from the heavens, from the settled place of Thy dwelling, and hast done according to all that the stranger calleth unto Thee for: so that all the peoples of the earth do know Thy name, so as to fear Thee, as Thy people Israel, and to know that Thy name is called on this house that I have built.
'When Thy people doth go out to battle against its enemies in the way that Thou dost send them, and they have prayed unto Thee the way of this city that Thou hast fixed on, and the house that I have built for Thy name:
then Thou hast heard from the heavens their prayer and their supplication, and hast maintained their cause.
'When they sin against Thee — for there is not a man who sinneth not — and Thou hast been angry with them, and hast given them before an enemy, and taken them captive have their captors, unto a land far off or near;
and they have turned [it] back unto their heart in the land whither they have been taken captive, and have turned back, and made supplication unto Thee in the land of their captivity, saying, We have sinned, we have done perversely, and have done wickedly;
yea, they have turned back unto Thee with all their heart, and with all their soul, in the land of their captivity, whither they have taken them captive, and they have prayed the way of their land that Thou hast given to their fathers, and of the city that Thou hast chosen, and of the house that I have built for Thy name:
then Thou hast heard from the heavens, from the settled place of Thy dwelling, their prayer and their supplications, and hast maintained their cause, and forgiven Thy people who have sinned against Thee.
'Now, my God, let, I beseech Thee, Thine eyes be open, and Thine ears attentive, to the prayer of this place:
and now, rise, O Jehovah God, to Thy rest, Thou, and the ark of Thy strength; Thy priests, O Jehovah God, are clothed with salvation, and Thy saints rejoice in the goodness,
O Jehovah God, turn not back the face of Thine anointed, be mindful of the kind acts of David Thy servant.'
And at Solomon's finishing to pray, then the fire hath come down from the heavens, and consumeth the burnt-offering and the sacrifices, and the honour of Jehovah hath filled the house,
and the priests have not been able to go in unto the house of Jehovah, because the honour of Jehovah hath filled the house of Jehovah.
And all the sons of Israel are looking on the descending of the fire, and the honour of Jehovah on the house, and they bow — faces to the earth — on the pavement, and do obeisance, and give thanks to Jehovah, for good, for to the age [is] His kindness.
And the king and all the people are sacrificing a sacrifice before Jehovah,
and king Solomon sacrificeth the sacrifice of the herd, twenty and two thousand, and of the flock, a hundred and twenty thousand, and the king and all the people dedicate the house of God.
And the priests over their charges are standing, and the Levites with instruments of the song of Jehovah — that David the king made, to give thanks to Jehovah, for to the age [is] His kindness, in David's praising by their hand — and the priests are blowing trumpets over-against them, and all Israel are standing.
And Solomon sanctifieth the middle of the court that [is] before the house of Jehovah, for he hath made there the burnt-offerings, and the fat of the peace-offerings: for the altar of brass that Solomon made hath not been able to contain the burnt-offering, and the present, and the fat.
And solomon maketh the feast at that time seven days, and all Israel with him — a very great assembly — from the entering in of Hamath unto the brook of Egypt.
And they make on the eighth day a restraint, because the dedication of the altar they have made seven days, and the feast seven days.
And on the twenty and third day of the seventh month he hath sent the people to their tents, rejoicing, and glad in heart, for the goodness that Jehovah hath done to David, and to Solomon, and to Israel His people.
And Solomon finisheth the house of Jehovah, and the house of the king; and all that hath come on the heart of Solomon to do in the house of Jehovah, and in his own house, he hath caused to prosper.
And Jehovah appeareth unto Solomon by night, and saith to him, 'I have heard thy prayer, and have fixed on this place to Me for a house of sacrifice.
If I restrain the heavens and there is no rain, and if I lay charge on the locust to consume the land, and if I send pestilence among My people —
and My people on whom My name is called be humbled, and pray, and seek My face, and turn back from their evil ways, then I — I hear from the heavens, and forgive their sin, and heal their land.
'Now, Mine eyes are open, and Mine ears attentive, to the prayer of this place;
and now, I have chosen and sanctified this house for My name being there unto the age; yea, Mine eyes and My heart have been there all the days.
'And thou, if thou dost walk before Me as David thy father walked, even to do according to all that I have commanded thee, and My statutes and My judgments dost keep —
then I have established the throne of thy kingdom, as I covenanted with David thy father, saying, There is not cut off a man to thee — a ruler in Israel;
and if ye turn back — ye — and have forsaken My statutes, and My commands, that I have placed before you, and have gone and served other gods, and bowed yourselves to them — then I have plucked them from off My ground that I have given to them,
and this house that I have sanctified for My name, I cast from before My face, and make it for a proverb, and for a byword, among all the peoples.
'And this house that hath been high, to every one passing by it, is an astonishment, and he hath said, Wherefore hath Jehovah done thus to this land, and to this house?
and they have said, Because that they have forsaken Jehovah, God of their fathers, who brought them out from the land of Egypt, and lay hold on other gods, and bow themselves to them, and serve them, therefore He hath brought upon them all this evil.'
And it cometh to pass, at the end of twenty years, that Solomon hath built the house of Jehovah, and his own house.
As to the cities that Huram hath given to Solomon, Solomon hath built them, and there he causeth the sons of Israel to dwell.
And Solomon goeth to Hamath-Zobah, and layeth hold upon it;
and he buildeth Tadmor in the wilderness, and all the cities of store that he hath built in Hamath.
And he buildeth Beth-Horon the upper, and Beth-Horon the lower — cities of defence, with walls, two-leaved doors, and bar —
and Baalath, and all the cities of store that Solomon had, and all the cities of the chariot, and the cities of the horsemen, and all the desire of Solomon that he desired to build in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and in all the land of his dominion.
All the people who are left of the Hittite, and the Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite, who are not of Israel —
of their sons who have been left after them in the land, whom the sons of Israel consumed not — doth Solomon lift up a tribute unto this day.
And none of the sons of Israel hath Solomon made servants for his work, but they [are] men of war, and heads of his captains, and heads of his charioteers, and of his horsemen;
and these [are] heads of the officers whom king Solomon hath, two hundred and fifty who are rulers among the people.
And the daughter of Pharaoh hath Solomon brought up from the city of David to the house that he built for her, for he said, 'My wife doth not dwell in the house of David king of Israel, for they are holy unto whom hath come the ark of Jehovah.'
Then hath Solomon caused to ascend burnt-offerings to Jehovah on the altar of Jehovah that he built before the porch,
even by the matter of a day in its day, to cause to ascend according to the command of Moses, on sabbaths, and on new moons, and on appointed seasons, three times in a year — in the feast of unleavened things, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of booths.
And he establisheth, according to the ordinance of David his father, the courses of the priests over their service, and of the Levites over their charges, to praise and to minister over-against the priests, according to the matter of a day in its day, and the gatekeepers in their courses at gate and gate, for so [is] the command of David the man of God.
And they have not turned aside [from] the command of the king concerning the priests and the Levites, in reference to any matter, and to the treasures.
And all the work of Solomon is prepared till the day of the foundation of the house of Jehovah, and till its completion; perfect is the house of Jehovah.
Then hath Solomon gone to Ezion-Geber, and unto Elath, on the border of the sea, in the land of Edom;
and Huram sendeth to him, by the hand of his servants, ships and servants knowing the sea, and they go with servants of Solomon to Ophir, and take thence four hundred and fifty talents of gold, and bring in unto king Solomon.
And the queen of Sheba hath heard of the fame of Solomon, and cometh in to try Solomon with acute sayings, to Jerusalem, with a very great company, and camels bearing spices and gold in abundance, and precious stone; and she cometh in unto Solomon, and speaketh with him all that hath been with her heart,
and Solomon declareth to her all her matters, and there hath not been hid a thing from Solomon that he hath not declared to her.
And the queen of Sheba seeth the wisdom of Solomon, and the house that he hath built,
and the food of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the standing of his ministers, and their clothing, and his stewards, and their clothing, an his burnt-offering that he offered up in the house of Jehovah, and there hath not been any more spirit in her.
And she saith unto the king, 'True [is] the word that I heard in my land concerning thy matters and concerning thy wisdom,
and I have given no credence to their words, till that I have come, and mine eyes see, and lo, there hath not been declared to me the half of the abundance of thy wisdom — thou hast added unto the report that I heard.
'O the happiness of thy men, and the happiness of thy servants — these — who are standing before thee continually, and hearing thy wisdom.
Let Jehovah thy God be blessed who hath delighted in thee, to put thee on His throne for king for Jehovah thy God; in the love of thy God to Israel, to establish it to the age, He hath put thee over them for king, to do judgment and righteousness.'
And she giveth to the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold, and spices in great abundance, and precious stone; and there hath not been any such spice as the queen of Sheba hath given to king Solomon.
And also, servants of Huram, and servants of Solomon, who brought in gold from Ophir, have brought in algum-trees and precious stone.
And the king maketh the algum-trees staircases for the house of Jehovah, and for the house of the king, and harps and psalteries for singers; and there have been none seen like these before in the land of Judah.
And king Solomon hath given to the queen of Sheba all her desire that she asked, apart from that which she had brought unto the king, and she turneth and goeth to her land, she and her servants.
And the weight of the gold that is coming to Solomon in one year is six hundred and sixty and six talents of gold,
apart from [what] the tourists, and the merchants, are bringing in; and all the kings of Arabia, and the governors of the land, are bringing in gold and silver to Solomon.
And king Solomon maketh two hundred targets of alloyed gold, six hundred [shekels] of alloyed gold he causeth to go up on the one target;
and three hundred shields of alloyed gold, three hundred [shekels] of gold he causeth to go up on the one shield, and the king putteth them in the house of the forest of Lebanon.
And the king maketh a great throne of ivory, and overlayeth it with pure gold;
and six steps [are] to the throne, and a footstool of gold, to the throne they are fastened, and hands [are] on this [side] and on that on the place of the sitting, and two lions are standing near the hands,
and twelve lions are standing there on the six steps on this [side], and on that: it hath not been made so for any kingdom.
And all the drinking vessels of king Solomon [are] of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon [are] of refined gold — silver is not reckoned in the days of Solomon for anything;
for ships of the king are going to Tarshish, with servants of Huram: once in three years come do the ships of Tarshish bearing gold, and silver, ivory, apes, and peacocks.
And king Solomon becometh greater than any of the kings of the earth for riches and wisdom;
and all the kings of the earth are seeking the presence of Solomon to hear his wisdom that God hath put in his heart,
and they are bringing in each his present, vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and garments, harness, and spices, horses, and mules, a rate year by year.
And there are to Solomon four thousand stalls for horses and chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, and he placed them in cities of the chariot, and with the king in Jerusalem.
And he is ruling over all the kings from the River even unto the land of the Philistines, and unto the border of Egypt.
And the king maketh the silver in Jerusalem as stones, and the cedars he hath made as sycamores, that [are] in the low country, for abundance,
and they are bringing out horses from Egypt to Solomon, and from all the lands.
And the rest of the matters of Solomon, the first and the last, are they not written beside the matters of Nathan the prophet, and beside the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, and with the visions of Iddo the seer concerning Jeroboam son of Nebat?
And Solomon reigneth in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years,
and Solomon lieth with his fathers, and they bury him in the city of David his father, and reign doth Rehoboam his son in his stead.
And Rehoboam goeth to Shechem, for [to] Shechem have all Israel come to cause him to reign.
And it cometh to pass, at Jeroboam son of Nebat's — who [is] in Egypt because he hath fled from the face of Solomon the king — hearing, that Jeroboam turneth back out of Egypt;
and they send and call for him, and Jeroboam cometh in, and all Israel, and speak unto Rehoboam, saying,
'Thy father made our yoke sharp, and now, make light [somewhat] of the sharp service of thy father, and of his heavy yoke that he put upon us, and we serve thee.'
And he saith unto them, 'Yet three days — then return ye unto me;' and the people go.
And king Rehoboam consulteth with the aged men who have been standing before Solomon his father in his being alive, saying, 'How are ye counselling to answer this people?'
And they speak unto him, saying, 'If thou dost become good to this people, and hast been pleased with them, and spoken unto them good words, then they have been to thee servants all the days.'
And he forsaketh the counsel of the aged men that they counselled him, and consulteth with the lads who have grown up with him, those standing before him,
and he saith unto them, 'What are ye counselling, and we answer this people that have spoken unto me, saying, Make light [somewhat] of the yoke that thy father put upon us?'
And the lads who have grown up with him, speak with him, saying, 'Thus dost thou say to the people who have spoken unto thee, saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy, and thou, make light [somewhat] of our yoke; thus dost thou say unto them, My little finger is thicker than the loins of my father;
and now, my father laid on you a heavy yoke, and I — I add unto your yoke; my father chastised you with whips, and I — with scorpions.'
And Jeroboam cometh in, and all the people, unto Rehoboam on the third day, as the king spake, saying, 'Return unto me on the third day.'
And the king answereth them sharply, and king Rehoboam forsaketh the counsel of the aged men,
and speaketh unto them according to the counsel of the lads, saying, 'My father made your yoke heavy, and I — I add unto it; my father chastised you with whips, and I — with scorpions.'
And the king hath not hearkened unto the people, for the revolution hath been from God, for the sake of Jehovah's establishing His word that He spake by the hand of Abijah the Shilonite unto Jeroboam son of Nebat.
And all Israel have seen that the king hath not hearkened to them, and the people send back [to] the king, saying, 'What portion have we in David? yea, there is no inheritance in a son of Jesse; each to thy tents, O Israel; now, see thy house — David,' and all Israel go to their tents.
As to the sons of Israel who are dwelling in the cities of Judah — Rehoboam reigneth over them.
And king Rehoboam sendeth Hadoram, who [is] over the tribute, and the sons of Israel cast at him stones, and he dieth; and king Rehoboam hath strengthened himself to go up into a chariot to flee to Jerusalem;
and Israel transgress against the house of David unto this day.
And Rehoboam cometh in to Jerusalem, and assembleth the house of Judah and Benjamin, a hundred and eighty thousand chosen warriors, to fight with Israel, to bring back the kingdom to Rehoboam.
And a word of Jehovah is unto Shemaiah, a man of God, saying,
'Speak unto Rehoboam son of Solomon king of Judah, and unto all Israel in Judah and Benjamin, saying,
Thus said Jehovah, Ye do not go up nor fight with your brethren, turn back each to his house, for from Me hath this thing been;' and they hear the words of Jehovah, and turn back from going against Jeroboam.
And Rehoboam dwelleth in Jerusalem, and buildeth cities for a bulwark in Judah,
yea, he buildeth Beth-Lehem and Etam, and Tekoa,
and Beth-Zur, and Shocho, and Adullam,
and Gath, and Mareshah, and Ziph,
and Adoraim, and Lachish, and Azekah,
and Zorah, and Aijalon, and Hebron, that [are] in Judah and in Benjamin, cities of bulwarks.
And he strengtheneth the bulwarks, and putteth in them leaders, and treasures of food, and oil, and wine,
and in every city and city targets and spears, and strengtheneth them very greatly; and he hath Judah and Benjamin.
And the priests, and the Levites, that [are] in all Israel, have stationed themselves by him, out of all their border,
for the Levites have left their suburbs and their possession, and they come to Judah and to Jerusalem, for Jeroboam and his sons have cast them off from acting as priests to Jehovah,
and he establisheth to him priests for high places, and for goats, and for calves, that he made —
and after them, out of all the tribes of Israel, those giving their heart to seek Jehovah, God of Israel, have come in to Jerusalem to sacrifice to Jehovah, God of their father.
And they strengthen the kingdom of Judah, and strengthen Rehoboam son of Solomon, for three years, because they walked in the way of David and Solomon for three years.
And Rehoboam taketh to him a wife, Mahalath, child of Jerimoth son of David, [and] Abigail daughter of Eliab, son of Jesse.
And she beareth to him sons, Jeush, and Shamaria, and Zaham.
And after her he hath taken Maachah daughter of Absalom, and she beareth to him Abijah, and Attai, and Ziza, and Shelomith.
And Rehoboam loveth Maachah daughter of Absalom above all his wives and his concubines — for eighteen wives he hath taken, and sixty concubines — and he begetteth twenty and eight sons, and sixty daughters.
And Rehoboam appointeth for head Abijah son of Maachah, for leader among his brethren, for to cause him to reign.
And he hath understanding, and spreadeth out of all his sons to all lands of Judah and Benjamin, to all cities of the bulwarks, and giveth to them provision in abundance; and he asketh a multitude of wives.
And it cometh to pass, at the establishing of the kingdom of Rehoboam, and at his strengthening himself, he hath forsaken the law of Jehovah, and all Israel with him.
And it cometh to pass, in the fifth year of king Rehoboam, come up hath Shishak king of Egypt against Jerusalem — because they trespassed against Jehovah —
with a thousand and two hundred chariots, and with sixty thousand horsemen, and there is no number to the people who have come with him out of Egypt — Lubim, Sukkiim, and Cushim —
and he captureth the cities of the bulwarks that [are] to Judah, and cometh in unto Jerusalem.
And Shemaiah the prophet hath come in unto Rehoboam and the heads of Judah who have been gathered unto Jerusalem from the presence of Shishak, and saith to them, 'Thus said Jehovah, Ye have forsaken Me, and also, I have left you in the hand of Shishak;'
and the heads of Israel are humbled, and the king, and they say, 'Righteous [is] Jehovah.'
And when Jehovah seeth that they have been humbled, a word of Jehovah hath been unto Shemaiah, saying, 'They have been humbled; I do not destroy them, and I have given to them as a little thing for an escape, and I pour not out My fury in Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak;
but they become servants to him, and they know My service, and the service of the kingdoms of the lands.'
And Shishak king of Egypt cometh up against Jerusalem, and taketh the treasures of the house of Jehovah, and the treasures of the house of the king — the whole he hath taken — and he taketh the shields of gold that Solomon had made;
and king Rehoboam maketh in their stead shields of brass, and hath given [them] a charge on the hand of the heads of the runners who are keeping the opening of the house of the king;
and it cometh to pass, from the time of the going in of the king to the house of Jehovah, the runners have come in and lifted them up, and brought them back unto the chamber of the runners.
And in his being humbled, turned back from him hath the wrath of Jehovah, so as not to destroy to completion; and also, in Judah there have been good things.
And king Rehoboam strengtheneth himself in Jerusalem, and reigneth; for a son of forty and two years [is] Rehoboam in his reigning, and seventeen years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, the city that Jehovah hath chosen to put His name there, out of all the tribes of Israel, and the name of his mother [is] Naamah the Ammonitess,
and he doth the evil thing, for he hath not prepared his heart to seek Jehovah.
And the matters of Rehoboam, the first and the last, are they not written among the matters of Shemaiah the prophet, and of Iddo the seer, concerning genealogy? And the wars of Rehoboam and Jeroboam [are] all the days;
and Rehoboam lieth with his fathers, and is buried in the city of David, and reign doth Abijah his son in his stead.
In the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam — Abijah reigneth over Judah;
three years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, (and the name of his mother [is] Michaiah daughter of Uriel, from Gibeah,) and war hath been between Abijah and Jeroboam.
And Abijah directeth the war with a force of mighty men of war, four hundred thousand chosen men, and Jeroboam hath set in array with him battle, with eight hundred thousand chosen men, mighty of valour.
And Abijah riseth up on the hill of Zemaraim that [is] in the hill-country of Ephraim, and saith, 'Hear me, Jeroboam and all Israel!
Is it not for you to know that Jehovah, God of Israel, hath given the kingdom to David over Israel to the age, to him and to his sons — a covenant of salt?
and rise up doth Jeroboam, son of Nebat, servant of Solomon son of David, and rebelleth against his lord!
'And there are gathered unto him vain men, sons of worthlessness, and they strengthen themselves against Rehoboam son of Solomon, and Rehoboam was a youth, and tender of heart, and hath not strengthened himself against them.
'And now, ye are saying to strengthen yourselves before the kingdom of Jehovah in the hand of the sons of David, and ye [are] a numerous multitude, and with you calves of gold that Jeroboam hath made to you for gods.
'Have ye not cast out the priests of Jehovah, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and make to you priests like the peoples of the lands? every one who hath come to fill his hand with a bullock, a son of the herd, and seven rams, even he hath been a priest to No-gods!
'As for us, Jehovah [is] our God, and we have not forsaken Him, and priests are ministering to Jehovah, sons of Aaron and the Levites, in the work,
and are making perfume to Jehovah, burnt-offerings morning by morning, and evening by evening, and perfume of spices, and the arrangement of bread [is] on the pure table, and the candlestick of gold, and its lamps, to burn evening by evening, for we are keeping the charge of Jehovah our God, and ye — ye have forsaken Him.
'And lo, with us — at [our] head — [is] God, and His priests and trumpets of shouting to shout against you; O sons of Israel, do not fight with Jehovah, God of your fathers, for ye do not prosper.'
And Jeroboam hath brought round the ambush to come in from behind them, and they are before Judah, and the ambush [is] behind them.
And Judah turneth, and lo, against them [is] the battle, before and behind, and they cry to Jehovah, and the priests are blowing with trumpets,
and the men of Judah shout — and it cometh to pass, at the shouting of the men of Judah, that God hath smitten Jeroboam, and all Israel, before Abijah and Judah.
And the sons of Israel flee from the face of Judah, and God giveth them into their hand,
and Abijah and his people smite among them a great smiting, and there fall wounded of Israel five hundred thousand chosen men.
And the sons of Israel are humbled at that time, and the sons of Judah are strong, for they have leant on Jehovah, God of their fathers.
And Abijah pursueth after Jeroboam, and captureth from him cities, Beth-El and its small towns, and Jeshanah and its small towns, and Ephraim and its small towns.
And Jeroboam hath not retained power any more in the days of Abijah, and Jehovah smiteth him, and he dieth.
And Abijah strengtheneth himself, and taketh to him fourteen wives, and begetteth twenty and two sons, and sixteen daughters,
and the rest of the matters of Abijah, and his ways, and his words, are written in the 'Inquiry' of the prophet Iddo.
And Abijah lieth with his fathers, and they bury him in the city of David, and reign doth Asa his son in his stead: in his days was the land quiet ten years.
And Asa doth that which is good, and that which is right, in the eyes of Jehovah his God,
and turneth aside the altars of the stranger, and the high places, and breaketh the standing-pillars, and cutteth down the shrines,
and saith to Judah to seek Jehovah, God of their fathers, and to do the law and the command;
and he turneth aside out of all cities of Judah the high places and the images, and the kingdom is quiet before him.
And he buildeth cities of bulwarks in Judah, for the land hath quiet, and there is no war with him in these years, because Jehovah hath given rest to him.
And he saith to Judah, 'Let us build these cities, and compass [them] with wall, and towers, two-leaved doors, and bars, while the land [is] before us, because we have sought Jehovah our God, we have sought, and He giveth rest to us round about;' and they build and prosper.
And there is to Asa a force bearing target and spear, out of Judah three hundred thousand, and out of Benjamin, bearing shield and treading bow, two hundred and eighty thousand: all these [are] mighty of valour.
And come out unto them doth Zerah the Cushite with a force of a thousand thousand, and chariots three hundred, and he cometh in unto Mareshah,
and Asa goeth out before him, and they set battle in array in the valley of Zephathah at Mareshah.
And Asa calleth unto Jehovah his God, and saith, 'Jehovah! it is nothing with Thee to help, between the mighty and those who have no power; help us, O Jehovah, our God, for on Thee we have leant, and in Thy name we have come against this multitude; O Jehovah, our God thou [art]; let him not prevail with Thee — mortal man!
And Jehovah smiteth the Cushim before Asa, and before Judah, and the Cushim flee,
and Asa and the people who [are] with him pursue them even to Gerar, and there fall of the Cushim, for they have no preserving, because they have been broken before Jehovah, and before His camp; and they bear away very much spoil,
and smite all the cities round about Gerar, for a fear of Jehovah hath been upon them, and they spoil all the cities, for abundant spoil hath been in them;
and also tents of cattle they have smitten, and they capture sheep in abundance, and camels, and turn back to Jerusalem.
And upon Azariah son of Oded hath been the Spirit of God,
and he goeth out before Asa, and saith to him, 'Hear, me, Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin; Jehovah [is] with you — in your being with Him, and if ye seek Him, He is found of you, and if ye forsake Him, He forsaketh you;
and many days [are] to Israel without a true God, and without a teaching priest, and without law,
and it turneth back in its distress unto Jehovah, God of Israel, and they seek Him, and He is found of them,
and in those times there is no peace to him who is going out, and to him who is coming in, for many troubles [are] on all the inhabitants of the lands,
and they have been beaten down, nation by nation, and city by city, for God hath troubled them with every adversity;
and ye, be ye strong, and let not your hands be feeble, for there is a reward for your work.'
And at Asa's hearing these words, and the prophecy of Oded the prophet, he hath strengthened himself, and doth cause the abominations to pass away out of all the land of Judah and Benjamin, and out of the cities that he hath captured from the hill-country of Ephraim, and reneweth the altar of Jehovah that [is] before the porch of Jehovah,
and gathereth all Judah and Benjamin, and the sojourners with them out of Ephraim, and Manasseh, and out of Simeon — for they have fallen unto him from Israel in abundance, in their seeing that Jehovah his God [is] with him.
And they are gathered to Jerusalem in the third month of the fifteenth year of the reign of Asa,
and sacrifice to Jehovah on that day from the spoil they have brought in — oxen seven hundred, and sheep seven thousand,
and they enter into a covenant to seek Jehovah, God of their fathers, with all their heart, and with all their soul,
and every one who doth not seek for Jehovah, God of Israel, is put to death, from small unto great, from man unto woman.
And they swear to Jehovah with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with cornets,
and rejoice do all Judah concerning the oath, for with all their heart they have sworn, and with all their good-will they have sought Him, and He is found of them, and Jehovah giveth rest to them round about.
And also Maachah, mother of Asa the king — he hath removed her from [being] mistress, in that she hath made for a shrine a horrible thing, and Asa cutteth down her horrible thing, and beateth [it] small, and burneth [it] by the brook Kidron:
yet the high places have not turned aside from Israel; only, the heart of Asa hath been perfect all his days.
And he bringeth in the sanctified things of his father, and his own sanctified things, to the house of God, silver, and gold, and vessels.
And war hath not been till the thirty and fifth year of the reign of Asa.
In the thirty and sixth year of the reign of Asa, come up hath Baasha king of Israel, against Judah, and buildeth Ramah, so as not to permit any going out and coming in to Asa king of Judah.
And Asa bringeth out silver and gold from the treasures of the house of Jehovah, and of the house of the king, and sendeth unto Ben-Hadad king of Aram, who is dwelling in Damascus, saying,
'A covenant [is] between me and thee, and between my father and thy father, lo, I have sent to thee silver and gold; go, break thy covenant with Baasha king of Israel, and he doth go up from off me.'
And Ben-Hadad hearkeneth unto king Asa, and sendeth the heads of the forces that he hath unto cities of Israel, and they smite Ijon, and Dan, and Abel-Maim, and all the stores, cities of Naphtali.
And it cometh to pass, at Baasha's hearing, that he ceaseth from building Ramah, and letteth his work rest;
and Asa the king hath taken all Judah, and they bear away the stones of Ramah, and its wood, that Baasha hath built, and he buildeth with them Geba and Mizpah.
And at that time hath Hanani the seer come in unto Asa king of Judah, and saith unto him, 'Because of thy leaning on the king of Aram, and thou hast not leaned on Jehovah thy God, therefore hath the force of the king of Aram escaped from thy hand.
Did not the Cushim and the Lubim become a very great force for multitude, for chariot, and for horsemen? and in thy leaning on Jehovah He gave them into thy hand,
for Jehovah — His eyes go to and fro in all the earth, to show Himself strong [for] a people whose heart [is] perfect towards Him; thou hast been foolish concerning this, because — henceforth there are with thee wars.'
And Asa is angry at the seer, and giveth him to the house of torture, for [he is] in a rage with him for this; and Asa oppresseth [some] of the people at that time.
And lo, the matters of Asa, the first and the last, lo, they are written on the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.
And Asa is diseased — in the thirty and ninth year of his reign — in his feet, till his disease is excessive, and also in his disease he hath not sought Jehovah, but among physicians.
And Asa lieth with his fathers, and dieth in the forty and first year of his reign,
and they bury him in [one of] his graves, that he had prepared for himself in the city of David, and they cause him to lie on a bed that [one] hath filled [with] spices, and divers kinds of mixtures, with perfumed work; and they burn for him a burning — very great.
And Jehoshaphat his son reigneth in his stead, and he strengtheneth himself against Israel,
and putteth a force in all the fenced cities of Judah, and putteth garrisons in the land of Judah, and in the cities of Ephraim that Asa his father had captured.
And Jehovah is with Jehoshaphat, for he hath walked in the first ways of David his father, and hath not sought to Baalim,
for to the God of his father he hath sought, and in His commands he hath walked, and not according to the work of Israel.
And Jehovah doth establish the kingdom in his hand, and all Judah give a present to Jehoshaphat, and he hath riches and honour in abundance,
and his heart is high in the ways of Jehovah, and again he hath turned aside the high places and the shrines out of Judah.
And in the third year of his reign he hath sent for his heads, for Ben-Hail, and for Obadiah, and for Zechariah, and for Nethaneel, and for Michaiah, to teach in cities of Judah,
and with them the Levites, Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, and Zebadiah, and Asahel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehonathan, and Adonijah, and Tobijath, and Tob-Adonijah, the Levites; and with them Elishama and Jehoram, the priests.
And they teach in Judah, and with them [is] the Book of the Law of Jehovah, and they go round about into all cities of Judah, and teach among the people.
And here is a fear of Jehovah on all kingdoms of the lands that [are] round about Judah, and they have not fought with Jehoshaphat;
and of the Philistines they are bringing in to Jehoshaphat a present, and tribute silver; also, the Arabians are bringing to him a flock, rams seven thousand an seven hundred, and he-goats seven thousand and seven hundred.
And Jehoshaphat is going on and becoming very great, and he buildeth in Judah palaces and cities of store,
and he hath much work in cities of Judah; and men of war, mighty of valour, [are] in Jerusalem.
And these [are] their numbers, for the house of their fathers: Of Judah, heads of thousands, Adnah the head, and with him mighty ones of valour, three hundred chiefs.
And at his hand [is] Jehohanan the head, and with him two hundred and eighty chiefs.
And at his hand [is] Amasiah son of Zichri, who is willingly offering himself to Jehovah, and with him two hundred chiefs, mighty of valour.
And of Benjamin: mighty of valour, Eliada, and with him, armed with bow and shield, two hundred chiefs.
And at his hand [is] Jehozabad, and with him a hundred and eighty chiefs, armed ones of the host.
These [are] those serving the king, apart from those whom the king put in the cities of fortress, in all Judah.
And Jehoshaphat hath riches and honour in abundance, and joineth affinity to Ahab,
and goeth down at the end of [certain] years unto Ahab to Samaria, and Ahab sacrificeth for him sheep and oxen in abundance, and for the people who [are] with him, and persuadeth him to go up unto Ramoth-Gilead.
And Ahab king of Israel saith unto Jehoshaphat king of Judah, 'Dost thou go with me [to] Ramoth-Gilead?' And he saith to him, 'As I — so thou, and as thy people — my people, even with thee in battle.'
And Jehoshaphat saith unto the king of Israel, 'Seek, I pray thee, this day, the word of Jehovah.'
And the king of Israel gathereth the prophets, four hundred men, and saith unto them, 'Do we go unto Ramoth-Gilead to battle, or do I forbear?' And they say, 'Go up, and God doth give [it] into the hand of the king.'
And Jehoshaphat saith, 'Is there not here a prophet of Jehovah still, and we seek from him?'
And the king of Israel saith unto Jehoshaphat, 'Still — one man to seek Jehovah from him, and I — I have hated him, for he is not prophesying concerning me of good, but all his days of evil, he [is] Micaiah son of Imlah;' and Jehoshaphat saith, 'Let not the king say so.'
And the king of Israel calleth unto a certain officer, and saith, 'Hasten Micaiah son of Imlah.'
And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah are sitting, each on his throne, clothed with garments, and they are sitting in a threshing-floor at the opening of the gate of Samaria, and all the prophets are prophesying before them.
And Zedekiah son of Chenaanah maketh for himself horns of iron, and saith, 'Thus said Jehovah,
With these thou dost push Aram till thou hast consumed them.' And all the prophets are prophesying so, saying, 'Go up [to] Ramath-Gilead and prosper, and Jehovah hath given [it] into the hand of the king.'
And the messenger who hath gone to call for Micaiah hath spoken unto him, saying, 'Lo, the words of the prophets — one mouth — [are] good towards the king, and let, I pray thee, thy word be like one of theirs: and thou hast spoken good.'
And Micaiah saith 'Jehovah liveth, surely that which my God saith, it I speak.'
And he cometh in unto the king, and the king saith unto him, 'Micaiah, do we go unto Ramoth-Gilead to battle, or do I forbear?' And he saith, 'Go ye up, and prosper, and they are given into your hand.'
And the king saith unto him, 'How many times am I adjuring thee, that thou speak unto me only truth in the name of Jehovah?'
And he saith, 'I have seen all Israel scattered on the mountains, as sheep that have no shepherd, and Jehovah saith, There are no masters to these, they turn back each to his house in peace.'
And the king of Israel saith unto Jehoshaphat, 'Did I not say unto thee, He doth not prophesy concerning me good, but rather of evil?'
And he saith, 'Therefore, hear ye a word of Jehovah: I have seen Jehovah sitting on His throne, and all the host of the heavens standing on His right and His left;
and Jehovah saith, Who doth entice Ahab king of Israel, and he doth go up and fall in Ramoth-Gilead? And this speaker saith thus, and that speaker thus.
And go out doth the spirit, and stand before Jehovah, and saith, I do entice him; and Jehovah saith unto him, With what?
and he saith, I go out, and have become a spirit of falsehood in the mouth of all his prophets. And He saith, Thou dost entice, and also, thou art able; go out and do so.
And, now, lo, Jehovah hath put a spirit of falsehood in the mouth of these thy prophets, and Jehovah hath spoken concerning thee — evil.'
And Zedekiah son of Chenaanah cometh nigh, and smiteth Micaiah on the cheek, and saith, 'Where [is] this — the way the Spirit of Jehovah passed over from me to speak with thee?'
And Micaiah saith, 'Lo, thou dost see in that day, that thou dost enter into the innermost chamber to be hidden.'
And the king of Israel saith, 'Take ye Micaiah, and turn him back unto Amon head of the city, and unto Joash son of the king,
and ye have said, Thus said the king, Put ye this [one] in the house of restraint, and cause him to eat bread of oppression, and water of oppression, till my return in peace.'
And Micaiah saith, 'If thou dost certainly return in peace, Jehovah hath not spoken by me;' and he saith, 'Hear ye, O peoples, all of them!'
And the king of Israel goeth up, and Jehoshaphat king of Judah, unto Ramoth-Gilead;
and the king of Israel saith unto Jehoshaphat to disguise himself, and to go into battle, 'And thou, put on thy garments.' And the king of Israel disguiseth himself, and they go into battle.
And the king of Aram hath commanded the heads of the charioteers whom he hath, saying, 'Ye do not fight with small or with great, except with the king of Israel by himself.'
And it cometh to pass at the heads of the charioteers seeing Jehoshaphat, that they have said, 'The king of Israel he is,' and they turn round against him to fight, and Jehoshaphat crieth out, and Jehovah hath helped him, and God enticeth them from him,
yea, it cometh to pass, at the heads of the charioteers seeing that it hath not been the king of Israel — they turn back from after him.
And a man hath drawn with a bow, in his simplicity, and smiteth the king of Israel between the joinings and the coat of mail, and he saith to the charioteer, 'Turn thy hand, and thou hast brought me out of the camp, for I have become sick.'
And the battle increaseth on that day, and the king of Israel hath been stayed up in the chariot over-against Aram till the evening, and he dieth at the time of the going in of the sun.
And Jehoshaphat king of Judah turneth back unto his house in peace to Jerusalem,
and go out unto his presence doth Jehu son of Hanani, the seer, and saith unto king Jehoshaphat, 'To give help to the wicked, and to those hating Jehovah, dost thou love? and for this against thee [is] wrath from before Jehovah,
but good things have been found with thee, for thou hast put away the shrines out of the land, and hast prepared thy heart to seek God.'
And Jehoshaphat dwelleth in Jerusalem, and he turneth back and goeth out among the people from Beer-Sheba unto the hill-country of Ephraim, and bringeth them back unto Jehovah, God of their fathers.
And he establisheth judges in the land, in all the fenced cities of Judah, for every city,
and saith unto the judges, 'See what ye are doing — for not for man do ye judge, but for Jehovah, who [is] with you in the matter of judgment;
and now, let fear of Jehovah be upon you, observe and do, for there is not with Jehovah our God perverseness, and acceptance of faces, and taking of a bribe.'
And also in Jerusalem hath Jehoshaphat appointed of the Levites, and of the priests, and of the heads of the fathers of Israel, for the judgment of Jehovah, and for strife; and they turn back to Jerusalem,
and he layeth a charge upon them, saying, 'Thus do ye do in the fear of Jehovah, in faithfulness, and with a perfect heart,
and any strife that cometh in unto you of your brethren who are dwelling in their cities, between blood and blood, between law and command, statutes, and judgments, then ye have warned them and they become not guilty before Jehovah, and wrath hath not been on you and on your brethren; thus do ye do, and ye are not guilty.
'And, lo, Amariah the head priest [is] over you for every matter of Jehovah, and Zebadiah son of Ishmael, the leader of the house of Judah, [is] for every matter of the king, and officers the Levites [are] before you; be strong and do, and Jehovah is with the good.'
And it cometh to pass after this, the sons of Moab have come in, and the sons of Ammon, and with them of the peoples, against Jehoshaphat to battle.
And they come in and declare to Jehoshaphat, saying, 'Come against thee hath a great multitude from beyond the sea, from Aram, and lo, they [are] in Hazezon-Tamar — it [is] En-Gedi.'
And Jehoshaphat feareth, and setteth his face to seek to Jehovah, and proclaimeth a fast over all Judah;
and Judah is gathered to inquire of Jehovah; also, from all the cities of Judah they have come in to seek Jehovah.
And Jehoshaphat standeth in the assembly of Judah and Jerusalem, in the house of Jehovah, at the front of the new court,
and saith, 'O Jehovah, God of our fathers, art not Thou — God in the heavens? yea, Thou art ruling over all kingdoms of the nations, and in Thy hand [is] power and might, and there is none with Thee to station himself.
'Art not Thou our God? Thou hast dispossessed the inhabitants of this land from before Thy people Israel, and dost give it to the seed of Abraham Thy friend to the age,
and they dwell in it, and build to Thee in it a sanctuary for Thy name, saying,
If evil doth come upon us — sword, judgment, and pestilence, and famine — we stand before this house, and before Thee, for Thy name [is] in this house, and cry unto Thee out of our distress, and Thou dost hear and save.
'And now, lo, sons of Ammon, and Moab, and mount Seir, whom Thou didst not grant to Israel to go in against in their coming out of the land of Egypt, for they turned aside from off them and destroyed them not,
and lo, they are recompensing to us — to come in to drive us out of Thy possession, that Thou hast caused us to possess.
'O our God, dost Thou not execute judgment upon them? for there is no power in us before this great multitude that hath come against us, and we know not what we do, but on Thee [are] our eyes.'
And all Judah are standing before Jehovah, also their infants, their wives, and their sons.
And upon Jahaziel, son of Zechariah, son of Benaiah, son of Jeiel, son of Mattaniah, the Levite, of the sons of Asaph, hath the Spirit of Jehovah been, in the midst of the assembly,
and he saith, 'Attend, all Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, and O king Jehoshaphat, Thus said Jehovah to you, Ye fear not, nor are afraid of the face of this great multitude, for not for you [is] the battle, but for God.
To-morrow, go ye down against them, lo, they are coming up by the ascent of Ziz, and ye have found them in the end of the valley, the front of the wilderness of Jeruel.
Not for you to fight in this; station yourselves, stand, and see the salvation of Jehovah with you, O Judah and Jerusalem — be not afraid nor fear ye — to-morrow go out before them, and Jehovah [is] with you.'
And Jehoshaphat boweth — face to the earth — and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem have fallen before Jehovah, to bow themselves to Jehovah.
And the Levites, of the sons of the Kohathites, and of the sons of the Korhites, rise to give praise to Jehovah, God of Israel, with a loud voice on high.
And they rise early in the morning, and go out to the wilderness of Tekoa, and in their going out Jehoshaphat hath stood and saith, 'Hear me, O Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem, remain stedfast in Jehovah your God, and be stedfast; remain stedfast in His prophets, and prosper.'
And he taketh counsel with the people, and appointeth singers to Jehovah, and those giving praise to the honour of holiness, in the going out before the armed [men], and saying, 'Give ye thanks to Jehovah, for to the age [is] His kindness.'
And at the time they have begun with singing and praise, Jehovah hath put ambushments against the sons of Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, who are coming in to Judah, and they are smitten,
and the sons of Ammon stand up, and Moab, against the inhabitants of mount Seir, to devote and to destroy, and at their finishing with the inhabitants of Seir, they helped, a man against his neighbour, to destroy.
And Judah hath come in unto the watch-tower, to the wilderness, and they look unto the multitude, and lo, they [are] carcases fallen to the earth, and there is none escaped,
and Jehoshaphat cometh in, and his people, to seize their spoil, and they find among them, in abundance, both goods and carcases, and desirable vessels, and they take spoil to themselves without prohibition, and they are three days seizing the spoil, for it [is] abundant.
And on the fourth day they have been assembled at the valley of Blessing, for there they blessed Jehovah: therefore they have called the name of that place, 'Valley of Blessing,' unto this day.
And they turn back, every man of Judah and Jerusalem, and Jehoshaphat at their head, to go back unto Jerusalem with joy, for Jehovah hath made them rejoice over their enemies.
And they come in to Jerusalem with psalteries, and with harps, and with trumpets, unto the house of Jehovah.
And there is a fear of God on all kingdoms of the lands in their hearing that Jehovah hath fought with the enemies of Israel,
and the kingdom of Jehoshaphat is quiet, and his God giveth rest to him round about.
And Jehoshaphat reigneth over Judah, a son of thirty and five years in his reigning, and twenty and five years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Azubah daughter of Shilhi.
And he walketh in the way of his father Asa, and hath not turned aside from it, to do that which is right in the eyes of Jehovah.
Only, the high places have not turned aside, and still the people have not prepared their heart for the God of their fathers.
And the rest of the matters of Jehoshaphat, the first and the last, lo, they are written among the matters of Jehu son of Hanani, who hath been mentioned on the book of the kings of Israel.
And after this hath Jehoshaphat king of Judah joined himself with Ahaziah king of Israel, (he did wickedly in [so] doing),
and he joineth him with himself to make ships to go to Tarshish, and they make ships in Ezion-Geber,
and prophesy doth Eliezer son of Dodavah, of Mareshah, against Jehoshaphat, saying, 'For thy joining thyself with Ahaziah, Jehovah hath broken up thy works;' and the ships are broken, and have not retained [power] to go unto Tarshish.
And Jehoshaphat lieth with his fathers, and is buried with his fathers in the city of David, and Jehoram his son reigneth in his stead.
And he hath brethren, sons of Jehoshaphat, Azariah, and Jehiel, and Zechariah, and Azariah, and Michael, and Shephatiah; all these [are] sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel,
and their father giveth to them many gifts of silver and of gold, and of precious things, with fenced cities in Judah, and the kingdom he hath given to Jehoram, for He [is] the first-born.
And Jehoram riseth up over the kingdom of his father, and strengtheneth himself, and slayeth all his brethren with the sword, and also — of the heads of Israel.
A son of thirty and two years [is] Jehoram in his reigning, and eight years he hath reigned in Jerusalem,
and he walketh in the way of the kings of Israel, as did the house of Ahab, for a daughter of Ahab hath been to him for a wife, and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah,
and Jehovah hath not been willing to destroy the house of David, for the sake of the covenant that He made with David, and as He had said to give to him a lamp, and to his sons — all the days.
In his days hath Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah, and cause a king to reign over them;
and Jehoram passeth over with his heads, and all the chariots with him, and it cometh to pass, he hath risen by night and smiteth the Edomites who are coming round against him, and the princes of the chariots,
and Edom revolteth from under the hand of Judah unto this day; then doth Libnah revolt at that time from under his hand, because he hath forsaken Jehovah, God of his fathers,
also, he hath made high places in the mountains of Judah, and causeth the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit whoredom, and compelleth Judah.
And there cometh in unto him a writing from Elijah the prophet, saying, 'Thus said Jehovah, God of David thy father, Because that thou hast not walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat thy father, and in the ways of Asa king of Judah,
and thou dost walk in the way of the kings of Israel, and dost cause Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit whoredom like the whoredoms of the house of Ahab, and also thy brethren, the house of thy father, who are better than thyself, thou hast slain;
lo, Jehovah is smiting — a great smiting — among thy people, and among thy sons, and among thy wives, and among all thy goods —
and thou, with many sicknesses, with disease of thy bowels, till thy bowels come out, by the sickness, day by day.'
And Jehovah waketh up against Jehoram the spirit of the Philistines, and of the Arabians, who [are] beside the Cushim,
and they come up into Judah, and rend it, and take captive all the substance that is found at the house of the king, and also his sons, and his wives, and there hath not been left to him a son except Jehoahaz the youngest of his sons.
And after all this hath Jehovah plagued him in his bowels by a disease for which there is no healing,
and it cometh to pass, from days to days, and at the time of the going out of the end of two years, his bowels have gone out with his sickness, and he dieth of sore diseases, and his people have not made for him a burning like the burning of his fathers.
A son of thirty and two [years] was he in his reigning, and eight years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and he goeth without desire, and they bury him in the city of David, and not in the graves of the kings.
And the inhabitants of Jerusalem cause Ahaziah his youngest son to reign in his stead, (for all the elder had the troop slain that came in with the Arabians to the camp,) and Ahaziah son of Jehoram king of Judah reigneth.
A son of twenty and two years [is] Ahaziah in his reigning, and one year he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Athaliah daughter of Omri;
he also hath walked in the ways of the house of Ahab, for his mother hath been his counsellor to do wickedly.
And he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, like the house of Ahab, for they have been his counsellors, after the death of his father, for destruction to him.
Also, in their counsel he hath walked, and goeth with Jehoram son of Ahab king of Israel to battle against Hazael king of Aram, in Ramoth-Gilead, and they of Ramah smite Joram;
and he turneth back to be healed in Jezreel because of the wounds with which they had smitten him in Ramah, in his fighting with Hazael king of Aram. And Azariah son of Jehoram king of Judah hath gone down to see Jehoram son of Ahab, in Jezreel, for he [is] sick;
and from God hath been the destruction of Ahaziah, to come unto Joram: and in his coming he hath gone out with Jehoram unto Jehu son of Nimshi, whom Jehovah anointed to cut off the house of Ahab.
And it cometh to pass, in Jehu's executing judgment with the house of Ahab, that he findeth the heads of Judah and sons of the brethren of Ahaziah, ministers of Ahaziah, and slayeth them.
And he seeketh Ahaziah, and they capture him, (and he is hiding himself in Samaria), and bring him in unto Jehu, and put him to death, and bury him, for they said, 'He [is] son of Jehoshaphat, who sought Jehovah with all his heart;' and there is none to the house of Ahaziah to retain power for the kingdom.
And Athaliah mother of Ahaziah hath seen that her son is dead, and she riseth and destroyeth the whole seed of the kingdom of the house of Judah.
And Jehoshabeath daughter of the king taketh Joash son of Ahaziah, and stealeth him from the midst of the sons of the king who are put to death, and putteth him and his nurse into the inner part of the bed-chambers, and Jehoshabeath daughter of king Jehoram, wife of Jehoiada the priest, because she hath been sister of Ahaziah, hideth him from the face of Athaliah, and she hath not put him to death.
And he is with them in the house of God hiding himself six years, and Athaliah is reigning over the land.
And in the seventh year hath Jehoiada strengthened himself, and taketh the heads of the hundreds, even Azariah son of Jeroham, and Ishmael son of Jehohanan, and Azariah son of Obed, and Maaseiah son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat son of Zichri, with him into covenant.
And they go round about in Judah, and gather the Levites out of all the cities of Judah, and heads of the fathers of Israel, and come in unto Jerusalem,
and all the assembly make a covenant in the house of God with the king, and he saith to them, 'Lo, the son of the king doth reign, as Jehovah spake concerning the sons of David.
'This [is] the thing that ye do: The third of you, going in on the sabbath, of the priests, and of the Levites, [are] for gatekeepers of the thresholds,
and the third [are] at the house of the king, and the third at the gate of the foundation, and all the people [are] in the courts of the house of Jehovah.
'And none doth enter the house of Jehovah except the priests, and those ministering of the Levites (they go in for they [are] holy), and all the people keep the watch of Jehovah:
and the Levites have compassed the king round about, each with his weapon in his hand, and he who hath gone in unto the house is put to death; and be ye with the king in his coming in and in his going out.'
And the Levites and all Judah do according to all that Jehoiada the priest hath commanded, and take each his men going in on the sabbath, with those going out on the sabbath, for Jehoiada the priest hath not let away the courses.
And Jehoiada the priest giveth to the heads of the hundreds the spears, and the shields, and the bucklers that [are] king David's, that [are] in the house of God;
and he stationeth the whole of the people, and each his dart in his hand, from the right shoulder of the house unto the left shoulder of the house, at the altar, and at the house, by the king, round about.
And they bring out the son of the king, and put upon him the crown, and the testimony, and cause him to reign; and Jehoiada and his sons anoint him, and say, 'Let the king live!'
And Athaliah heareth the voice of the people who are running, and who are praising the king, and she cometh in unto the people in the house of Jehovah,
and seeth, and lo, the king is standing by his pillar in the entrance, and the heads, and the trumpets [are] by the king, and all the people of the land rejoicing and shouting with trumpets, and the singers with instruments of song, and the teachers, to praise, and Athaliah rendeth her garments, and saith, 'Conspiracy, conspiracy.'
And Jehoiada the priest bringeth out the heads of the hundreds, inspectors of the force, and saith unto them, 'Take her out from within the rows, and he who hath gone after her is put to death by the sword;' for the priest said, 'Put her not to death [in] the house of Jehovah.'
And they make for her sides, and she cometh in unto the entrance of the gate of the horses at the house of the king, and they put her to death there.
And Jehoiada maketh a covenant between him, and between all the people, and between the king, to be for a people to Jehovah;
and all the people enter the house of Baal, and break it down, yea, his altars and his images they have broken, and Mattan priest of Baal they have slain before the altars.
And Jehoiada putteth the offices of the house of Jehovah into the hand of the priests the Levites whom David had apportioned over the house of Jehovah, to cause to ascend the burnt-offerings of Jehovah, as written in the law of Moses, with joy, and with singing, by the hands of David;
and he stationeth the gatekeepers over the gates of the house of Jehovah, and the unclean in anything doth not go in.
And he taketh the heads of the hundreds, and the honourable ones, and the rulers among the people, and all the people of the land, and bringeth down the king from the house of Jehovah, and they come in through the high gate to the house of the king, and cause the king to sit on the throne of the kingdom.
And all the people of the land rejoice, and the city hath been quiet, and Athaliah they have put to death by the sword.
A son of seven years [is] Joash in his reigning, and forty years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Zibiah of Beer-Sheba.
And Joash doth that which is right in the eyes of Jehovah all the days of Jehoiada the priest.
And Jehoiada taketh for him two wives, and he begetteth sons and daughters.
And it cometh to pass after this, it hath been with the heart of Joash to renew the house of Jehovah,
and he gathereth the priests and the Levites, and saith to them, 'Go out to the cities of Judah, and gather from all Israel money to strengthen the house of your God sufficiently year by year, and ye, ye do haste to the matter;' and the Levites have not hasted.
And the king calleth for Jehoiada the head, and saith to him, 'Wherefore hast thou not required of the Levites to bring in out of Judah and out of Jerusalem the tribute of Moses, servant of Jehovah, and of the assembly of Israel, for the tent of the testimony?
for sons of Athaliah, the wicked one, have broken up the house of God, and also, all the holy things of the house of Jehovah they have prepared for Baalim.'
And the king speaketh, and they make one chest, and put it at the gate of the house of Jehovah without,
and give an intimation in Judah and in Jerusalem to bring in to Jehovah the tribute of Moses, servant of God, [laid] on Israel in the wilderness.
And all the heads, and all the people rejoice, and they bring in, and cast into the chest, unto completion.
And it cometh to pass, at the time one bringeth in the chest for the inspection of the king by the hand of the Levites, and at their seeing that the money [is] abundant, that a scribe of the king hath come in, and an officer of the head-priest, and they empty the chest, and take it up and turn it back unto its place; thus they have done day by day, and gather money in abundance.
And the king and Jehoiada give it unto the doers of the work of the service of the house of Jehovah, and they are hiring hewers and artificers to renew the house of Jehovah, and also — to artificers in iron and brass to strengthen the house of Jehovah.
And those doing the business work, and there goeth up lengthening to the work by their hand, and they establish the house of God, by its proper measure, and strengthen it.
And at their completing [it], they have brought in before the king and Jehoiada the rest of the money, and they make it vessels for the house of Jehovah, vessels of serving, and of offering up, and spoons, even vessels of gold and silver; and they are causing burnt-offerings to ascend in the house of Jehovah continually, all the days of Jehoiada.
And Jehoiada is aged and satisfied with days, and dieth — a son of a hundred and thirty years in his death,
and they bury him in the city of David, with the kings, for he hath done good in Israel, and with God, and his house.
And after the death of Jehoiada come in have heads of Judah, and bow themselves to the king; then hath the king hearkened unto them,
and they forsake the house of Jehovah, God of their fathers, and serve the shrines and the idols, and there is wrath upon Judah and Jerusalem for this their guilt.
And He sendeth among them prophets, to bring them back unto Jehovah, and they testify against them, and they have not given ear;
and the Spirit of God hath clothed Zechariah son of Jehoiada the priest, and he standeth over-against the people, and saith to them, 'Thus said God, Why are ye transgressing the commands of Jehovah, and prosper not? because ye have forsaken Jehovah — He doth forsake you.'
And they conspire against him, and stone him with stones by the command of the king, in the court of the house of Jehovah,
and Joash the king hath not remembered the kindness that Jehoiada his father did with him, and slayeth his son, and in his death he said, 'Jehovah doth see, and require.'
And it cometh to pass, at the turn of the year, come up hath the force of Aram against him, and they come in unto Judah and Jerusalem, and destroy all the heads of the people from the people, and all their spoil they have sent to the king of Damascus,
for with few men have the force of Aram come in, and Jehovah hath given into their hand a mighty force for multitude, because they have forsaken Jehovah, God of their fathers; and with Joash they have executed judgments.
And in their going from him — for they left him with many diseases — his servants themselves have conspired against him, for the blood of the sons of Jehoiada the priest, and slay him on his bed, and he dieth; and they bury him in the city of David, and have not buried him in the graves of the kings.
And these [are] those conspiring against him, Zabad son of Shimeath the Ammonitess, and Jehozabad son of Shimrith the Moabitess.
As to his sons, and the greatness of the burden upon him, and the foundation of the house of God, lo, they are written on the 'Inquiry' of the book of the Kings; and reign doth Amaziah his son in his stead.
A son of twenty and five years hath Amaziah reigned, and twenty and nine years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Jehoaddan of Jerusalem,
and he doth that which is right in the eyes of Jehovah — only, not with a perfect heart.
And it cometh to pass, when the kingdom hath been strong upon him, that he slayeth his servants, those smiting the king his father,
and their sons he hath not put to death, but [did] as is written in the law, in the book of Moses, whom Jehovah commanded, saying, 'Fathers do not die for sons, and sons die not for fathers, but each for his own sin they die.'
And Amaziah gathereth Judah, and appointeth them, according to the house of the fathers, for heads of the thousands, and for heads of the hundreds, for all Judah and Benjamin; and he inspecteth them from a son of twenty years and upward, and findeth them three hundred thousand chosen ones, going forth to the host, holding spear and target.
And he hireth out of Israel a hundred thousand mighty ones of valour, with a hundred talents of silver;
and a man of God hath come in unto him, saying, 'O king, the host of Israel doth not go with thee; for Jehovah is not with Israel — all the sons of Ephraim;
but if thou art going — do [it], be strong for battle, God doth cause thee to stumble before an enemy, for there is power in God to help, and to cause to stumble.'
And Amaziah saith to the man of God, 'And what — to do for the hundred talents that I have given to the troop of Israel?' And the man of God saith, 'Jehovah hath more to give to thee than this.'
And Amaziah separateth them — for the troop that hath come in unto him from Ephraim to go to their own place, and their anger doth burn mightily against Judah, and they turn back to their place in the heat of anger.
And Amaziah hath strengthened himself, and leadeth his people, and goeth to the Valley of Salt, and smiteth the sons of Seir — ten thousand.
And ten thousand alive have the sons of Judah taken captive, and they bring them to the top of the rock, and cast them from the top of the rock, and all of them have been broken.
And the sons of the troop that Amaziah hath sent back from going with him to battle — they rush against cities of Judah, from Samaria even unto Beth-Horon, and smite of them three thousand, and seize much prey.
And it cometh to pass, after the coming in of Amaziah from smiting the Edomites, that he bringeth in the gods of the sons of Seir, and establisheth them to him for gods, and before them doth bow himself, and to them he maketh perfume.
And the anger of Jehovah burneth against Amaziah, and He sendeth unto him a prophet, and he saith unto him, 'Why hast thou sought the gods of the people that have not delivered their people out of thy hand?'
And it cometh to pass, in his speaking unto him, that he saith to him, 'For a counsellor to the king have we appointed thee? cease for thee; why do they smite thee?' And the prophet ceaseth, and saith, 'I have known that God hath counselled to destroy thee, because thou hast done this, and hast not hearkened to my counsel.'
And Amaziah king of Judah taketh counsel, and sendeth unto Joash son of Jehoahaz, son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying,
'Come, we look one another in the face.' And Joash king of Israel sendeth unto Amaziah king of Judah, saying, 'The thorn that [is] in Lebanon hath sent unto the cedar that [is] in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son for a wife; and pass by doth a beast of the field that [is] in Lebanon, and treadeth down the thorn.
Thou hast said, Lo, I have smitten Edom; and thy heart hath lifted thee up to boast; now, abide in thy house, why dost thou stir thyself up in evil, that thou hast fallen, thou, and Judah with thee?'
And Amaziah hath not hearkened, for from God it [is] in order to give them into hand, because they have sought the gods of Edom;
and go up doth Joash king of Israel, and they look one another in the face, he and Amaziah king of Judah, in Beth-Shemesh, that [is] Judah's,
and Judah is smitten before Israel, and they flee — each to his tents.
And Amaziah king of Judah, son of Joash, son of Jehoahaz, hath Joash king of Israel caught in Beth-Shemesh, and bringeth him in to Jerusalem, and breaketh down in the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim unto the gate of the corner, four hundred cubits,
and [taketh] all the gold, and the silver, and all the vessels that are found in the house of God with Obed-Edom, and the treasures of the house of the king, and the sons of the pledges, and turneth back to Samaria.
And Amaziah son of Joash, king of Judah, liveth after the death of Joash son of Jehoahaz, king of Israel, fifteen years;
and the rest of the matters of Amaziah, the first and the last, lo, are they not written on the books of the kings of Judah and Israel?
And from the time that Amaziah hath turned aside from after Jehovah — they make a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem, and he fleeth to Lachish, and they send after him to Lachish, and put him to death there,
and lift him up on the horses, and bury him with his fathers in the city of Judah.
And all the people of Judah take Uzziah (and he [is] a son of sixteen years), and cause him to reign instead of his father Amaziah.
He hath built Eloth, and restoreth it to Judah after the king's lying with his fathers.
A son of sixteen years [is] Uzziah in his reigning, and fifty and two years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Jecholiah of Jerusalem.
And he doth that which is right in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that Amaziah his father did,
and he is as one seeking God in the days of Zechariah who hath understanding in visions of God: and in the days of his seeking Jehovah, God hath caused him to prosper.
And he goeth forth, and fighteth with the Philistines, and breaketh down the wall of Gath, and the wall of Jabneh, and the wall of Ashdod, and buildeth cities about Ashdod, and among the Philistines.
And God helpeth him against the Philistines, and against the Arabians who are dwelling in Gur-Baal and the Mehunim.
And the Ammonites give a present to Uzziah, and his name goeth unto the entering in of Egypt, for he strengthened himself greatly.
And Uzziah buildeth towers in Jerusalem, by the gate of the corner, and by the gate of the valley, and by the angle, and strengtheneth them;
and he buildeth towers in the wilderness, and diggeth many wells, for he had much cattle, both in the low country and in the plain, husbandmen and vine-dressers in the mountains, and in Carmel; for he was a lover of the ground.
And Uzziah hath a force, making war, going forth to the host, by troops, in the number of their reckoning by the hand of Jeiel the scribe and Masseiah the officer, by the hand of Hananiah [one] of the heads of the king.
The whole number of heads of the fathers of the mighty ones of valour [is] two thousand and six hundred;
and by their hand [is] the force of the host, three hundred thousand, and seven thousand, and five hundred warriors, with mighty power to give help to the king against the enemy.
And Uzziah prepareth for them, for all the host, shields, and spears, and helmets, and coats of mail, and bows, even to stones of the slings.
And he maketh in Jerusalem inventions — a device of an inventor — to be on the towers, and on the corners, to shoot with arrows and with great stones, and his name goeth out unto a distance, for he hath been wonderfully helped till that he hath been strong.
And at his being strong his heart hath been high unto destruction, and he trespasseth against Jehovah his God, and goeth in unto the temple of Jehovah to make perfume upon the altar of perfume.
And Azariah the priest goeth in after him, and with him priests of Jehovah eighty, sons of valour,
and they stand up against Uzziah the king, and say to him, 'Not for thee, O Uzziah, to make perfume to Jehovah, but for priests, sons of Aaron, who are sanctified to make perfume; go forth from the sanctuary, for thou hast trespassed, and [it is] not to thee for honour from Jehovah God.'
And Uzziah is wroth, and in his hand [is] a censer to make perfume, and in his being wroth with the priests — the leprosy hath risen in his forehead, before the priests, in the house of Jehovah, from beside the altar of perfume.
And Azariah the head priest looketh unto him, and all the priests, and lo, he [is] leprous in his forehead, and they hasten him thence, and also he himself hath hastened to go out, for Jehovah hath plagued him.
And Uzziah the king is a leper unto the day of his death, and inhabiteth a separate house — a leper, for he hath been cut off from the house of Jehovah, and Jotham his son [is] over the house of the king, judging the people of the land.
And the rest of the matters of Uzziah, the first and the last, hath Isaiah son of Amoz the prophet written;
and Uzziah lieth with his fathers, and they bury him with his fathers, in the field of the burying-place that the kings have, for they said, 'He [is] a leper;' and reign doth Jotham his son in his stead.
A son of twenty and five years [is] Jotham in his reigning, and sixteen years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Jerushah daughter of Zadok.
And he doth that which is right in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that Uzziah his father did; only, he hath not come in unto the temple of Jehovah; and again are the people doing corruptly.
He hath built the upper gate of the house of Jehovah, and in the wall of Ophel he hath built abundantly;
and cities he hath built in the hill-country of Judah, and in the forests he hath built palaces and towers.
And he hath fought with the king of the sons of Ammon, and prevaileth over them, and the sons of Ammon give to him in that year a hundred talents of silver, and ten thousand cors of wheat, and of barley ten thousand; this have the sons of Ammon returned to him both in the second year, and in the third.
And Jotham doth strengthen himself, for he hath prepared his ways before Jehovah his God.
And the rest of the matters of Jotham, and all his battles, and his ways, lo, they are written on the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.
A son of twenty and five years was he in his reigning, and sixteen years he hath reigned in Jerusalem;
and Jotham lieth with his fathers, and they bury him in the city of David, and reign doth Ahaz his son in his stead.
A son of twenty years [is] Ahaz in his reigning, and sixteen years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and he hath not done that which is right in the eyes of Jehovah, as David his father,
and walketh in the ways of the kings of Israel, and also, molten images hath made for Baalim,
and himself hath made perfume in the valley of the son of Hinnom, and burneth his sons with fire according to the abominations of the nations that Jehovah dispossessed from the presence of the sons of Israel,
and sacrificeth and maketh perfume in high places, and on the heights, and under every green tree.
And Jehovah his God giveth him into the hand of the king of Aram, and they smite him, and take captive from him a great captivity, and bring [them] in to Damascus, and also into the hand of the king of Israel he hath been given, and he smiteth him — a great smiting.
And Pekah son of Remaliah slayeth in Judah a hundred and twenty thousand in one day (the whole [are] sons of valour), because of their forsaking Jehovah, God of their fathers.
And Zichri, a mighty one of Ephraim, slayeth Maaseiah son of the king, and Azrikam leader of the house, and Elkanah second to the king.
And the sons of Israel take captive of their brethren, two hundred thousand, wives, sons and daughters, and also much spoil they have seized from them, and they bring in the spoil to Samaria.
And there hath been there a prophet of Jehovah (Oded [is] his name), and he goeth out before the host that hath come in to Samaria, and saith to them, 'Lo, in the fury of Jehovah God of your fathers against Judah, He hath given them into your hand, and ye slay among them in rage — unto the heavens it hath come;
and now, sons of Judah and Jerusalem ye are saying to subdue for men-servants and for maid-servants to you; but are there not with you causes of guilt before Jehovah your God?
and now, hear me, and send back the captives whom ye have taken captive of your brethren, for the heat of the anger of Jehovah [is] upon you.'
And certain of the heads of the sons of Ephraim (Azariah son of Johanan, Berechiah son of Meshillemoth, and Jehizkiah son of Shallum, and Amasa son of Hadlai), rise up against those coming in from the host,
and say to them, 'Ye do not bring in the captives hither, for, to guilt against Jehovah on us, ye are saying to add unto our sin and unto our guilt? for abundant [is] the guilt we have, and the fierceness of anger on Israel.'
And the armed men leave the captives and the prey before the heads and all the assembly;
and the men who have been expressed by name rise and take hold on the captives, and all their naked ones they have clothed from the spoil, yea, they clothe them, and shoe them, and cause them to eat and drink, and anoint them, and lead them on asses, even every feeble one, and bring them in to Jericho, the city of palms, near their brethren, and turn back to Samaria.
At that time hath king Ahaz sent unto the king of Asshur to give help to him;
and again the Edomites have come, and smite in Judah, and take captive a captivity.
And the Philistines have rushed against the cities of the low country, and of the south of Judah, and capture Beth-Shemesh, and Aijalon, and Gederoth, and Shocho and its villages, and Timnah and its villages, and Gimzo and its villages, and dwell there,
for Jehovah hath humbled Judah because of Ahaz king of Israel, for he made free with Judah, even to commit a trespass against Jehovah.
And Tilgath-Pilneser king of Asshur cometh in unto him, and doth distress him, and hath not strengthened him,
though Ahaz hath taken a portion [out] of the house of Jehovah, and [out] of the house of the king, and of the princes, and giveth to the king of Asshur, yet it is no help to him.
And in the time of his distress — he addeth to trespass against Jehovah, (this king Ahaz),
and he sacrificeth to the gods of Damascus — those smiting him, and saith, 'Because the gods of the kings of Aram are helping them, to them I sacrifice, and they help me,' and they have been to him to cause him to stumble, and to all Israel.
And Ahaz gathereth the vessels of the house of God, and cutteth in pieces the vessels of the house of God, and shutteth the doors of the house of Jehovah, and maketh to himself altars in every corner in Jerusalem.
And in every city and city of Judah he hath made high places to make perfume to other gods, and provoketh Jehovah, God of his fathers.
And the rest of his matters, and all his ways, the first and the last, lo, they are written on the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.
And Ahaz lieth with his fathers, and they bury him in the city, in Jerusalem, but have not brought him in to the graves of the kings of Israel, and reign doth Hezekiah his son in his stead.
Hezekiah hath reigned — a son of twenty and five years, and twenty and nine years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Abijah daughter of Zechariah;
and he doth that which is right in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that David his father did.
He, in the first year of his reign, in the first month, hath opened the doors of the house of Jehovah, and strengtheneth them,
and bringeth in the priests and the Levites, and gathereth them to the broad place to the east.
And he saith to them, 'Hear me, O Levites, now, sanctify yourselves, and sanctify the house of Jehovah, God of your fathers, and bring out the impurity from the sanctuary,
for our fathers have trespassed, and done that which is evil in the eyes of Jehovah our God, and forsake him, and turn round their faces from the tabernacle of Jehovah, and give the neck.
'Also — they have shut the doors of the porch, and quench the lamps, and perfume they have not made, and burnt-offering have not caused to ascend in the sanctuary to the God of Israel,
and the wrath of Jehovah is on Judah and Jerusalem, and He giveth them for a trembling, for an astonishment, and for a hissing, as ye are seeing with your eyes.
And lo, fallen have our fathers by the sword, and our sons, and our daughters, and our wives [are] in captivity for this.
'Now — with my heart — to make a covenant before Jehovah, God of Israel, and the fierceness of His anger doth turn back from us.
My sons, be not now at rest, for on you hath Jehovah fixed to stand before Him, to serve Him, and to be to Him ministering and making perfume.'
And the Levites rise — Mahath son of Amasai, and Joel son of Azariah, of the sons of the Kohathite; and of the sons of Merari: Kish son of Abdi, and Azariah son of Jehalelel; and of the Gershonite: Joah son of Zimmah, and Eden son of Joah;
and of the sons of Elizaphan: Shimri, and Jeiel; and of the sons of Asaph: Zechariah and Mattaniah;
and of the sons of Heman: Jehiel and Shimei; and of the sons of Jeduthun: Shemaiah and Uzziel —
and they gather their brethren, and sanctify themselves, and come in, according to the command of the king in the matters of Jehovah, to cleanse the house of Jehovah,
and the priests come in to the inner part of the house of Jehovah to cleanse [it], and bring out all the uncleanness that they have found in the temple of Jehovah to the court of the house of Jehovah, and the Levites receive [it], to take [it] out to the brook Kidron without.
And they begin on the first of the first month to sanctify, and on the eighth day of the month they have come to the porch of Jehovah, and they sanctify the house of Jehovah in eight days, and on the sixteenth day of the first month they have finished.
And they come in within unto Hezekiah the king, and say, 'We have cleansed all the house of Jehovah, and the altar of the burnt-offering, and all its vessels, and the table of the arrangement, and all its vessels,
and all the vessels that king Ahaz cast away in his reign — in his trespass — we have prepared and sanctified, and lo, they [are] before the altar of Jehovah.'
And Hezekiah the king riseth early, and gathereth the heads of the city, and goeth up to the house of Jehovah;
and they bring in seven bullocks, and seven rams, and seven lambs, and seven young he-goats, for a sin-offering for the kingdom, and for the sanctuary, and for Judah; and he saith to sons of Aaron, the priests, to cause [them] to ascend on the altar of Jehovah.
And they slaughter the oxen, and the priests receive the blood, and sprinkle on the altar; and they slaughter the rams, and sprinkle the blood on the altar; and they slaughter the lambs, and sprinkle the blood on the altar;
and they bring nigh the he-goats of the sin-offering before the king and the assembly, and they lay their hands upon them;
and the priests slaughter them, and make a sin-offering with their blood on the altar, to make atonement for all Israel, for 'For all Israel,' said the king, '[is] the burnt-offering and the sin-offering.'
And he appointeth the Levites in the house of Jehovah with cymbals, with psalteries, and with harps, by the command of David, and of Gad, seer of the king, and of Nathan the prophet, for by the hand of Jehovah [is] the command, by the hand of His prophets;
and the Levites stand with the instruments of David, and the priests with the trumpets.
And Hezekiah saith to cause the burnt-offering to ascend on the altar; and at the time the burnt-offering began — began the song of Jehovah, and the trumpets, even by the hands of the instruments of David king of Israel.
And all the assembly are doing obeisance, and the singers singing, and the trumpeters blowing; the whole [is] till the completion of the burnt-offering.
And at the completion of the offering up bowed have the king and all those found with him, and do obeisance.
And Hezekiah the king saith, and the princes, to the Levites to give praise to Jehovah in the words of David, and of Asaph the seer, and they praise — unto joy, and they bow, and do obeisance.
And Hezekiah answereth and saith, 'Now ye have filled your hand to Jehovah, come nigh, and bring in sacrifices and thank-offerings to the house of Jehovah;' and the assembly bring in sacrifices and thank-offerings, and every willing-hearted one — burnt-offerings.
And the number of the burnt-offerings that the assembly have brought in, is seventy oxen, a hundred rams, lambs two hundred; for a burnt-offering to Jehovah [are] all these.
And the sanctified things [are] oxen six hundred, and sheep three thousand.
Only, the priests have become few, and have not been able to strip the whole of the burnt-offerings, and their brethren the Levites strengthen them till the completion of the work, and till the priests sanctify themselves, for the Levites [are] more upright of heart to sanctify themselves than the priests.
And also, burnt-offerings [are] in abundance, with fat of the peace-offerings, and with oblations for the burnt-offering; and the service of the house of Jehovah is established,
and rejoice doth Hezekiah and all the people, because of God's giving preparation to the people, for the thing hath been suddenly.
And Hezekiah sendeth unto all Israel and Judah, and also letters he hath written unto Ephraim and Manasseh, to come in to the house of Jehovah in Jerusalem, to make a passover to Jehovah, God of Israel.
And the king taketh counsel, and his heads, and all the assembly in Jerusalem, to make the passover in the second month,
for they have not been able to make it at that time, for the priests have not sanctified themselves sufficiently, and the people have not been gathered to Jerusalem.
And the thing is right in the eyes of the king, and in the eyes of all the assembly,
and they establish the thing, to cause to pass over an intimation into all Israel, from Beer-Sheba even unto Dan, to come in to make a passover to Jehovah, God of Israel, in Jerusalem, for not for a long time had they done as it is written.
And the runners go with letters from the hand of the king and his heads, into all Israel and Judah, even according to the command of the king, saying, 'O sons of Israel, turn back unto Jehovah, God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, and He doth turn back unto the escaped part that is left of you from the hand of the kings of Asshur;
and do not be like your fathers, and like your brethren, who trespassed against Jehovah, God of their fathers, and He giveth them to desolation, as ye do see.
'Now, harden not your neck like your fathers, give a hand to Jehovah, and come in to His sanctuary, that He hath sanctified to the age, and serve Jehovah your God, and the fierceness of His anger doth turn back from you;
for in your turning back unto Jehovah, your brethren and your sons have mercies before their captors, even to return to this land, for gracious and merciful [is] Jehovah your God, and He doth not turn aside the face from you, if ye turn back unto Him.'
And the runners are passing over from city to city, in the land of Ephraim and Manasseh, even unto Zebulun: and they are laughing at them, and mocking at them,
only, certain from Asher, and Manasseh, and from Zebulun, have been humbled, and come in to Jerusalem.
Also, in Judah hath the hand of God been to give to them one heart to do the command of the king and of the heads, in the matter of Jehovah;
and much people are gathered to Jerusalem, to make the feast of unleavened things in the second month — a mighty assembly for multitude.
And they arise and turn aside the altars that [are] in Jerusalem, and all the perfume altars they have turned aside, and cast [them] to the brook Kidron;
and they slaughter the passover-offering on the fourteenth of the second month, and the priests and the Levites have been ashamed, and sanctify themselves, and bring in burnt-offerings to the house of Jehovah.
And they stand on their station according to their ordinance; according to the law of Moses the man of God the priests are sprinkling the blood out of the hand of the Levites,
for many [are] in the assembly who have not sanctified themselves, and the Levites [are] over the slaughtering of the passover-offerings for every one not clean, to sanctify [him] to Jehovah:
for a multitude of the people, many from Ephraim and Manasseh, Issachar, and Zebulun, have not been cleansed, but have eaten the passover otherwise than it is written; but Hezekiah prayed for them, saying, 'Jehovah, who [is] good, doth receive atonement for every one
who hath prepared his heart to seek God — Jehovah, God of his fathers — yet not according to the cleansing of the sanctuary;'
and Jehovah hearkeneth unto Hezekiah, and healeth the people.
And the sons of Israel, those found in Jerusalem, make the feast of unleavened things seven days with great joy; and giving praise to Jehovah day by day are the Levites and the priests, with instruments of praise before Jehovah.
And Hezekiah speaketh unto the heart of all the Levites, those giving good understanding concerning Jehovah, and they eat the appointed thing seven days; sacrificing sacrifices of peace-offerings, and making confession to Jehovah, God of their fathers.
And all the assembly take counsel to keep other seven days, and they keep seven days [with] joy;
for Hezekiah king of Judah hath presented to the assembly a thousand bullocks, and seven thousand sheep; and the heads have presented to the assembly bullocks a thousand, and sheep ten thousand; and priests sanctify themselves in abundance.
And all the assembly of Judah rejoice, and the priests, and the Levites, and all the assembly, those coming in from Israel, and the sojourners, those coming in from the land of Israel, and those dwelling in Judah,
and there is great joy in Jerusalem; for from the days of Solomon son of David king of Israel there is not like this in Jerusalem,
and the priests, the Levites, rise and bless the people, and their voice is heard, and their prayer cometh in to His holy habitation, to the heavens.
And at the completion of all this, gone out have all Israel who are found present to the cities of Judah, and break the standing-pillars, and cut down the shrines, and break down the high places and the altars, out of all Judah and Benjamin, and in Ephraim and Manasseh, even to completion, and all the sons of Israel turn back, each to his Possession, to their cities.
And Hezekiah appointeth the courses of the priests, and of the Levites, by their courses, each according to his service, of the priests and of the Levites, for burnt-offering, and for peace-offerings, to minister, and to give thanks, and to give praise in the gates of the camps of Jehovah.
And a portion of the king, from his substance, [is] for burnt-offerings, for burnt-offerings of the morning, and of the evening, and the burnt-offerings of sabbaths, and of new moons, and of appointed seasons, as it is written in the law of Jehovah.
And he saith to the people, to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, to give the portion of the priests, and of the Levites, so that they are strengthened in the law of Jehovah;
and at the spreading forth of the thing have the sons of Israel multiplied the first-fruit of corn, new wine, and oil, and honey, and of all the increase of the field, and the tithe of the whole in abundance they have brought in.
And the sons of Israel and Judah, those dwelling in cities of Judah, they also a tithe of herd and flock, and a tithe of the holy things that are sanctified to Jehovah their God, have brought in, and they give — heaps, heaps;
in the third month they have begun to lay the foundation of the heaps, and in the seventh month they have finished.
And Hezekiah and the heads come in and see the heaps, and bless Jehovah and His people Israel,
and Hezekiah inquireth at the priests and the Levites concerning the heaps,
and Azariah the head priest, of the house of Zadok, speaketh unto him, and saith, 'From the beginning of the bringing of the heave-offering to the house of Jehovah, [there is] to eat, and to be satisfied, and to leave abundantly, for Jehovah hath blessed His people, and that left [is] this store.'
And Hezekiah saith to prepare chambers in the house of Jehovah, and they prepare,
and they bring in the heave-offering, and the tithe, and the holy things faithfully; and over them is a leader, Conaniah the Levite, and Shimei his brother [is] second;
and Jehiel, and Azaziah, and Nahath, and Asahel, and Jerimoth, and Jozabad, and Eliel, and Ismachiah, and Mahath, and Benaiah, [are] inspectors under the hand of Conaniah and Shimei his brother, by the appointment of Hezekiah the king, and Azariah leader of the house of God.
And Kore son of Imnah the Levite, the gatekeeper at the east, [is] over the willing-offerings of God, to give the heave-offering of Jehovah, and the most holy things.
And by his hand [are] Eden, and Miniamin, and Jeshua, and Shemaiah, Amariah, and Shechaniah, in cities of the priests, faithfully to give to their brethren in courses, as the great so the small,
apart from their genealogy, to males from a son of three years and upward, to every one who hath gone in to the house of Jehovah, by the matter of a day in its day, for their service in their charges, according to their courses;
and the genealogy of the priests by the house of their fathers, and of the Levites, from a son of twenty years and upward, in their charges, in their courses;
and to the genealogy among all their infants, their wives, and their sons, and their daughters to all the congregation, for in their faithfulness they sanctify themselves in holiness.
And to sons of Aaron, the priests, in the fields of the suburb of their cities, in every city and city, [are] men who have been defined by name, to give portions to every male among the priests, and to every one who reckoned himself by genealogy among the Levites.
And Hezekiah doth thus in all Judah, and doth that which is good, and that which is right, and that which is true, before Jehovah his God;
and in every work that he hath begun for the service of the house of God, and for the law, and for the command, to seek to his God, with all his heart he hath wrought and prospered.
After these things and this truth, come hath Sennacherib king of Asshur, yea, he cometh in to Judah, and encampeth against the cities of the bulwarks, and saith to rend them unto himself.
And Hezekiah seeth that Sennacherib hath come, and his face [is] to the battle against Jerusalem,
and he taketh counsel with his heads and his mighty ones, to stop the waters of the fountains that [are] at the outside of the city — and they help him,
and much people are gathered, and they stop all the fountains and the brook that is rushing into the midst of the land, saying, 'Why do the kings of Asshur come, and have found much water?'
And he strengtheneth himself, and buildeth the whole of the wall that is broken, and causeth [it] to ascend unto the towers, and at the outside of the wall another, and strengtheneth Millo, [in] the city of David, and maketh darts in abundance, and shields.
And he putteth heads of war over the people, and gathereth them unto him, unto the broad place of a gate of the city, and speaketh unto their heart, saying,
'Be strong and courageous, be not afraid, nor be cast down from the face of the king of Asshur, and from the face of all the multitude that [is] with him, for with us [are] more than with him.
With him [is] an arm of flesh, and with us [is] Jehovah our God, to help us, and to fight our battles;' and the people are supported by the words of Hezekiah king of Judah.
After this hath Sennacherib king of Asshur sent his servants to Jerusalem — and he [is] by Lachish, and all his power with him — against Hezekiah king of Judah, and against all Judah, who [are] in Jerusalem, saying,
'Thus said Sennacherib king of Asshur, On what are ye trusting and abiding in the bulwark, in Jerusalem?
'Is not Hezekiah persuading you, to give you up to die by famine, and by thirst, saying, Jehovah our God doth deliver us from the hand of the king of Asshur?
Hath not Hezekiah himself turned aside His high places, and His altars, and speaketh to Judah and to Jerusalem, saying, Before one altar ye bow yourselves, and on it ye make perfume?
'Do ye not know what I have done — I and my fathers — to all peoples of the lands? Were the gods of the nations of the lands at all able to deliver their land out of my hand?
Who among all the gods of these nations whom my fathers have devoted to destruction [is] he who hath been able to deliver his people out of my hand, that your God is able to deliver you out of my hand?
'And, now, let not Hezekiah lift you up, nor persuade you thus, nor give credence to him, for no god of any nation and kingdom is able to deliver his people from my hand, and from the hand of my fathers: also, surely your God doth not deliver you from my hand!'
And again have his servants spoken against Jehovah God, and against Hezekiah His servant,
and letters he hath written to give reproach to Jehovah, God of Israel, and to speak against Him, saying, 'As the gods of the nations of the lands that have not delivered their people from my hand, so the God of Hezekiah doth not deliver His people from my hand.'
And they call with a great voice [in] Jewish, against the people of Jerusalem who [are] on the wall, to frighten them, and to trouble them, that they may capture the city,
and they speak against the God of Jerusalem as against the gods of the peoples of the land — work of the hands of man.
And Hezekiah the king prayeth, and Isaiah son of Amoz the prophet, concerning this, and they cry to the heavens,
and Jehovah sendeth a messenger, and cutteth off every mighty one of valour — both leader and head — in the camp of the king of Asshur, and he turneth back with shame of face to his land, and entereth the house of his god, and those coming out of his bowels have caused him to fall there by the sword.
And Jehovah saveth Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem from the hand of Sennacherib king of Asshur, and from the hand of all, and He leadeth them round about;
and many are bringing in an offering to Jehovah, to Jerusalem, and precious things to Hezekiah king of Judah, and he is lifted up before the eyes of all the nations after this.
In those days hath Hezekiah been sick even unto death, and he prayeth unto Jehovah, and He speaketh to him, and a wonder hath appointed for him;
and Hezekiah hath not returned according to the deed [done] unto him, for his heart hath been lofty, and there is wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem;
and Hezekiah is humbled for the loftiness of his heart, he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the wrath of Jehovah hath not come upon them in the days of Hezekiah.
And Hezekiah hath riches and honour very much, and treasures he hath made to himself of silver, and of gold, and of precious stone, and of spices, and of shields, and of all [kinds] of desirable vessels,
and storehouses for the increase of corn, and new wine, and oil, and stalls for all kinds of cattle, and herds for stalls;
and cities he hath made for himself, and possessions of flocks and herds in abundance, for God hath given to him very much substance.
And Hezekiah himself hath stopped the upper source of the waters of Gihon, and directeth them beneath to the west of the city of David, and Hezekiah prospereth in all his work;
and so with the ambassadors of the heads of Babylon, those sending unto him to inquire of the wonder that hath been in the land, God hath left him to try him, to know all in his heart,
And the rest of the matters of Hezekiah, and his kind acts, lo, they are written in the vision of Isaiah son of Amoz the prophet, on the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.
And Hezekiah lieth with his fathers, and they bury him in the uppermost of the graves of the sons of David, and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem have done honour to him at his death, and reign doth Manasseh his son in his stead.
A son of twelve years is Manasseh in his reigning, and fifty and five years he hath reigned in Jerusalem;
and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, like the abominations of the nations that Jehovah dispossessed from the presence of the sons of Israel,
and he turneth and buildeth the high places that Hezekiah his father hath broken down, and raiseth altars for Baalim, and maketh shrines, and boweth himself to all the host of the heavens, and serveth them.
And he hath built altars in the house of Jehovah of which Jehovah had said, 'In Jerusalem is My name to the age.'
And he buildeth altars to all the host of the heavens in the two courts of the house of Jehovah.
And he hath caused his sons to pass over through fire in the valley of the son of Hinnom, and observed clouds and used enchantments and witchcraft, and dealt with a familiar spirit, and a wizard; he hath multiplied to do the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, to provoke him to anger.
And he placeth the graven image of the idol that he made in the house of God, of which God said unto David, and unto Solomon his son, 'In this house, and in Jerusalem that I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, I put My name to the age,
and I add not to turn aside the foot of Israel from off the ground that I appointed to your fathers, only, if they watch to do all that I have commanded them — to all the law, and the statutes, and the ordinances by the hand of Moses.'
And Manasseh maketh Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, to do evil above the nations that Jehovah destroyed from the presence of the sons of Israel.
And Jehovah speaketh unto Manasseh and unto his people, and they have not attended,
and Jehovah bringeth in against them the heads of the host that the king of Asshur hath, and they capture Manasseh among the thickets, and bind him with brazen fetters, and cause him to go to Babylon.
And when he is in distress he hath appeased the face of Jehovah his God, and is humbled exceedingly before the God of his fathers,
and prayeth unto Him, and He is entreated of him, and heareth his supplication, and bringeth him back to Jerusalem, to his kingdom, and Manasseh knoweth that Jehovah — He [is] God.
And after this he hath built an outer wall to the city of David, on the west of Gihon, in the valley, and at the entering in at the fish-gate, and it hath gone round to the tower, and he maketh it exceeding high, and he putteth heads of the force in all the cities of the bulwarks in Judah.
And he turneth aside the gods of the stranger, and the idol, out of the house of Jehovah, and all the altars that he had built in the mount of the house of Jehovah and in Jerusalem, and casteth [them] to the outside of the city.
And he buildeth the altar of Jehovah, and sacrificeth upon it sacrifices of peace-offerings and thank-offering, and saith to Judah to serve Jehovah, God of Israel;
but still the people are sacrificing in high places, only — to Jehovah their God.
And the rest of the matters of Manasseh, and his prayer unto his God, and the matters of the seers, those speaking unto him in the name of Jehovah, God of Israel, lo, they are [on the book of] the matters of the kings of Israel;
and his prayer, and his entreaty, and all his sin, and his trespass, and the places in which he had built high places, and established the shrines and the graven images before his being humbled, lo, they are written beside the matters of Hozai.
And Manasseh lieth with his fathers, and they bury him in his own house, and reign doth Amon his son in his stead.
A son of twenty and two years [is] Amon in his reigning, and two years he hath reigned in Jerusalem,
and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, as did Manasseh his father, and to all the graven images that Manasseh his father had made hath Amon sacrificed, and serveth them,
and hath not been humbled before Jehovah, like the humbling of Manasseh his father, for Amon himself hath multiplied guilt.
And his servants conspire against him, and put him to death in his own house,
and the people of the land smite all those conspiring against king Amon, and the people of the land cause Josiah his son to reign in his stead.
A son of eight years [is] Josiah in his reigning, and thirty and one years he hath reigned in Jerusalem,
and he doth that which is right in the eyes of Jehovah, and walketh in the ways of David his father, and hath not turned aside — right or left.
And in the eighth year of his reign (and he yet a youth), he hath begun to seek to the God of David his father, and in the twelfth year he hath begun to cleanse Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, and the shrines, and the graven images, and the molten images.
And they break down before him the altars of the Baalim, and the images that [are] on high above them he hath cut down, and the shrines, and the graven images, and the molten images, he hath broken and beaten small, and streweth on the surface of the graves of those sacrificing to them,
and the bones of the priests he hath burnt on their altars, and cleanseth Judah and Jerusalem,
and in the cities of Manasseh, and Ephraim, and Simeon, even unto Naphtali, with their tools, round about.
And he breaketh down the altars and the shrines, and the graven images he hath beaten down very small, and all the images he hath cut down in all the land of Israel, and turneth back to Jerusalem.
And in the eighteenth year of his reign, to purify the land and the house he hath sent Shaphan son of Azaliah, and Maaseiah head of the city, and Joah son of Johaz the remembrancer, to strengthen the house of Jehovah his God.
And they come in unto Hilkiah the high priest, and they give the money that is brought in to the house of God, that the Levites, keeping the threshold, have gathered from the hand of Manasseh, and Ephraim, and from all the remnant of Israel, and from all Judah, and Benjamin, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and they give [it] into the hand of the workmen, those appointed over the house of Jehovah, and they give it [to] the workmen who are working in the house of Jehovah, to repair and to strengthen the house;
and they give [it] to artificers, and to builders, to buy hewn stones, and wood for couplings and for beams to the houses that the kings of Judah had destroyed.
And the men are working faithfully in the business, and over them are appointed Jahath and Obadiah, the Levites, of the sons of Merari, and Zechariah and Meshullam, of the sons of the Kohathite, to overlook; and of the Levites, every one understanding about instruments of song,
and over the burden-bearers, and overseers of every one doing work for service and service; and of the Levites [are] scribes, and officers, and gatekeepers.
And in their bringing out the money that is brought in to the house of Jehovah, hath Hilkiah the priest found the book of the law of Jehovah by the hand of Moses,
and Hilkiah answereth and saith unto Shaphan the scribe, 'A book of the law I have found in the house of Jehovah;' and Hilkiah giveth the book unto Shaphan,
and Shaphan bringeth in the book unto the king, and bringeth the king back word again, saying, 'All that hath been given into the hand of thy servants they are doing,
and they pour out the money that is found in the house of Jehovah, and give it into the hand of those appointed, and into the hands of those doing the work.'
And Shaphan the scribe declareth to the king, saying, 'A book hath Hilkiah the priest given to me;' and Shaphan readeth in it before the king.
And it cometh to pass, at the king's hearing the words of the law, that he rendeth his garments,
and the king commandeth Hilkiah, and Ahikam son of Shaphan, and Abdon son of Micah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah, servant of the king, saying,
'Go, seek Jehovah for me, and for him who is left in Israel and in Judah, concerning the words of the book that is found, for great [is] the fury of Jehovah that is poured on us, because that our fathers kept not the word of Jehovah, to do according to all that is written on this book.'
And Hilkiah goeth, and they of the king, unto Huldah the prophetess, wife of Shallum son of Tikvath, son of Hasrah, keeper of the garments, and she is dwelling in Jerusalem in the Second, and they speak unto her thus.
And she saith to them, 'Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, Say to the man who hath sent you unto me,
Thus said Jehovah, Lo, I am bringing in evil on this place, and on its inhabitants, all the execrations that are written on the book that they read before the king of Judah;
because that they have forsaken Me, and make perfume to other gods, so as to provoke Me with all the works of their hands, and poured out is My fury upon this place, and it is not quenched.
'And unto the king of Judah, who is sending you to inquire of Jehovah, thus do ye say unto him: Thus said Jehovah God of Israel, whose words thou hast heard:
Because thy heart [is] tender, and thou art humbled before God in thy hearing His words concerning this place, and concerning its inhabitants, and art humbled before Me, and dost rend thy garments, and weep before Me: even I also have heard — the affirmation of Jehovah.
Lo, I am gathering thee unto thy fathers, and thou hast been gathered unto thy graves in peace, and thine eyes do not look on all the evil that I am bringing upon this place, and upon its inhabitants;' and they bring the king back word.
And the king sendeth and gathereth all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem,
and the king goeth up to the house of Jehovah, and every man of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the priests, and the Levites, even all the people, from great even unto small, and he readeth in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant that is found in the house of Jehovah.
And the king standeth on his station, and maketh the covenant before Jehovah, to walk after Jehovah, and to keep His commands, and His testimonies, and His statutes, with all his heart, and with all his soul, to do the words of the covenant that are written on this book.
And he presenteth every one who is found in Jerusalem and Benjamin, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem do according to the covenant of God, the God of their fathers.
And Josiah turneth aside all the abominations out of all the lands that the sons of Israel have, and causeth every one who is found in Israel to serve, to serve Jehovah their God; all his days they turned not aside from after Jehovah, God of their fathers.
And Josiah maketh in Jerusalem a passover to Jehovah, and they slaughter the passover-offering on the fourteenth of the first month,
and he stationeth the priests over their charges, and strengtheneth them for the service of the house of Jehovah,
and saith to the Levites — who are teaching all Israel — who are sanctified to Jehovah, 'Put the holy ark in the house that Solomon son of David king of Israel built; it is not to you a burden on the shoulder. 'Now, serve Jehovah your God, and His people Israel,
and prepare, by the house of your fathers, according to your courses, by the writing of David king of Israel, and by the writing of Solomon his son,
and stand in the sanctuary, by the divisions of the house of the fathers of your brethren, sons of the people, and the portion of the house of a father of the Levites,
and slaughter the passover-offering and sanctify yourselves, and prepare for your brethren, to do according to the word of Jehovah by the hand of Moses.'
And Josiah lifteth up to the sons of the people a flock of lambs and young goats, the whole for passover-offerings, for every one who is found, to the number of thirty thousand, and oxen three thousand: these [are] from the substance of the king.
And his heads, for a willing-offering to the people, to the priests, and to the Levites, have lifted up; Hilkiah, and Zechariah, and Jehiel, leaders in the house of God, to the priests have given for passover-offerings two thousand and six hundred, and oxen three hundred;
and Conaniah, and Shemaiah, and Nethaneel, his brethren, and Hashabiah, and Jeiel, and Jozabad, heads of the Levites, have lifted up to the Levites, for passover-offerings, five thousand, and oxen five hundred.
And the service is prepared, and the priests stand on their station, and the Levites on their courses, according to the command of the king,
and they slaughter the passover-offering, and the priests sprinkle out of their hand, and the Levites are striping;
and they turn aside the burnt-offering, to put them by the divisions of the house of the fathers of the sons of the people, to bring near to Jehovah, as it is written in the book of Moses — and so to the oxen.
And they cook the passover with fire, according to the ordinance, and the sanctified things they have cooked in pots, and in kettles, and in pans — for all the sons of the people.
And afterward they have prepared for themselves, and for the priests: for the priests, sons of Aaron, [are] in the offering up of the burnt-offering and of the fat till night; and the Levites have prepared for themselves, and for the priests, sons of Aaron.
And the singers, sons of Asaph, [are] on their station, according to the command of David, and Asaph, and Heman, and Jeduthun seer of the king, and the gate keepers [are] at gate and gate; it is not for them to turn aside from off their service, for their brethren the Levites have prepared for them.
And all the service of Jehovah is prepared on that day, to keep the passover, and to cause to ascend burnt-offering upon the altar of Jehovah, according to the command of king Josiah.
And the sons of Israel who are found make the passover at that time, and the feast of unleavened things, seven days.
And there hath not been made a passover like it in Israel from the days of Samuel the prophet, and none of the kings of Israel made such a passover as Josiah hath made, and the priests, and the Levites, and all Judah and Israel who are found, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
In the eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah hath this passover been made.
After all this, when Josiah hath prepared the house, come up hath Necho king of Egypt, to fight against Carchemish by Phrat, and Josiah goeth forth to meet him;
and he sendeth unto him messengers, saying, 'What — to me and to thee, O king of Judah? not against thee do I come to-day, but unto the house with which I have war, and God said to haste me; cease for thee from God who [is] with me, and He doth not destroy thee.'
And Josiah hath not turned round his face from him, but to fight against him hath disguised himself, and hath not hearkened unto the words of Necho, from the mouth of God, and cometh in to fight in the valley of Megiddo;
and the archers shoot at king Josiah, and the king saith to his servants, 'Remove me, for I have become very sick.'
And his servants remove him from the chariot, and cause him to ride on the second chariot that he hath, and cause him to go to Jerusalem, and he dieth, and is buried in the graves of his fathers, and all Judah and Jerusalem are mourning for Josiah,
and Jeremiah lamenteth for Josiah, and all the singers and the songstresses speak in their lamentations of Josiah unto this day, and set them for a statute on Israel, and lo, they are written beside the lamentations.
And the rest of the matters of Josiah, and his kind acts, according as it is written in the law of Jehovah,
even his matters, the first and the last, lo, they are written on the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.
And the people of the land take Jehoahaz son of Josiah, and cause him to reign instead of his father in Jerusalem.
A son of three and twenty years [is] Jehoahaz in his reigning, and three months he hath reigned in Jerusalem,
and turn him aside doth the king of Egypt in Jerusalem, and fineth the land a hundred talents of silver, and a talent of gold;
and the king of Egypt causeth Eliakim his brother to reign over Judah and Jerusalem, and turneth his name to Jehoiakim; and Jehoahaz his brother hath Necho taken, and bringeth him in to Egypt.
A son of twenty and five years [is] Jehoiakim in his reigning, and eleven years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah his God;
against him hath Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon come up, and bindeth him in brazen fetters to take him away to Babylon.
And of the vessels of the house of Jehovah hath Nebuchadnezzar brought in to Babylon, and putteth them in his temple in Babylon.
And the rest of the matters of Jehoiakim, and his abominations that he hath done, and that which is found against him, lo, they are written on the book of the kings of Israel and Judah, and reign doth Jehoiachin his son in his stead.
A son of eight years is Jehoiachin in his reigning, and three months and ten days he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah;
and at the turn of the year hath king Nebuchadnezzar sent and bringeth him in to Babylon, with the desirable vessels of the house of Jehovah, and causeth Zedekiah his brother to reign over Judah and Jerusalem.
A son of twenty and one years [is] Zedekiah in his reigning, and eleven years he hath reigned in Jerusalem;
and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah his God, he hath not been humbled before Jeremiah the prophet [speaking] from the mouth of Jehovah;
and also, against king Nebuchadnezzar he hath rebelled, who had caused him to swear by God, and he hardeneth his neck, and strengtheneth his heart, against turning back unto Jehovah, God of Israel.
Also, all the heads of the priests, and the people, having multiplied to commit a trespass according to all the abominations of the nations, and they defile the house of Jehovah that He hath sanctified in Jerusalem.
And Jehovah, God of their fathers, sendeth unto them by the hand of His messengers — rising early and sending — for He hath had pity on His people, and on His habitation,
and they are mocking at the messengers of God, and despising His words, and acting deceitfully with His prophets, till the going up of the fury of Jehovah against His people — till there is no healing.
And He causeth to go up against them the king of the Chaldeans, and he slayeth their chosen ones by the sword in the house of their sanctuary, and hath had no pity on young man and virgin, old man and very aged — the whole He hath given into his hand.
And all the vessels of the house of God, the great and the small, and the treasures of the house of Jehovah, and the treasures of the king and of his princes — the whole he hath brought in to Babylon.
And they burn the house of God, and break down the wall of Jerusalem, and all its palaces they have burnt with fire, and all its desirable vessels — to destruction.
And he removeth those left of the sword unto Babylon, and they are to him and to his sons for servants, till the reigning of the kingdom of Persia,
to fulfil the word of Jehovah in the mouth of Jeremiah, till the land hath enjoyed its sabbaths; all the days of the desolation it kept sabbath — to the fulness of seventy years.
And in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, at the completion of the word of Jehovah in the mouth of Jeremiah, hath Jehovah waked up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, and he causeth an intimation to pass over into all his kingdom, and also in writing, saying,
'Thus said Cyrus king of Persia, All kingdoms of the earth hath Jehovah, God of the heavens, given to me, and He hath laid a charge on me to build to Him a house in Jerusalem, that [is] in Judah; who is among you of all His people? Jehovah his God [is] with him, and he doth go up.'
And in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, at the completion of the word of Jehovah from the mouth of Jeremiah, hath Jehovah waked up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, and he causeth an intimation to pass over into all his kingdom, and also in writing, saying,
'Thus said Cyrus king of Persia, All kingdoms of the earth hath Jehovah, God of the heavens, given to me, and He hath laid a charge on me to build to Him a house in Jerusalem, that [is] in Judah;
who [is] among you of all His people? His God is with him, and he doth go up to Jerusalem, that [is] in Judah, and build the house of Jehovah, God of Israel — He [is] God — that [is] in Jerusalem.
'And every one who is left, of any of the places where he [is] a sojourner, assist him do the men of his place with silver, and with gold, and with goods, and with beasts, along with a free-will offering for the house of God, that [is] in Jerusalem.'
And heads of the fathers of Judah and Benjamin rise, and the priests and the Levites, even every one whose spirit God hath waked, to go up to build the house of Jehovah, that [is] in Jerusalem;
and all those round about them have strengthened [them] with their hands, with vessels of silver, with gold, with goods, and with beasts, and with precious things, apart from all that hath been offered willingly.
And the king Cyrus hath brought out the vessels of the house of Jehovah that Nebuchadnezzar hath brought out of Jerusalem, and putteth them in the house of his gods;
yea, Cyrus king of Persia bringeth them out by the hand of Mithredath the treasurer, and numbereth them to Sheshbazzar the prince of Judah.
And this [is] their number: dishes of gold thirty, dishes of silver a thousand, knives nine and twenty,
basins of gold thirty, basins of silver (seconds) four hundred and ten, other vessels a thousand.
All the vessels of gold and of silver [are] five thousand and four hundred; the whole hath Sheshbazzar brought up with the going up of the removal from Babylon to Jerusalem.
And these [are] sons of the province who are going up — of the captives of the removal that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon removed to Babylon, and they turn back to Jerusalem and Judah, each to his city —
who have come in with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispar, Bigvai, Rehum, Baanah: The number of the men of the people of Israel:
Sons of Parosh, two thousand a hundred seventy and two.
Sons of Shephatiah, three hundred seventy and two.
Sons of Arah, seven hundred five and seventy.
Sons of Pahath-Moab, of the sons of Jeshua, Joab, two thousand eight hundred and twelve.
Sons of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four.
Sons of Zattu, nine hundred and forty and five.
Sons of Zaccai, seven hundred and sixty.
Sons of Bani, six hundred forty and two.
Sons of Bebai, six hundred twenty and three.
Sons of Azgad, a thousand two hundred twenty and two.
Sons of Adonikam, six hundred sixty and six.
Sons of Bigvai, two thousand fifty and six.
Sons of Adin, four hundred fifty and four.
Sons of Ater of Hezekiah, ninety and eight.
Sons of Bezai, three hundred twenty and three.
Sons of Jorah, a hundred and twelve.
Sons of Hashum, two hundred twenty and three.
Sons of Gibbar, ninety and five.
Sons of Beth-Lehem, a hundred twenty and three.
Men of Netophah, fifty and six.
Men of Anathoth, a hundred twenty and eight.
Sons of Azmaveth, forty and two.
Sons of Kirjath-Arim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hundred and forty and three.
Sons of Ramah and Gaba, six hundred twenty and one.
Men of Michmas, a hundred twenty and two.
Men of Beth-El and Ai, two hundred twenty and three.
Sons of Nebo, fifty and two.
Sons of Magbish, a hundred fifty and six.
Sons of another Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four.
Sons of Harim, three hundred and twenty.
Sons of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred twenty and five.
Sons of Jericho, three hundred forty and five.
Sons of Senaah, three thousand and six hundred and thirty.
The Priests: sons of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy and three.
Sons of Imner, a thousand fifty and two.
Sons of Pashhur, a thousand two hundred forty and seven.
Sons of Harim, a thousand and seventeen.
The Levites; sons of Jeshua and Kadmiel, of the sons of Hodaviah, seventy and four.
The singers: sons of Asaph, a hundred twenty and eight.
Sons of the gatekeepers; sons of Shallum, sons of Ater, sons of Talmon, sons of Akkub, sons of Hatita, sons of Shobai, the whole [are] a hundred thirty and nine.
The Nethinim: sons of Ziha, sons of Hasupha, sons of Tabbaoth,
Sons of Keros, sons of Siaha, sons of Padon,
Sons of Lebanah, sons of Hagabah, sons of Akkub,
Sons of Hagab, sons of Shalmai, sons of Hanan,
Sons of Giddel, sons of Gahar, sons of Reaiah,
Sons of Rezin, sons of Nekoda, sons of Gazzam,
Sons of Uzza, sons of Paseah, sons of Besai,
Sons of Asnah, sons of Mehunim, sons of Nephusim,
Sons of Bakbuk, sons of Hakupha, sons of Harhur,
Sons of Bazluth, sons of Mehida, sons of Harsha,
Sons of Barkos, sons of Sisera, sons of Thamah,
Sons of Neziah, sons of Hatipha.
Sons of the servants of Solomon: sons of Sotai, sons of Sophereth, sons of Peruda,
Sons of Jaalah, sons of Darkon, sons of Giddel,
Sons of Shephatiah, sons of Hattil, sons of Pochereth of Zebaim, sons of Ami.
All the Nethinim, and the sons of the servants of Solomon [are] three hundred ninety and two.
And these [are] those going up from Tel-Melah, Tel-Harsa, Cherub, Addan, Immer, and they have not been able to declare the house of their fathers, and their seed, whether they [are] of Israel:
sons of Delaiah, sons of Tobiah, sons of Nekoda, six hundred fifty and two.
And of the sons of the priests: sons of Habaiah, sons of Koz, sons of Barzillai (who took from the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite a wife, and is called by their name;)
these have sought their register among those reckoning themselves by genealogy, and they have not been found, and they are redeemed from the priesthood,
and the Tirshatha saith to them, that they eat not of the most holy things till the standing up of a priest with Urim and with Thummim.
All the assembly together [is] four myriad two thousand three hundred sixty,
apart from their servants and their handmaids; these [are] seven thousand three hundred thirty and seven: and of them [are] singers and songstresses two hundred.
Their horses [are] seven hundred thirty and six, their mules, two hundred forty and five,
their camels, four hundred thirty and five, asses, six thousand seven hundred and twenty.
And some of the heads of the fathers in their coming in to the house of Jehovah that [is] in Jerusalem, have offered willingly for the house of God, to establish it on its base;
according to their power they have given to the treasure of the work; of gold, drams six myriads and a thousand, and of silver, pounds five thousand, and of priests' coats, a hundred.
And the priests dwell, and the Levites, and of the people, and the singers, and the gatekeepers, and the Nethinim, in their cities; even all Israel in their cities.
And the seventh month cometh, and the sons of Israel [are] in the cities, and the people are gathered, as one men, unto Jerusalem.
And rise doth Jeshua son of Jozadak, and his brethren the priests, and Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, and his brethren, and they build the altar of the God of Israel, to cause to ascend upon it burnt-offerings, as it is written in the law of Moses, the man of God.
And they establish the altar on its bases, because of the fear upon them of the peoples of the lands, and he causeth burnt-offerings to ascend upon it to Jehovah, burnt-offerings for the morning and for the evening.
And they make the feast of the booths as it is written, and the burnt-offering of the day daily in number according to the ordinance, the matter of a day in its day;
and after this a continual burnt-offering, and for new moons, and for all appointed seasons of Jehovah that are sanctified; and for every one who is willingly offering a willing-offering to Jehovah.
From the first day of the seventh month they have begun to cause burnt-offerings to ascend to Jehovah, and the temple of Jehovah hath not been founded,
and they give money to hewers and to artificers, and food, and drink, and oil to Zidonians and to Tyrians, to bring in cedar-trees from Lebanon unto the sea of Joppa, according to the permission of Cyrus king of Persia concerning them.
And in the second year of their coming in unto the house of God, to Jerusalem, in the second month, began Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua son of Jozadak, and the remnant of their brethren the priests and the Levites, and all those coming from the captivity to Jerusalem, and they appoint the Levites from a son of twenty years and upward, to overlook the work of the house of Jehovah.
And Jeshua standeth, [and] his sons, and his brethren, Kadmiel and his sons, sons of Judah together, to overlook those doing the work in the house of God; the sons of Henadad, [and] their sons and their brethren the Levites.
And those building have founded the temple of Jehovah, and they appoint the priests, clothed, with trumpets, and the Levites, sons of Asaph, with cymbals, to praise Jehovah, by means of [the instruments of] David king of Israel.
And they respond in praising and in giving thanks to Jehovah, for good, for to the age His kindness [is] over Israel, and all the people have shouted — a great shout — in giving praise to Jehovah, because the house of Jehovah hath been founded.
And many of the priests, and the Levites, and the heads of the fathers, the aged men who had seen the first house — in this house being founded before their eyes — are weeping with a loud voice, and many with a shout, in joy, lifting up the voice;
and the people are not discerning the noise of the shout of joy from the noise of the weeping of the people, for the people are shouting — a great shout — and the noise hath been heard unto a distance.
And adversaries of Judah and Benjamin hear that the sons of the captivity are building a temple to Jehovah, God of Israel,
and they draw nigh unto Zerubbabel, and unto heads of the fathers, and say to them, 'Let us build with you; for, like you, we seek to your God, and we are not sacrificing since the days of Esar-Haddon king of Asshur, who brought us up hither.'
And Zerubbabel saith to them, also Jeshua, and the rest of the heads of the fathers of Israel, 'Not for you, and for us, to build a house to our God; but we ourselves together do build to Jehovah God of Israel, as the king Cyrus, king of Persia, commanded us.'
And it cometh to pass, the people of the land are making the hands of the people of Judah feeble, and troubling them in building,
and are hiring against them counsellors to make void their counsel all the days of Cyrus king of Persia, even till the reign of Darius king of Persia.
And in the reign of Ahasuerus, in the commencement of his reign, they have written an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem;
and in the days of Artaxerxes have Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, and the rest of his companions written unto Artaxerxes king of Persia, and the writing of the letter is written in Aramaean, and interpreted in Aramaean.
Rehum counsellor, and Shimshai scribe have written a letter concerning Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the king, thus:
Then Rehum counsellor, and Shimshai scribe, and the rest of their companions, Dinaites, and Apharsathchites, Tarpelites, Apharsites, Archevites, Babylonians, Susanchites, (who are Elamites),
and the rest of the nations that the great and honourable Asnapper removed and set in the city of Samaria, and the rest beyond the river, and at such a time:
This [is] a copy of a letter that they have sent unto him, unto Artaxerxes the king: 'Thy servants, men beyond the river, and at such a time;
Be it known to the king, that the Jews who have come up from thee unto us, have come in to Jerusalem, the rebellious and base city they are building, and the walls they have finished, and the foundations they join.
'Now, be it known to the king, that if this city be builded, and the walls finished, toll, tribute, and custom they do not give; and at length [to] the kings it doth cause loss.
Now, because that the salt of the palace [is] our salt, and the nakedness of the king we have no patience to see, therefore we have sent and made known to the king;
so that he doth seek in the book of the records of thy fathers, and thou dost find in the book of the records, and dost know, that this city [is] a rebellious city, and causing loss [to] kings and provinces, and makers of sedition [are] in its midst from the days of old, therefore hath this city been wasted.
We are making known to the king that, if this city be builded and the walls finished, by this means a portion beyond the river thou hast none.'
An answer hath the king sent unto Rehum counsellor, and Shimshai scribe, and the rest of their companions who are dwelling in Samaria, and the rest beyond the river, 'Peace, and at such a time:
The letter that ye sent unto us, explained, hath been read before me,
and by me a decree hath been made, and they sought, and have found that this city from the days of old against kings is lifting up itself, and rebellion and sedition is made in it,
and mighty kings have been over Jerusalem, even rulers over all beyond the river, and toll, tribute, and custom is given to them.
'Now, make ye a decree to cause these men to cease, and this city is not builded, till by me a decree is made.
And beware ye of negligence in doing this; why doth the hurt become great to the loss of the kings?'
Then from the time that a copy of the letter of king Artaxerxes is read before Rehum, and Shimshai the scribe, and their companions, they have gone in haste to Jerusalem, unto the Jews, and caused them to cease by force and strength;
then ceased the service of the house of God that [is] in Jerusalem, and it ceased till the second year of the reign of Darius king of Persia.
And prophesied have the prophets, (Haggai the prophet, and Zechariah son of Iddo) unto the Jews who [are] in Judah and in Jerusalem, in the name of the God of Israel — unto them.
Then have Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua son of Jozadak, risen, and begun to build the house of God, that [is] in Jerusalem, and with them are the prophets of God supporting them.
At that time come to them hath Tatnai, governor beyond the river, and Shethar-Boznai, and their companions, and thus they are saying to them, 'Who hath made for you a decree this house to build, and this wall to finish?'
Then thus we have said to them, 'What [are] the names of the men who are building this building?'
And the eye of their God hath been upon the elders of the Jews, and they have not caused them to cease till the matter goeth to Darius, and then they send back a letter concerning this thing.
The copy of a letter that Tatnai, governor beyond the river, hath sent, and Shethar-Boznai and his companions, the Apharsachites who [are] beyond the river, unto Darius the king.
A letter they have sent unto him, and thus is it written in it:
'To Darius the king, all peace! be it known to the king that we have gone to the province of Judah, to the great house of God, and it is built [with] rolled stones, and wood is placed in the walls, and this work is done speedily, and prospering in their hand.
Then we have asked of these elders, thus we have said to them, Who hath made for you a decree this house to build, and this wall to finish?
And also their names we have asked of them, to let thee know, that we might write the names of the men who [are] at their head.
'And thus they have returned us word, saying, We [are] servants of the God of heaven and earth, and are building the house that was built many years before this, that a great king of Israel built and finished:
but after that our fathers made the God of heaven angry, he gave them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon the Chaldean, and this house he destroyed, and the people he removed to Babylon;
but in the first year of Cyrus king of Babylon, Cyrus the king made a decree to build this house of God,
and also, the vessels of the house of God, of gold and silver, that Nebuchadnezzar had taken forth out of the temple that [is] in Jerusalem, and brought them to the temple of Babylon, them hath Cyrus the king brought forth out of the temple of Babylon, and they have been given to [one], Sheshbazzar [is] his name, whom he made governor,
and said to him, These vessels lift up, go, put them down in the temple that [is] in Jerusalem, and the house of God is builded on its place.
Then hath this Sheshbazzar come — he hath laid the foundations of the house of God that [is] in Jerusalem, and from thence even till now it hath been building, and is not finished.
'And now, if to the king it be good, let search be made in the treasure-house of the king, that [is] there in Babylon, whether it be that of Cyrus the king there was made a decree to build this house of God in Jerusalem, and the will of the king concerning this thing he doth send unto us.'
Then Darius the king made a decree, and they sought in the house of the books of the treasuries placed there in Babylon,
and there hath been found at Achmetha, in a palace that [is] in the province of Media, a roll, and a record thus written within it [is]:
'In the first year of Cyrus the king, Cyrus the king hath made a decree concerning the house of God in Jerusalem: the house let be builded in the place where they are sacrificing sacrifices, and its foundations strongly laid; its height sixty cubits, its breadth sixty cubits;
three rows of rolled stones, and a row of new wood, and the outlay let be given out of the king's house.
'And also, the vessels of the house of God, of gold and silver, that Nebuchadnezzar took forth out of the temple that [is] in Jerusalem, and brought to Babylon, let be given back, and go to the temple that [is] in Jerusalem, [each] to its place, and put [them] down in the house of God.
'Now, Tatnai, governor beyond the river, Shethar-Boznai, and their companions, the Apharsachites, who [are] beyond the river, be ye far from hence;
let alone the work of this house of God, let the governor of the Jews, and the elders of the Jews, build this house of God on its place.
'And by me is made a decree concerning that which ye do with the elders of these Jews to build this house of God, that of the riches of the king, that [are] of the tribute beyond the river, speedily let the outlay be given to these men, that they cease not;
and what they are needing — both young bullocks, and rams, and lambs for burnt-offerings to the God of heaven, wheat, salt, wine, and oil according to the saying of the priests who [are] in Jerusalem — let be given to them day by day without fail,
that they be bringing near sweet savours to the God of heaven, and praying for the life of the king, and of his sons.
'And by me is made a decree, that any one who changeth this thing, let wood be pulled down from his house, and being raised up, let him be smitten on it, and his house let be made a dunghill for this.
And God, who caused His name to dwell there, doth cast down any king and people that putteth forth his hand to change, to destroy this house of God that [is] in Jerusalem; I Darius have made a decree; speedily let it be done.'
Then Tatnai, governor beyond the river, Shethar-Boznai, and their companions, according to that which Darius the king hath sent, so they have done speedily;
and the elders of the Jews are building and prospering through the prophecy of Haggai the prophet, and Zechariah son of Iddo, and they have built and finished by the decree of the God of Israel, and by the decree of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaxerxes king of Persia.
And this house hath gone out till the third day of the month Adar, that is [in] the sixth year of the reign of Darius the king.
And the sons of Israel have made, [and] the priests, and the Levites, and the rest of the sons of the captivity, a dedication of this house of God with joy,
and have brought near for the dedication of this house of God, bullocks a hundred, rams two hundred, lambs four hundred; and young he-goats for a sin-offering for all Israel, twelve, according to the number of the tribes of Israel;
and they have established the priests in their divisions, and the Levites in their courses, over the service of God that [is] in Jerusalem, as it is written in the book of Moses.
And the sons of the captivity make the passover on the fourteenth of the first month,
for the priests and the Levites have been purified together — all of them [are] pure — and they slaughter the passover for all the sons of the captivity, and for their brethren the priests, and for themselves.
And the sons of Israel, those returning from the captivity, and every one who is separated from the uncleanness of the nations of the land unto them, to seek to Jehovah, God of Israel, do eat,
and they make the feast of unleavened things seven days with joy, for Jehovah made them to rejoice, and turned round the heart of the king of Asshur unto them, to strengthen their hands in the work of the house of God, the God of Israel.
And after these things, in the reign of Artaxerxes king of Persia, Ezra son of Seraiah, son of Azariah, son of Hilkiah,
son of Shallum, son of Zadok, son of Ahitub,
son of Amariah, son of Azariah, son of Meraioth,
son of Zerahiah, son of Uzzi, son of Bukki,
son of Abishua, son of Phinehas, son of Eleazar, son of Aaron the head priest;
Ezra himself hath come up from Babylon, and he [is] a scribe ready in the law of Moses, that Jehovah God of Israel gave, and the king giveth to him — according to the hand of Jehovah his God upon him — all his request.
And there go up of the sons of Israel, and of the priests, and the Levites, and the singers, and the gatekeepers, and the Nethinim, unto Jerusalem, in the seventh year of Artaxerxes the king.
And he cometh in to Jerusalem in the fifth month, that [is in] the seventh year of the king,
for on the first of the month he hath founded the ascent from Babylon, and on the first of the fifth month he hath come in unto Jerusalem, according to the good hand of his God upon him,
for Ezra hath prepared his heart to seek the law of Jehovah, and to do, and to teach in Israel statute and judgment.
And this [is] a copy of the letter that the king Artaxerxes gave to Ezra the priest, the scribe, a scribe of the words of the commands of Jehovah, and of His statutes on Israel:
'Artaxerxes, king of kings, to Ezra the priest, a perfect scribe of the law of the God of heaven, and at such a time:
By me hath been made a decree that every one who is willing, in my kingdom, of the people of Israel and of its priests and Levites, to go to Jerusalem with thee, doth go;
because that from the king and his seven counsellors thou art sent, to inquire concerning Judah and concerning Jerusalem, with the law of God that [is] in thy hand,
and to carry silver and gold that the king and his counsellors willingly offered to the God of Israel, whose tabernacle [is] in Jerusalem,
and all the silver and gold that thou findest in all the province of Babylon, with the free-will offerings of the people, and of the priests, offering willingly, for the house of their God that [is] in Jerusalem,
therefore thou dost speedily buy with this money, bullocks, rams, lambs, and their presents, and their libations, and dost bring them near to the altar of the house of your God that [is] in Jerusalem,
and that which to thee and to thy brethren is good to do with the rest of the silver and gold, according to the will of your God ye do.'
'And the vessels that are given to thee, for the service of the house of thy God, make perfect before the God of Jerusalem;
and the rest of the needful things of the house of thy God, that it falleth to thee to give, thou dost give from the treasure-house of the king.
'And by me — I Artaxerxes the king — is made a decree to all treasurers who [are] beyond the river, that all that Ezra the priest, scribe of the law of the God of heaven, doth ask of you, be done speedily:
Unto silver a hundred talents, and unto wheat a hundred cors, and unto wine a hundred baths, and unto oil a hundred baths, and salt without reckoning;
all that [is] by the decree of the God of heaven, let be done diligently for the house of the God of heaven; for why is there wrath against the kingdom of the king and his sons?
'And to you we are making known, that upon any of the priests and Levites, singers, gatekeepers, Nethinim, and servants of the house of God, tribute and custom there is no authority to lift up.
'And thou, Ezra, according to the wisdom of thy God, that [is] in thy hand, appoint magistrates and judges who may be judges to all the people who are beyond the river, to all knowing the law of thy God, and he who hath not known ye cause to know;
and any who doth not do the law of thy God, and the law of the king, speedily is judgment done upon him, whether to death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of riches, and to bonds.'
Blessed [is] Jehovah, God of our fathers, who hath given such a thing as this in the heart of the king, to beautify the house of Jehovah that [is] in Jerusalem,
and unto me hath stretched out kindness before the king and his counsellors, and before all the mighty heads of the king: and I have strengthened myself as the hand of Jehovah my God [is] upon me, and I gather out of Israel heads to go up with me.
And these [are] heads of their fathers, and the genealogy of those going up with me, in the reign of Artaxerxes the king, from Babylon.
From the sons of Phinehas: Gershom; from the sons of Ithamar: Daniel; from the sons of David: Hattush;
from the sons of Shechaniah, from the sons of Pharosh: Zechariah, and with him, reckoning themselves by genealogy, of males a hundred and fifty.
From the sons of Pahath-Moab: Elihoenai son of Zerahiah, and with him two hundred who are males.
From the sons of Shechaniah: the son of Jahaziel, and with him three hundred who are males.
And from the sons of Adin: Ebed son of Jonathan, and with him fifty who are males.
And from the sons of Elam: Jeshaiah son of Athaliah, and with him seventy who are males.
And from the sons of Shephatiah: Zebadiah son of Michael, and with him eighty who are males.
From the sons of Joab: Obadiah son of Jehiel, and with him two hundred and eighteen who are males.
And from the sons of Shelomith, the son of Josiphiah, and with him a hundred and sixty who are males.
And from the sons of Bebai: Zechariah son of Bebai, and with him twenty and eight who are males.
And from the sons of Azgad: Johanan son of Hakkatan, and with him a hundred and ten who are males.
And from the younger sons of Adonikam — and these [are] their names — Eliphelet, Jeiel, and Shemaiah, and with them sixty who are males.
And from the sons of Bigvai, Uthai and Zabbud, and with them seventy who are males.
And I gather them unto the river that is going unto Ahava, and we encamp there three days; and I consider about the people, and about the priests, and of the sons of Levi I have found none there;
and I send for Eliezer, for Ariel, for Shemaiah, and for Elnathan, and for Jarib, and for Elnathan, and for Nathan, and for Zechariah, and for Meshullam, heads, and for Joiarib, and for Elnathan, men of understanding;
and I charge them for Iddo the head, in the place Casiphia, and put in their mouth words to speak unto Iddo, [and] his brethren the Nethinim, in the place Casiphia, to bring to us ministrants for the house of our God.
And they bring to us, according to the good hand of our God upon us, a man of understanding, of the sons of Mahli, son of Levi, son of Israel, and Sherebiah, and his sons, and his brethren, eighteen;
and Hashabiah, and with him Jeshaiah, of the sons of Merari, his brethren, and their sons, twenty;
and from the Nethinim, whom David and the heads gave for the service of the Levites, two hundred and twenty Nethinim, all of them defined by name.
And I proclaim there a fast, by the river Ahava, to afflict ourselves before our God, to seek from Him a right way for us, and for our infants, and for all our substance,
for I was ashamed to ask from the king a force and horsemen to help us because of the enemy in the way, for we spake to the king, saying, 'The hand of our God [is] upon all seeking Him for good, and His strength and His wrath [is] upon all forsaking Him.'
And we fast, and seek from our God for this, and He is entreated of us.
And I separate from the heads of the priests, twelve, even Sherebiah, Hashabiah, and with them of their brethren ten,
and I weigh to them the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, a heave-offering of the house of our God, that the king, and his counsellors, and his heads, and all Israel — those present — lifted up;
and I weigh to their hand, of silver, talents six hundred and fifty, and of vessels of silver a hundred talents, of gold a hundred talents,
and basins of gold twenty, of a thousand drams, and two vessels of good shining brass, desirable as gold.
And I say unto them, 'Ye [are] holy to Jehovah, and the vessels [are] holy, and the silver and the gold [are] a willing-offering to Jehovah, God of your fathers;
watch, and keep, till ye weigh before the heads of the priests, and of the Levites, and the heads of the fathers of Israel, in Jerusalem, in the chambers of the house of Jehovah.'
And the priests and the Levites took the weight of the silver, and of the gold, and of the vessels, to bring to Jerusalem to the house of our God.
And we journey from the river Ahava, on the twelfth of the first month, to go to Jerusalem, and the hand of our God hath been upon us, and He delivereth us from the hand of the enemy and the lier in wait by the way;
and we come in to Jerusalem, and dwell there three days.
And on the fourth day hath been weighed the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, in the house of our God, unto the hand of Meremoth son of Uriah the priest, and with him Eleazar son of Phinehas, and with them Jozabad son of Jeshua, and Noadiah son of Binnui, the Levites:
by number, by weight of every one, and all the weight is written at that time.
Those coming in of the captives — sons of the removal — have brought near burnt-offerings to the God of Israel, bullocks twelve, for all Israel, rams ninety and six, lambs seventy and seven, young he-goats for a sin-offering twelve — the whole a burnt-offering to Jehovah;
and they give the laws of the king to the lieutenants of the king and the governors beyond the river, and they have lifted up the people and the house of God.
And at the completion of these things, drawn nigh unto me have the heads, saying, 'The people of Israel, and the priests, and the Levites, have not been separated from the peoples of the lands, as to their abominations, even the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Perizzite, the Jebusite, the Ammonite, the Moabite, the Egyptian, and the Amorite,
for they have taken of their daughters to them, and to their sons, and the holy seed have mingled themselves among the peoples of the lands, and the hand of the heads and of the seconds have been first in this trespass.'
And at my hearing this word, I have rent my garment and my upper robe, and pluck out of the hair of my head, and of my beard, and sit astonished,
and unto me are gathered every one trembling at the words of the God of Israel, because of the trespass of the removal, and I am sitting astonished till the present of the evening.
And at the present of the evening I have risen from mine affliction, and at my rending my garment and my upper robe, then I bow down on my knees, and spread out my hands unto Jehovah my God,
and say, 'O my God, I have been ashamed, and have blushed to lift up, O my God, my face unto Thee, for our iniquities have increased over the head, and our guilt hath become great unto the heavens.
'From the days of our fathers we [are] in great guilt unto this day, and in our iniquities we have been given — we, our kings, our priests — into the hand of the kings of the lands, with sword, with captivity, and with spoiling, and with shame of face, as [at] this day.
'And now, as a small moment hath grace been from Jehovah our God, to leave to us an escape, and to give to us a nail in His holy place, by our God's enlightening our eyes, and by giving us a little quickening in our servitude;
for servants we [are], and in our servitude our God hath not forsaken us, and stretcheth out unto us kindness before the kings of Persia, to give to us a quickening to lift up the house of our God, and to cause its wastes to cease, and to give to us a wall in Judah and in Jerusalem.
'And now, what do we say, O our God, after this? for we have forsaken Thy commands,
that Thou hast commanded by the hands of thy servants the prophets, saying, The land into which ye are going to possess it, [is] a land of impurity, by the impurity of the people of the lands, by their abominations with which they have filled it — from mouth unto mouth — by their uncleanness;
and now, your daughters ye do not give to their sons, and their daughters ye do not take to your sons, and ye do not seek their peace, and their good — unto the age, so that ye are strong, and have eaten the good of the land, and given possession to your sons unto the age.
'And after all that hath come upon us for our evil works, and for our great guilt (for Thou, O our God, hast kept back of the rod from our iniquities, and hast given to us an escape like this),
do we turn back to break Thy commands, and to join ourselves in marriage with the people of these abominations? art not Thou angry against us — even to consumption — till there is no remnant and escaped part?
'O Jehovah, God of Israel, righteous [art] Thou, for we have been left an escape, as [it is] this day; lo, we [are] before Thee in our guilt, for there is none to stand before Thee concerning this.'
And at Ezra's praying, and at his making confession, weeping and casting himself down before the house of God, there have been gathered unto him out of Israel an assembly very great — men and women and children — for the people have wept, multiplying weeping.
And Shechaniah son of Jehiel, of the sons of Elam, answereth and saith to Ezra, 'We — we have trespassed against our God, and we settle strange women of the peoples of the land; and now there is hope for Israel concerning this,
and now, let us make a covenant with our God, to cause all the women to go out, and that which is born of them, by the counsel of the Lord, and of those trembling at the command of our God, and according to law it is done;
rise, for on thee [is] the matter, and we [are] with thee; be strong, and do.'
And Ezra riseth, and causeth the heads of the priests, the Levites, and all Israel, to swear to do according to this word — and they swear.
And Ezra riseth from before the house of God, and goeth unto the chamber of Jehohanan son of Eliashib; yea, he goeth there, bread he hath not eaten, and water he hath not drunk, for he is mourning because of the trespass of the removal.
And they cause a voice to pass over into Judah and Jerusalem, to all sons of the removal, to be gathered to Jerusalem,
and every one who cometh not in by the third day, according to the counsel of the heads and of the elders, all his substance is devoted, and himself separated from the assembly of the removal.
And gathered are all the men of Judah and Benjamin to Jerusalem by the third day, it [is] the ninth month, on the twentieth of the month, and all the people sit in the broad place of the house of God, trembling on account of the matter and of the showers.
And Ezra the priest riseth, and saith unto them, 'Ye — ye have trespassed, and ye settle strange women, to add to the guilt of Israel;
and, now, make confession to Jehovah, God of your fathers, and do His good pleasure, and be separated from the peoples of the land, and from the strange women.'
And all the assembly answer and say [with] a great voice, 'Right; according to thy word — on us to do;
but the people [are] many, and [it is] the time of showers, and there is no power to stand without, and the work [is] not for one day, nor for two, for we have multiplied to transgress in this thing.
'Let, we pray thee, our heads of all the assembly stand, and all who [are] in our cities, who have settled strange wives, do come in at the times appointed, and with them the elders of city and city, and its judges, till the turning back of the fury of the wrath of our God from us, for this thing.'
Only Jonathan son of Asahel, and Jahaziah son of Tikvah, stood against this, and Meshullam, and Shabbethai the Levite, helped them.
And the sons of the removal do so, and Ezra the priest, [and] men, heads of the fathers, for the house of their fathers, are separated, even all of them by name, and they sit on the first day of the tenth month, to examine the matter;
and they finish with all the men who have settled strange women unto the first day of the first month.
And there are found of the sons of the priests that have settled strange women: of the sons of Jeshua son of Jozadak, and his brethren, Maaseiah, and Eliezer, and Jarib, and Gedaliah;
and they give their hand to send out their wives, and, being guilty, a ram of the flock, for their guilt.
And of the sons of Immer: Hanani and Zebadiah;
and of the sons of Harim: Masseiah, and Elijah, and Shemaiah, and Jehiel, and Uzziah;
and of the sons of Pashhur: Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethaneel, Jozabad, and Elasah.
And of the Levites: Jozabad, and Shimei, and Kelaiah — he [is] Kelita, — Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer.
And of the singers: Eliashib. And of the gatekeepers: Shallum, and Telem, and Uri.
And of Israel: of the sons of Parosh: Ramiah, and Jeziah, and Malchijah, and Miamin, and Eleazar, and Malchijah, and Benaiah.
And of the sons of Elam: Mattaniah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, and Abdi, and Jeremoth, and Elijah.
And of the sons of Zattu: Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah, and Jeremoth, and Zabad, and Aziza.
And of the sons of Bebai: Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, Athlai.
And of the sons of Bani: Meshullam, Malluch, and Adaiah, Jashub, and Sheal, and Ramoth.
And of the sons of Pahath-Moab: Adna, and Chelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattaniah, Bezaleel, and Binnui, and Manasseh.
And of the sons of Harim: Eliezer, Ishijah, Malchiah, Shemaiah, Shimeon,
Benjamin, Malluch, Shemariah.
Of the sons of Hashum: Mattenai, Mattathah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Manasseh, Shimei.
Of the sons of Bani: Maadai, Amram, and Uel,
Benaiah, Bedeiah, Cheluhu,
Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib,
Mattaniah, Mattenai, and Jaasau,
and Bani, and Binnui, Shimei,
and Shelemiah, and Nathan, and Adaiah,
Machnadbai, Shashai, Sharai,
Azareel, and Shelemiah, Shemariah,
Shallum, Amariah, Joseph.
Of the sons of Nebo: Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jadau, and Joel, Benaiah;
all these have taken strange women, and there are of them women — who adopt sons.
Words of Nehemiah son of Hachaliah. And it cometh to pass, in the month of Chisleu, the twentieth year, and I have been in Shushan the palace,
and come in doth Hanani, one of my brethren, he and men of Judah, and I ask them concerning the Jews, the escaped part that have been left of the captivity, and concerning Jerusalem;
and they say to me, 'Those left, who have been left of the captivity there in the province, [are] in great evil, and in reproach, and the wall of Jerusalem is broken down, and its gates have been burnt with fire.'
And it cometh to pass, at my hearing these words, I have sat down, and I weep and mourn [for] days, and I am fasting and praying before the God of the heavens.
And I say, 'I beseech thee, O Jehovah, God of the heavens, God, the great and the fearful, keeping the covenant and kindness for those loving Him, and for those keeping His commands,
let Thine ear be, I pray Thee, attentive, and Thine eyes open, to hearken unto the prayer of Thy servant, that I am praying before Thee to-day, by day and by night, concerning the sons of Israel Thy servants, and confessing concerning the sins of the sons of Israel, that we have sinned against Thee; yea, I and the house of my father have sinned;
we have acted very corruptly against Thee, and have not kept the commands, and the statutes, and the judgments, that Thou didst command Moses Thy servant.
'Remember, I pray Thee, the word that Thou didst command Moses Thy servant, saying, Ye — ye trespass — I scatter you among peoples;
and ye have turned back unto Me, and kept My commands, and done them — if your outcast is in the end of the heavens, thence I gather them, and have brought them in unto the place that I have chosen to cause My name to tabernacle there.
And they [are] Thy servants, and Thy people, whom Thou hast ransomed by Thy great power, and by Thy strong hand.
'I beseech Thee, O Lord, let, I pray Thee, Thine ear be attentive unto the prayer of Thy servant, and unto the prayer of Thy servants, those delighting to fear Thy Name; and give prosperity, I pray Thee, to Thy servant to-day, and give him for mercies before this man;' and I have been butler to the king.
And it cometh to pass, in the month of Nisan, the twentieth year of Artaxerxes the king, wine [is] before him, and I lift up the wine, and give to the king, and I had not been sad before him;
and the king saith to me, 'Wherefore [is] thy face sad, and thou not sick? this is nothing except sadness of heart;' and I fear very much,
and say to the king, 'Let the king to the age live! wherefore should not my face be sad, when the city, the place of the graves of my fathers, [is] a waste, and its gates have been consumed with fire?'
And the king saith to me, 'For what art thou seeking?' and I pray unto the God of the heavens,
and say to the king, 'If to the king [it be] good, and if thy servant be pleasing before thee, that thou send me unto Judah, unto the city of the graves of my fathers, and I built it.'
And the king saith to me (and the queen is sitting near him), 'How long is thy journey? and when dost thou return?' and it is good before the king, and he sendeth me away, and I set to him a time.
And I say to the king, 'If to the king [it be] good, letters let be given to me for the governors beyond the River, that they let me pass over till that I come in unto Judah:
and a letter unto Asaph, keeper of the paradise that the king hath, that he give to me trees for beams [for] the gates of the palace that the house hath, and for the wall of the city, and for the house into which I enter;' and the king giveth to me, according to the good hand of my God upon me.
And I come in unto the governors beyond the River, and give to them the letters of the king; and the king sendeth with me heads of a force, and horsemen;
and Sanballat the Horonite heareth, and Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, and it is evil to them — a great evil — that a man hath come in to seek good for the sons of Israel.
And I come in unto Jerusalem, and I am there three days,
and I rise by night, I and a few men with me, and have not declared to a man what my God is giving unto my heart to do for Jerusalem, and there is no beast with me except the beast on which I am riding.
And I go out through the gate of the valley by night, and unto the front of the fountain of the dragon, and unto the gate of the dunghill, and I am measuring about the walls of Jerusalem, that are broken down, and its gates consumed with fire.
And I pass over unto the gate of the fountain, and unto the pool of the king, and there is no place for the beast under me to pass over,
and I am going up through the brook by night, and am measuring about the wall, and turn back, and come in through the gate of the valley, and turn back.
And the prefects have not known whither I have gone, and what I am doing; and to the Jews, and to the priests, and to the freemen, and to the prefects, and to the rest of those doing the work, hitherto I have not declared [it];
and I say unto them, 'Ye are seeing the evil that we are in, in that Jerusalem [is] waste, and its gates have been burnt with fire; come and we build the wall of Jerusalem, and we are not any more a reproach.'
And I declare to them the hand of my God that is good upon me, and also the words of the king that he said to me, and they say, 'Let us rise, and we have built;' and they strengthen their hands for good.
And Sanballat the Horonite heareth, and Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, and Geshem the Arabian, and they mock at us, and despise us, and say, 'What [is] this thing that ye are doing? against the king are ye rebelling?'
And I return them word, and say to them, 'The God of the heavens — He doth give prosperity to us, and we His servants rise and have built; and to you there is no portion, and right, and memorial in Jerusalem.'
And Eliashib the high priest riseth, and his brethren the priests, and they build the sheep-gate; they have sanctified it, and set up its doors, even unto the tower of Meah they have sanctified it, unto the tower of Hananeel;
and by his hand have men of Jericho built; and by their hand hath Zaccur son of Imri built;
and the fish-gate have sons of Hassenaah built, they have walled it, and set up its doors, its locks, and its bars.
And by their hand hath Merimoth son of Urijah, son of Koz, strengthened; and by his hand hath Meshullam son of Berechiah, son of Meshezabeel, strengthened; and by his hand hath Zadok son of Baana strengthened;
and by his hand have the Tekoites strengthened, and their honourable ones have not brought in their neck to the service of their Lord.
And the old gate have Jehoiada son of Paseah, and Meshullam son of Besodeiah, strengthened; they have walled it, and set up its doors, and its locks, and its bars.
And by their hand hath Melatiah the Gibeonite strengthened, and Jadon the Meronothite, men of Gibeon and of Mizpah, to the throne of the governor beyond the River.
By his hand hath Uzziel son of Harhaiah of the refiners strengthened; and by his hand hath Hananiah son of [one of] the compounders strengthened; and they leave Jerusalem unto the broad wall.
And by their hand hath Rephaiah son of Hur, head of the half of the district of Jerusalem, strengthened.
And by their hand hath Jedaiah son of Harumaph strengthened, and over-against his own house; and by his hand hath Hattush son of Hashabniah strengthened.
A second measure hath Malchijah son of Harim strengthened, and Hashub son of Pahath-Moab, even the tower of the furnaces.
And by his hand hath Shallum son of Halohesh, head of the half of the district of Jerusalem, strengthened, he and his daughters.
The gate of the valley hath Hanun strengthened, and the inhabitants of Zanoah; they have built it, and set up its doors, its locks, and its bars, and a thousand cubits in the wall unto the dung-gate.
And the dung-gate hath Malchijah son of Rechab, head of the district of Beth-Haccerem, strengthened; he doth built it, and set up its doors, its locks, and its bars.
And the gate of the fountain hath Shallum son of Col-Hozeh, head of the district of Mizpah, strengthened: he doth build it, and cover it, and set up its doors, its locks, and its bars, and the wall of the pool of Siloah, to the garden of the king, and unto the steps that are going down from the city of David.
After him hath Nehemiah son of Azbuk, head of the half of the district of Beth-Zur, strengthened, unto over-against the graves of David, and unto the pool that is made, and unto the house of the mighty ones.
After him have the Levites strengthened, [and] Rehum son of Bani: by his hand hath Hashabiah, head of the half of the district of Keilah, strengthened, for his district.
After him have their brethren strengthened, [and] Bavvai son of Henadad, head of the half of the district of Keilah.
And Ezer son of Jeshua, head of Mizpah, doth strengthen, by his hand, a second measure, from over-against the ascent of the armoury at the angle.
After him hath Baruch son of Zabbai hastened to strengthen a second measure from the angle unto the opening of the house of Eliashib the high priest.
After him hath Meremoth son of Urijah, son of Koz, strengthened, a second measure, from the opening of the house of Eliashib even unto the completion of the house of Eliashib.
And after him have the priests, men of the circuit, strengthened.
After them hath Benjamin strengthened, and Hashub, over-against their house; after him hath Azariah son of Maaseiah, son of Ananiah, strengthened, near his house.
After him hath Binnui son of Henadad strengthened, a second measure, from the house of Azariah unto the angle, and unto the corner.
Palal son of Uzai, from over-against the angle, and the tower that is going out from the upper house of the king that [is] at the court of the prison; after him Pedaiah son of Parosh.
And the Nethinim have been dwelling in Ophel, unto over-against the water-gate at the east, and the tower that goeth out.
After him have the Tekoites strengthened, a second measure, from over-against the great tower that goeth out, and unto the wall of Ophel.
From above the horse-gate have the priests strengthened, each over-against his house.
After them hath Zadok son of Immer strengthened, over against his house; and after him hath Shemaiah son of Shechaniah, keeper of the east gate, strengthened.
After him hath Hananiah son of Shelemiah strengthened, and Hanun the sixth son of Zalaph, a second measure; after him hath Meshullam son of Berechiah strengthened, over-against his chamber.
After him hath Malchijah son of the refiner strengthened, unto the house of the Nethinim, and of the merchants, over-against the gate of the Miphkad, and unto the ascent of the corner.
And between the ascent of the corner and the sheep-gate, have the refiners and the merchants strengthened.
And it cometh to pass, when Sanballat hath heard that we are building the wall, that it is displeasing to him, and he is very angry and mocketh at the Jews,
and saith before his brethren and the force of Samaria, yea, he saith, 'What [are] the weak Jews doing? are they left to themselves? do they sacrifice? do they complete in a day? do they revive the stones out of the heaps of the rubbish? — and they burnt!'
And Tobiah the Ammonite [is] by him and saith, 'Also, that which they are building — if a fox doth go up, then it hath broken down their stone wall.'
Hear, O our God, for we have been despised; and turn back their reproach on their own head, and give them for a spoil in a land of captivity;
and do not cover over their iniquity, and their sin from before Thee let not be blotted out, for they have provoked to anger — over-against those building.
And we build the wall, and all the wall is joined — unto its half, and the people have a heart to work.
And it cometh to pass, when Sanballat hath heard, and Tobiah, and the Arabians, and the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites, that lengthening hath gone up to the walls of Jerusalem, that the breeches have begun to be stopped, then it is very displeasing to them,
and they conspire, all of them together, to come in to fight against Jerusalem, and to do to it injury.
And we pray unto our God, and appoint a watch against them, by day and by night, because of them.
And Judah saith, 'The power of the burden-bearers hath become feeble, and the rubbish [is] abundant, and we are not able to build on the wall.'
And our adversaries say, 'They do not know, nor see, till that we come in to their midst, and have slain them, and caused the work to cease.'
And it cometh to pass, when the Jews have come who are dwelling near them, that they say to us ten times from all the places whither ye return — [they are] against us.
And I appoint at the lowest of the places, at the back of the wall, in the clear places, yea, I appoint the people, by their families, with their swords, their spears, and their bows.
And I see, and rise up, and say unto the freemen, and unto the prefects, and unto the rest of the people, 'Be not afraid of them; the Lord, the great and the fearful, remember ye, and fight for your brethren, your sons, and your daughters, your wives, and your houses.'
And it cometh to pass, when our enemies have heard that it hath been known to us, and God doth frustrate their counsel, and we turn back, all of us, unto the wall, each unto his work;
yea, it cometh to pass, from that day, half of my servants are working in the business, and half of them are keeping hold of both the spears, the shields, and the bows, and the coats of mail; and the heads [are] behind all the house of Judah.
The builders on the wall, and the bearers of the burden, those lading, [each] with one of his hands is working in the business, and one is laying hold of the missile.
And the builders [are] each with his sword, girded on his loins, and building, and he who is blowing with a trumpet [is] beside me.
And I say unto the freemen, and unto the prefects, and unto the rest of the people, 'The work is abundant, and large, and we are separated on the wall, far off one from another;
in the place that ye hear the voice of the trumpet thither ye are gathered unto us; our God doth fight for us.'
And we are working in the business, and half of them are keeping hold of the spears, from the going up of the dawn till the coming forth of the stars.
Also, at that time I said to the people, 'Let each with his servant lodge in the midst of Jerusalem, and they have been to us by night a guard, and by day [for] the work:'
and there are none — I and my brethren and my servants, the men of the guard who [are] after me — there are none of us putting off our garments, each [hath] his vessel of water.
And there is a great cry of the people and their wives, concerning their brethren the Jews,
yea, there are who are saying, 'Our sons, and our daughters, we — are many, and we receive corn, and eat, and live.'
And there are who are saying, 'Our fields, and our vineyards, and our houses, we are pledging, and we receive corn for the famine.'
And there are who are saying, 'We have borrowed money for the tribute of the king, [on] our fields, and our vineyards;
and now, as the flesh of our brethren [is] our flesh, as their sons [are] our sons, and lo, we are subduing our sons and our daughters for servants, and there are of our daughters subdued, and our hand hath no might, and our fields and our vineyards [are] to others.'
And it is very displeasing to me when I have heard their cry and these words,
and my heart reigneth over me, and I strive with the freemen, and with the prefects, and say to them, 'Usury one upon another ye are exacting;' and I set against them a great assembly,
and say to them, 'We have acquired our brethren the Jews, those sold to the nations, according to the ability that [is] in us, and ye also sell your brethren, and they have been sold to us!' and they are silent, and have not found a word.
And I say, 'Not good [is] the thing that ye are doing; in the fear of our God do ye not walk, because of the reproach of the nations our enemies?
And also, I, my brethren, and my servants, are exacting of them silver and corn; let us leave off, I pray you, this usury.
Give back, I pray you, to them, as to-day, their fields, their vineyards, their olive-yards, and their houses, and the hundredth [part] of the money, and of the corn, of the new wine, and of the oil, that ye are exacting of them.'
And they say, 'We give back, and of them we seek nothing; so we do as thou art saying.' And I call the priests, and cause them to swear to do according to this thing;
also, my lap I have shaken, and I say, 'Thus doth God shake out every man, who doth not perform this thing, from his house, and from his labour; yea, thus is he shaken out and empty;' and all the assembly say, 'Amen,' and praise Jehovah; and the people do according to this thing.
Also, from the day that he appointed me to be their governor in the land of Judah, from the twentieth year even unto the thirty and second year of Artaxerxes the king — twelve years — I, and my brethren, the bread of the governor have not eaten:
the former governors who [are] before me have made themselves heavy on the people, and take of them in bread and wine, besides in silver forty shekels; also, their servants have ruled over the people — and I have not done so, because of the fear of God.
And also, in the work of this wall I have done mightily, even a field we have not bought, and all my servants are gathered there for the work;
and of the Jews, and of the prefects, a hundred and fifty men, and those coming in unto us of the nations that [are] round about us, [are] at my table;
and that which hath been prepared for one day [is] one ox, six fat sheep, also fowls have been prepared for me, and once in ten days of all wines abundantly, and with this, the bread of the governor I have not sought, for heavy is the service on this people.
Remember for me, O my God, for good, all that I have done for this people.
And it cometh to pass, when it hath been heard by Sanballat, and Tobiah, and by Geshem the Arabian, and by the rest of our enemies, that I have builded the wall, and there hath not been left in it a breach, (also, till that time the doors I had not set up in the gates,)
that Sanballat sendeth, also Geshem, unto me, saying, 'Come and we meet together in the villages, in the valley of Ono;' and they are thinking to do to me evil.
And I send unto them messengers, saying, 'A great work I am doing, and I am not able to come down; why doth the work cease when I let it alone, and have come down unto you?'
and they send unto me, according to this word, four times, and I return them [word] according to this word.
And Sanballat sendeth unto me, according to this word, a fifth time, his servant, and an open letter in his hand;
it is written in it, 'Among the nations it hath been heard, and Gashmu is saying: Thou and the Jews are thinking to rebel, therefore thou art building the wall, and thou hast been to them for a king — according to these words!
And also, prophets thou hast appointed to call for thee in Jerusalem, saying, A king [is] in Judah, and now it is heard by the king according to these words; and now come, and we take counsel together.'
And I send unto him, saying, 'It hath not been according to these words that thou art saying, for from thine own heart thou art devising them;'
for all of them are making us afraid, saying, 'Their hands are too feeble for the work, and it is not done;' and now, strengthen Thou my hands.
And I have entered the house of Shemaiah son of Delaiah, son of Mehetabeel — and he is restrained — and he saith, 'Let us meet at the house of God, at the inside of the temple, and we shut the doors of the temple, for they are coming in to slay thee — yea, by night they are coming in to slay thee.'
And I say, 'A man such as I — doth he flee? and who as I, that doth go in unto the temple, and live? — I do not go in.'
And I discern, and lo, God hath not sent him, for in the prophecy he hath spoken unto me both Tobiah and Sanballat hired him,
so that he [is] an hireling, that I may fear and do so, and I had sinned, and it had been to them for an evil name that they may reproach me.
Be mindful, O my God, of Tobiah, and of Sanballat, according to these his works, and also, of Noadiah the prophetess, and of the rest of the prophets who have been making me afraid.
And the wall is completed in the twenty and fifth of Elul, on the fifty and second day;
and it cometh to pass, when all our enemies have heard, and all the nations who are round about us see, that they fall greatly in their own eyes, and know that by our God hath this work been done.
Also, in those days the freemen of Judah are multiplying their letters going unto Tobiah, and those of Tobiah are coming in unto them;
for many in Judah are sworn to him, for he [is] son-in-law to Shechaniah son of Arah, and Jehohanan his son hath taken the daughter of Meshullam son of Berechiah;
also, his good deeds they have been saying before me, and my words they have been taking out to him; letters hath Tobiah sent to make me afraid.
And it cometh to pass, when the wall hath been built, that I set up the doors, and the gatekeepers are appointed, and the singers, and the Levites,
and I charge Hanani my brother, and Hananiah head of the palace, concerning Jerusalem — for he [is] as a man of truth, and fearing God above many —
and I say to them, 'Let not the gates of Jerusalem be opened till the heat of the sun, and while they are standing by let them shut the doors, and fasten, and appoint guards of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, each in his guard, and each over-against his house.'
And the city [is] broad on both sides, and great, and the people [are] few in its midst, and there are no houses builded;
and my God putteth it unto my heart, and I gather the freeman, and the prefects, and the people, for the genealogy, and I find a book of the genealogy of those coming up at the beginning, and I find written in it: —
These [are] sons of the province, those coming up of the captives of the removal that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon removed — and they turn back to Jerusalem and to Judah, each to his city —
who are coming in with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, Baanah. Number of the men of the people of Israel:
Sons of Parosh: two thousand a hundred and seventy and two.
Sons of Shephatiah: three hundred seventy and two.
Sons of Arah: six hundred fifty and two.
Sons of Pahath-Moab, of the sons of Jeshua and Joab: two thousand and eight hundred [and] eighteen.
Sons of Elam: a thousand two hundred fifty and four.
Sons of Zattu: eight hundred forty and five.
Sons of Zaccai: seven hundred and sixty.
Sons of Binnui: six hundred forty and eight.
Sons of Bebai: six hundred twenty and eight.
Sons of Azgad: two thousand three hundred twenty and two.
Sons of Adonikam: six hundred sixty and seven.
Sons of Bigvai: two thousand sixty and seven.
Sons of Adin: six hundred fifty and five.
Sons of Ater of Hezekiah: ninety and eight.
Sons of Hashum: three hundred twenty and eight.
Sons of Bezai: three hundred twenty and four.
Sons of Hariph: a hundred [and] twelve.
Sons of Gibeon: ninety and five.
Men of Beth-Lehem and Netophah: a hundred eighty and eight.
Men of Anathoth: a hundred twenty and eight.
Men of Beth-Azmaveth: forty and two.
Men of Kirjath-Jearim, Chephirah, and Beeroth: seven hundred forty and three.
Men of Ramah and Gaba: six hundred twenty and one.
Men of Michmas: a hundred and twenty and two.
Men of Bethel and Ai: a hundred twenty and three.
Men of the other Nebo: fifty and two.
Sons of the other Elam: a thousand two hundred fifty and four.
Sons of Harim: three hundred and twenty.
Sons of Jericho: three hundred forty and five.
Sons of Lod, Hadid, and Ono: seven hundred and twenty and one.
Sons of Senaah: three thousand nine hundred and thirty.
The priests: sons of Jedaiah: of the house of Jeshua: nine hundred seventy and three;
sons of Immer: a thousand fifty and two;
sons of Pashur: a thousand two hundred forty and seven;
sons of Harim: a thousand and seventeen.
The Levites: sons of Jeshua, of Kadmiel: of sons of Hodevah: seventy and four.
The singers: sons of Asaph: a hundred forty and eight.
The gatekeepers: sons of Shallum, sons of Ater, sons of Talmon, sons of Akkub, sons of Hatita, sons of Shobai: a hundred thirty and eight.
The Nethinim: sons of Ziha, sons of Hasupha, sons of Tabbaoth,
sons of Keros, sons of Sia, sons of Padon,
sons of Lebanah, sons of Hagaba, sons of Shalmai,
sons of Hanan, sons of Giddel, sons of Gahar,
sons of Reaiah, sons of Rezin, sons of Nekoda,
sons of Gazzam, sons of Uzza, sons of Phaseah,
sons of Bezai, sons of Meunim, sons of Nephishesim,
sons of Bakbuk, sons of Hakupha, sons of Harhur,
sons of Bazlith, sons of Mehida, sons of Harsha,
sons of Barkos, sons of Sisera, sons of Tamah,
sons of Neziah, sons of Hatipha.
Sons of the servants of Solomon: sons of Sotai, sons of Sophereth, sons of Perida,
sons of Jaala, sons of Darkon, sons of Giddel,
sons of Shephatiah, sons of Hattil, sons of Pochereth of Zebaim, sons of Amon.
All the Nethinim and the sons of the servants of Solomon [are] three hundred ninety and two.
And these [are] those coming up from Tel-Melah, Tel-Harsha, Cherub, Addon, and Immer — and they have not been able to declare the house of their fathers, and their seed, whether they [are] of Israel —
sons of Delaiah, sons of Tobiah, sons of Nekoda, six hundred forty and two.
And of the priests: sons of Habaiah sons of Koz, sons of Barzillai, who hath taken from the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite a wife, and is called by their name.
These have sought their register among those reckoning themselves by genealogy, and it hath not been found, and they are redeemed from the priesthood,
and the Tirshatha saith to them that they eat not of the most holy things till the standing up of the priest with Urim and Thummim.
All the assembly together [is] four myriads two thousand three hundred and sixty,
apart from their servants and their handmaids — these [are] seven thousand three hundred thirty and seven; and of them [are] singers and songstresses, two hundred forty and five.
Their horses [are] seven hundred thirty and six; their mules, two hundred [and] forty and five; camels, four hundred thirty and five; asses, six thousand seven hundred and twenty.
And from the extremity of the heads of the fathers they have given to the work; the Tirshatha hath given to the treasure, of gold, drams a thousand, bowls fifty, priests' coats thirty and five hundred.
And of the heads of the fathers they have given to the treasure of the work, of gold, drams two myriads, and of silver, pounds two thousand and two hundred.
And that which the rest of the people have given [is] of gold, drams two myriads, and of silver, pounds two thousand, and of priests coats, sixty and seven.
And they dwell — the priests, and the Levites, and the gatekeepers, and the singers, and [some] of the people, and the Nethinim, and all Israel — in their cities, and the seventh month cometh, and the sons of Israel [are] in their cities.
And all the people are gathered as one man unto the broad place that [is] before the water-gate, and they say to Ezra the scribe to bring the book of the law of Moses, that Jehovah commanded Israel.
And Ezra the priest bringeth the law before the assembly, both of men and women, and every one intelligent to hear, on the first day of the seventh month,
and he readeth in it before the broad place that [is] before the water-gate, from the light till the middle of the day, over-against the men, and the women, and those intelligent, and the ears of all the people [are] unto the book of the law.
And Ezra the scribe standeth on a tower of wood that they made for the purpose, and Mattithiah standeth near him, and Shema, and Anaiah, and Urijah, and Hilkiah, and Maaseiah, on his right; and on his left Pedaiah, and Mishael, and Malchijah, and Hashum, and Hashbaddana, Zechariah, Meshullam.
And Ezra openeth the book before the eyes of all the people — for above all the people he hath been — and at his opening [it] all the people have stood up,
and Ezra blesseth Jehovah, the great God, and all the people answer, 'Amen, Amen,' with lifting up of their hands, and they bow and do obeisance to Jehovah — faces to the earth.
And Jeshua, and Bani, and Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodijah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, and the Levites, giving the people understanding in the law, and the people, [are] on their station,
and they read in the book, in the law of God, explaining — so as to give the meaning, and they give understanding to the convocation.
And Nehemiah — he [is] the Tirshatha — saith (and Ezra the priest, the scribe, and the Levites who are instructing the people) to all the people, 'To-day is holy to Jehovah your God, do not mourn, nor weep:' for all the people are weeping at their hearing the words of the law.
And he saith to them, 'Go, eat fat things, and drink sweet things, and sent portions to him for whom nothing is prepared, for to-day [is] holy to our Lord, and be not grieved, for the joy of Jehovah is your strength.'
And the Levites are keeping all the people silent, saying, 'Be silent, for to-day [is] holy, and be not grieved.'
And all the people go to eat, and to drink, and to send portions, and to make great joy, because they have understood concerning the words that they made known to them.
And on the second day have been gathered heads of the fathers of all the people, the priests, and the Levites, unto Ezra the scribe, even to act wisely concerning the words of the law.
And they find written in the law that Jehovah commanded by the hand of Moses, that the sons of Israel dwell in booths in the feast, in the seventh month,
and that they proclaim and cause to pass over all their cities, (and in Jerusalem,) saying, 'Go ye out to the mount, and bring leaves of the olive, and leaves of the oil tree, and leaves of the myrtle, and leaves of the palms, and leaves of thick trees, to make booths as it is written.'
And the people go out, and bring in, and make for themselves booths, each on his roof, and in their courts, and in the courts of the house of God, and in the broad place of the water-gate, and in the broad place of the gate of Ephraim.
And they make — all the assembly of the captives of the captivity — booths, and they sit in booths; for the sons of Israel had not done, from the days of Jeshua son of Nun, so unto that day, and there is very great joy.
And he readeth in the book of the law of God day by day, from the first day till the last day, and they make a feast seven days, and on the eighth day a restraint, according to the ordinance.
And in the twenty and fourth day of this month have the sons of Israel been gathered, with fasting, and with sackcloth, and earth upon them;
and the seed of Israel are separated from all sons of a stranger, and stand and confess concerning their sins, and the iniquities of their fathers,
and rise up on their station, and read in the book of the law of Jehovah their God a fourth of the day, and a fourth they are confessing and bowing themselves to Jehovah their God.
And there stand up on the ascent, of the Levites, Jeshua, and Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, Chenani, and they cry with a loud voice unto Jehovah their God.
And the Levites say, [even] Jeshua, and Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabniah, Sherebiah, Hodijah, Shebaniah, Pethahiah, 'Rise, bless Jehovah your God, from the age unto the age, and they bless the name of Thine honour that [is] exalted above all blessing and praise.
Thou [art] He, O Jehovah, Thyself — Thou hast made the heavens, the heavens of the heavens, and all their host, the earth and all that [are] on it, the seas and all that [are] in them, and Thou art keeping all of them alive, and the host of the heavens to Thee are bowing themselves.
'Thou [art] He, O Jehovah God, who didst fix on Abraham, and didst bring him out from Ur of the Chaldeans, and didst make his name Abraham,
and didst find his heart stedfast before Thee, so as to make with him the covenant, to give the land of the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite, and the Girgashite, to give [it] to his seed. 'And Thou dost establish Thy words, for Thou [art] righteous,
and dost see the affliction of our fathers in Egypt, and their cry hast heard by the sea of Suph,
and dost give signs and wonders on Pharaoh, and on all his servants, and on all the people of his land, for Thou hast known that they have acted proudly against them, and Thou makest to Thee a name as [at] this day.
And the sea Thou hast cleaved before them, and they pass over into the midst of the sea on the dry land, and their pursuers Thou hast cast into the depths, as a stone, into the strong waters.
And by a pillar of cloud Thou hast led them by day, and by a pillar of fire by night, to lighten to them the way in which they go.
'And on mount Sinai Thou hast come down, even to speak with them from the heavens, and Thou dost give to them right judgments, and true laws, good statutes and commands.
And Thy holy sabbath Thou hast made known to them, and commands, and statutes, and law, Thou hast commanded for them, by the hand of Moses Thy servant;
and bread from the heavens Thou hast given to them for their hunger, and water from a rock hast brought out to them for their thirst, and dost say to them to go in to possess the land that Thou hast lifted up Thy hand to give to them.
'And they and our fathers have acted proudly, and harden their neck, and have not hearkened unto Thy commands,
yea, they refuse to hearken, and have not remembered Thy wonders that Thou hast done with them, and harden their neck and appoint a head, to turn back to their service, in their rebellion; and Thou [art] a God of pardons, gracious, and merciful, long-suffering, and abundant in kindness, and hast not forsaken them.
'Also, when they have made to themselves a molten calf, and say, this [is] thy god that brought thee up out of Egypt, and do great despisings,
and Thou, in Thine abundant mercies, hast not forsaken them in the wilderness — the pillar of the cloud hath not turned aside from off them by day, to lead them in the way, and the pillar of the fire by night, to give light to them and the way in which they go.
'And Thy good Spirit Thou hast given, to cause them to act wisely; and Thy manna Thou hast not withheld from their mouth, and water Thou hast given to them for their thirst,
and forty years Thou hast nourished them in a wilderness; they have not lacked; their garments have not worn out, and their feet have not swelled.
'And Thou givest to them kingdoms, and peoples, and dost apportion them to the corner, and they possess the land of Sihon, and the land of the king of Heshbon, and the land of Og king of Bashan.
And their sons Thou hast multiplied as the stars of the heavens, and bringest them in unto the land that Thou hast said to their fathers to go in to possess.
'And the sons come in, and possess the land, and Thou humblest before them the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, and givest them into their hand, and their kings, and the peoples of the land, to do with them according to their pleasure.
And they capture fenced cities, and fat ground, and possess houses full of all good, digged-wells, vineyards, and olive-yards, and fruit-trees in abundance, and they eat, and are satisfied, and become fat, and delight themselves in Thy great goodness.
'And they are disobedient, and rebel against Thee, and cast Thy law behind their back, and Thy prophets they have slain, who testified against them, to bring them back unto Thee, and they do great despisings,
and Thou givest them into the hand of their adversaries, and they distress them, and in the time of their distress they cry unto Thee, and Thou, from the heavens, dost hear, and, according to Thine abundant mercies, dost give to them saviours, and they save them out of the hand of their adversaries.
'And when they have rest, they turn back to do evil before Thee, and Thou dost leave them in the hand of their enemies, and they rule over them; and they turn back, and call Thee, and Thou from the heavens dost hear, and dost deliver them, according to Thy mercies, many times,
and dost testify against them, to bring them back unto Thy law; and they — they have acted proudly, and have not hearkened to Thy commands, and against Thy judgments have sinned, — which man doth and hath lived in them — and they give a refractory shoulder, and their neck have hardened, and have not hearkened.
'And Thou drawest over them many years, and testifiest against them by Thy Spirit, by the hand of Thy prophets, and they have not given ear, and Thou dost give them into the hand of peoples of the lands,
and in Thine abundant mercies Thou hast not made them a consumption, nor hast forsaken them; for a God, gracious and merciful, [art] Thou.
'And now, O our God — God, the great, the mighty, and the fearful, keeping the covenant and the kindness — let not all the travail that hath found us be little before Thee, for our kings, for our heads, and for our priests, and for our prophets, and for our fathers, and for all Thy people, from the days of the kings of Asshur unto this day;
and Thou [art] righteous concerning all that hath come upon us, for truth Thou hast done, and we have done wickedly;
and our kings, our heads, our priests, and our fathers, have not done Thy law, nor attended unto Thy commands, and to Thy testimonies, that Thou hast testified against them;
and they, in their kingdom, and in Thine abundant goodness, that Thou hast given to them, and in the land, the large and the fat, that Thou hast set before them, have not served Thee, nor turned back from their evil doings.
'Lo, we — to-day — [are] servants, and the land that Thou hast given to our fathers, to eat its fruit and its good — lo, we [are] servants on it,
and its increase it is multiplying to the kings whom Thou hast set over us in our sins; and over our bodies they are ruling, and over our cattle, according to their pleasure, and we [are] in great distress.
And for all this we are making a stedfast covenant, and are writing, and over him who is sealed [are] our heads, our Levites, our priests.'
And over those sealed [are] Nehemiah the Tirshatha, son of Hachaliah, and Zidkijah,
Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah,
Pashhur, Amariah, Malchijah,
Huttush, Shebaniah, Malluch,
Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah,
Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch,
Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin,
Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah; these [are] the priests.
And the Levites: both Jeshua son of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel;
and their brethren: Shebaniah, Hodijah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan,
Micha, Rehob, Hashabiah,
Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah,
Hodijah, Bani, Beninu.
Heads of the people: Parosh, Pahath-Moab, Elam, Zatthu, Bani,
Bunni, Azgad, Bebai,
Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin,
Ater, Hizkijah, Azzur,
Hodijah, Hashum, Bezai,
Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai,
Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir,
Meshezabeel, Zadok, Jaddua,
Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah,
Hoshea, Hananiah, Hashub,
Hallohesh, Pilha, Shobek,
Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah,
and Ahijah, Hanan, Anan,
Malluch, Harim, Baanah.
And the rest of the people, the priests, the Levites, the gatekeepers, the singers, the Nethinim, and every one who hath been separated from the peoples of the lands unto the law of God, their wives, their sons, and their daughters, every knowing intelligent one,
are laying hold on their brethren, their honourable ones, and coming in to an execration, and in to an oath, to walk in the law of God, that was given by the hand of Moses, servant of God, and to observe and to do all the commands of Jehovah our Lord, and His judgments, and His statutes;
and that we give not our daughters to the peoples of the land, and their daughters we take not to our sons;
and the peoples of the land who are bringing in the wares and any corn on the sabbath-day to sell, we receive not of them on the sabbath, and on a holy day, and we leave the seventh year, and usury on every hand.
And we have appointed for ourselves commands, to put on ourselves the third of a shekel in a year, for the service of the house of our God,
for bread of the arrangement, and the continual present, and the continual burnt-offering of the sabbaths, of the new moons, for appointed seasons, and for holy things, and for sin-offerings, to make atonement for Israel, even all the work of the house of our God.
And the lots we have caused to fall for the offering of wood, [among] the priests, the Levites, and the people, to bring in to the house of our God, by the house of our fathers, at times appointed, year by year, to burn on the altar of Jehovah our God, as it is written in the law,
and to bring in the first fruits of our ground, and the first fruits of all fruit of every tree, year by year, to the house of Jehovah,
and the firstlings of our sons, and of our cattle, as it is written in the law, and the firstlings of our herds and our flocks, to bring in to the house of our God, to the priests who are ministering in the house of our God.
And the beginning of our dough, and our heave-offerings, and the fruit of every tree, of new wine, and of oil, we bring in to the priests, unto the chambers of the house of our God, and the tithe of our ground to the Levites; and they — the Levites — have the tithes in all the cities of our tillage;
and the priest, son of Aaron, hath been with the Levites in the tithing of the Levites, and the Levites bring up the tithe of the tithe to the house of our God unto the chambers, to the treasure-house;
for unto the chambers do they bring in — the sons of Israel and the sons of Levi — the heave-offering of the corn, the new wine, and the oil, and there [are] vessels of the sanctuary, and the priests, those ministering, and the gatekeepers, and the singers, and we do not forsake the house of our God.
And the heads of the people dwell in Jerusalem, and the rest of the people have caused to fall lots to bring in one out of ten to dwell in Jerusalem the holy city, and nine parts in the cities,
and the people give a blessing to all the men who are offering themselves willingly to dwell in Jerusalem.
And these [are] heads of the province who have dwelt in Jerusalem, and in cities of Judah, they have dwelt each in his possession in their cities; Israel, the priests, and the Levites, and the Nethinim, and the sons of the servants of Solomon.
And in Jerusalem have dwelt of the sons of Judah, and of the sons of Benjamin. Of the sons of Judah: Athaiah son of Uzziah, son of Zechariah, son of Amariah, son of Shephatiah, son of Mahalaleel, of the sons of Perez;
and Masseiah son of Baruch, son of Col-Hozeh, son of Hazaiah, son of Adaiah, son of Joiarib, son of Zechariah, son of Shiloni;
all the sons of Perez who are dwelling in Jerusalem [are] four hundred sixty and eight, men of valour.
And these [are] sons of Benjamin: Sallu son of Meshullam, son of Joed, son of Pedaiah, son of Kolaiah, son of Maaseiah, son of Ithiel, son of Jesaiah;
and after him Gabbai, Sallai, nine hundred twenty and eight.
And Joel son of Zichri [is] inspector over them, and Judah son of Senuah [is] over the city — second.
Of the priests: Jedaiah son of Joiarib, Jachin,
Seraiah son of Hilkiah, son of Meshullam, son of Zadok, son of Meraioth, son of Ahitub, leader of the house of God,
and their brethren doing the work of the house [are] eight hundred twenty and two; and Adaiah son of Jeroham, son of Pelaliah, son of Amzi, son of Zechariah, son of Pashhur, son of Malchiah,
and his brethren, heads of fathers, two hundred forty and two; and Amashsai son of Azareel, son of Ahazai, son of Meshillemoth, son of Immer,
and their brethren, mighty of valour, a hundred twenty and eight; and an inspector over them [is] Zabdiel, son of [one of] the great men.
And of the Levites: Shemaiah son of Hashub, son of Azrikam, son of Hashabiah, son of Bunni,
and Shabbethai, and Jozabad, [are] over the outward work of the house of God, of the heads of the Levites,
and Mattaniah son of Micha, son of Zabdi, son of Asaph, [is] head — at the commencement he giveth thanks in prayer; and Bakbukiah [is] second among his brethren, and Abda son of Shammua, son of Galal, son of Jeduthun.
All the Levites, in the holy city, [are] two hundred eighty and four.
And the gatekeepers, Akkub, Talmon, and their brethren, those watching at the gates, [are] a hundred seventy and two.
And the rest of Israel, of the priests, of the Levites, [are] in all cities of Judah, each in his inheritance;
and the Nethinim are dwelling in Ophel, and Ziha and Gishpa [are] over the Nethinim.
And the overseer of the Levites in Jerusalem [is] Uzzi son of Bani, son of Hashabiah, son of Mattaniah, son of Micha: of the sons of Asaph, the singers [are] over-against the work of the house of God,
for the command of the king [is] upon them, and support [is] for the singers, a matter of a day in its day.
And Pethahiah son of Meshezabeel, of the sons of Zerah, son of Judah, [is] by the hand of the king, for every matter of the people.
And at the villages with their fields, of the sons of Judah there have dwelt, in Kirjath-Arba and its small towns, and in Dibon and its small towns, and in Jekabzeel and its villages,
and in Jeshua, and in Moladah, and in Beth-Phelet,
and in Hazar-Shaul, and in Beer-Sheba and its small towns,
and in Ziklag, and in Mekonah and in its small towns,
and En-Rimmon, and in Zareah, and in Jarmuth,
Zanoah, Adullam, and their villages, Lachish and its fields, Azekah and its small towns; and they encamp from Beer-Sheba unto the valley of Hinnom.
And sons of Benjamin [are] at Geba, Michmash, and Aija, and Beth-El, and its small towns,
Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah,
Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim,
Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat,
Lod, and Ono, the valley of the artificers.
And of the Levites, the courses of Judah [are] for Benjamin.
And these [are] the priests and the Levites who came up with Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua; Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra,
Amariah, Malluch, Hattush,
Shechaniah, Rehum, Meremoth,
Iddo, Ginnethoi, Abijah,
Miamin, Maadiah, Bilgah,
Shemaiah, and Joiarib, Jedaiah,
Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah; these [are] heads of the priests and of their brethren in the days of Jeshua.
And the Levites [are] Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, Mattaniah, he [is] over the thanksgiving, and his brethren,
and Bakbukiah and Unni, their brethren, [are] over-against them in charges.
And Jeshua hath begotten Joiakim, and Joiakim hath begotten Eliashib, and Eliashib hath begotten Joiada,
and Joiada hath begotten Jonathan, and Jonathan hath begotten Jaddua.
And in the days of Joiakim have been priests, heads of the fathers; of Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah, Hananiah;
of Ezra, Meshullam; of Amariah, Jehohanan;
of Melicu, Jonathan; of Shebaniah, Joseph;
of Harim, Adna; of Meraioth, Helkai;
of Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginnethon, Meshullam;
of Abijah, Zichri; of Miniamin; of Moadiah, Piltai;
of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah, Jehonathan;
and of Joiarib, Mattenai; of Jedaiah, Uzzi;
of Sallai, Kallai; of Amok, Eber;
of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; of Jedaiah, Nethaneel.
The Levites, in the days of Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, and Jaddua, are written, heads of fathers, and of the priests, in the kingdom of Darius the Persian.
Sons of Levi, heads of the fathers, are written on the book of the Chronicles even till the days of Johanan son of Eliashib;
and heads of the Levites: Hashabiah, Sherebiah, and Jeshua son of Kadmiel, and their brethren, [are] over-against them, to give praise, to give thanks, by command of David the man of God, charge over-against charge.
Mattaniah, and Bakbukiah, Obadiah, Meshullam, Talmon, Akkub, [are] gatekeepers, keeping charge in the gatherings of the gates.
These [are] in the days of Joiakim son of Jeshua, son of Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah the governor, and of Ezra the priest, the scribe.
And at the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem they sought the Levites out of all their places, to bring them in to Jerusalem, to make the dedication even with gladness, and with thanksgivings, and with singing, [with] cymbals, psalteries, and with harps;
and sons of the singers are gathered together even from the circuit round about Jerusalem, and from the villages of Netophathi,
and from the house of Gilgal, and from fields of Geba and Azmaveth, for villages have the singers built for themselves round about Jerusalem;
and the priests and the Levites are cleansed, and they cleanse the people, and the gates, and the wall.
And I bring up the heads of Judah upon the wall, and appoint two great thanksgiving companies and processions. At the right, on the wall, to the dung-gate;
and after them goeth Hoshaiah, and half of the heads of Judah,
and Azariah, Ezra, and Meshullam,
Judah, and Benjamin, and Shemaiah, and Jeremiah;
and of the sons of the priests with trumpets, Zechariah son of Jonathan, son of Shemaiah, son of Mattaniah, son of Michaiah, son of Zaccur, son of Asaph,
and his brethren Shemaiah, and Azarael, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethaneel, and Judah, Hanani, with instruments of song of David the man of God, and Ezra the scribe [is] before them;
and by the gate of the fountain and over-against them, they have gone up by the steps of the city of David, at the going up of the wall beyond the house of David, and unto the water-gate eastward.
And the second thanksgiving company that is going over-against, and I after it, and half of the people on the wall from beyond the tower of the furnaces and unto the broad wall,
and from beyond the gate of Ephraim, and by the old-gate, and by the fish-gate, and the tower of Hananeel, and the tower of Meah, and unto the sheep-gate — and they have stood at the prison-gate.
And the two thanksgiving companies stand in the house of God, and I and half of the prefects with me,
and the priests, Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Michaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah, Hananiah, with trumpets,
and Masseiah, and Shemaiah, and Eleazar, and Uzzi, and Jehohanan, and Malchijah, and Elam, and Ezer, and the singers sound, and Jezrahiah the inspector;
and they sacrifice on that day great sacrifices and rejoice, for God hath made them rejoice [with] great joy, and also, the women and the children have rejoiced, and the joy of Jerusalem is heard — unto a distance.
And certain are appointed on that day over the chambers for treasures, for heave-offerings, for first-fruits, and for tithes, to gather into them out of the fields of the cities the portions of the law for priests, and for Levites, for the joy of Judah [is] over the priests, and over the Levites, who are standing up.
And the singers and the gatekeepers keep the charge of their God, even the charge of the cleansing — according to the command of David [and] Solomon his son,
for in the days of David and Asaph of old [were] heads of the singers, and a song of praise and thanksgiving to God.
And all Israel in the days of Zerubbabel, and in the days of Nehemiah, are giving the portions of the singers, and of the gatekeepers, the matter of a day in its day, and are sanctifying to the Levites, and the Levites are sanctifying to the sons of Aaron.
On that day there was read in the book of Moses, in the ears of the people, and it hath been found written in it that an Ammonite and Moabite doth not come into the assembly of God — unto the age,
because they have not come before the sons of Israel with bread and with water, and hire against them Balaam to revile them, and our God turneth the reviling into a blessing.
And it cometh to pass, at their hearing the law, that they separate all the mixed people from Israel.
And before this Eliashib the priest, appointed over chambers of the house of our God, [is] a relation of Tobiah,
and he maketh for him a great chamber, and there they were formerly putting the present, the frankincense, and the vessels, and the tithe of the corn, the new wine, and the oil — the commanded thing of the Levites, and the singers, and the gatekeepers — and the heave-offering of the priests.
And during all this I was not in Jerusalem, for in the thirty and second year of Artaxerxes king of Babylon did I come unto the king, and at the end of days I have asked of the king,
and I come in to Jerusalem, and understand concerning the evil that Eliashib hath done for Tobiah, to make to him a chamber in the courts of the house of God,
and it is very displeasing to me, and I cast all the vessels of the house of Tobiah without, out of the chamber,
and I speak, and they cleanse the chambers, and I bring back thither the vessels of the house of God with the present and the frankincense.
And I know that the portions of the Levites have not been given, and they flee each to his field — the Levites and the singers, doing the work.
And I strive with the prefects, and say, 'Wherefore hath the house of God been forsaken?' and I gather them, and set them on their station;
and all Judah have brought in the tithe of the corn, and of the new wine, and of the oil, to the treasuries.
And I appoint treasurers over the treasuries, Shelemiah the priest, and Zadok the scribe, and Pedaiah of the Levites; and by their hand [is] Hanan son of Zaccur, son of Mattaniah, for stedfast they have been reckoned, and on them [it is] to give a portion to their brethren.
Be mindful of me, O my God, for this, and do not blot out my kind acts that I have done, for the house of my God, and for its charges.
In those days I have seen in Judah those treading wine-vats on sabbath, and bringing in the sheaves, and lading on the asses, and also, wine, grapes, and figs, and every burden, yea, they are bringing in to Jerusalem on the sabbath-day, and I testify in the day of their selling provision.
And the Tyrians have dwelt in it, bringing in fish, and every ware, and selling on sabbath to the sons of Judah and in Jerusalem.
And I strive with the freemen of Judah, and say to them, 'What [is] this evil thing that ye are doing, and polluting the sabbath-day?
Thus did not your fathers do? and our God bringeth in on us all this evil, and on this city, and ye are adding fierceness on Israel, to pollute the sabbath.'
And it cometh to pass, when the gates of Jerusalem have been dark before the sabbath, that I speak, and the doors are shut, and I say, that they do not open them till after the sabbath; and of my servants I have stationed at the gates; there doth not come in a burden on the sabbath-day.
And they lodge — the merchants and sellers of all ware — at the outside of Jerusalem, once or twice,
and I testify against them, and say unto them, 'Wherefore are ye lodging over-against the wall? if ye repeat [it], a hand I put forth upon you;' from that time they have not come in on the sabbath.
And I say to the Levites, that they be cleansed, and, coming in, keeping the gates, to sanctify the sabbath-day. Also, this, remember for me, O my God, and have pity on me, according to the abundance of Thy kindness.
Also, in those days, I have seen the Jews [who] have settled women of Ashdod, of Ammon, of Moab.
And of their sons, half are speaking Ashdoditish — and are not knowing to speak Jewish — and according to the language of people and people.
And I strive with them, and declare them vile, and smite certain of them, and pluck off their hair, and cause them to swear by God, 'Ye do not give your daughters to their sons, nor do ye take of their daughters to your sons, and to yourselves.
'By these did not Solomon king of Israel sin? and among the many nations there was no king like him, and beloved by his God he was, and God maketh him king over all Israel — even him did the strange women cause to sin.
And to you do we hearken to do all this great evil, to trespass against our God, to settle strange women?'
And [one] of the sons of Joiada son of Eliashib the high priest, [is] son-in-law to Sanballat the Horonite, and I cause him to flee from off me.
Be mindful of them, O my God, for the redeemed of the priesthood, and the covenant of the priesthood, and of the Levites.
And I have cleansed them from every stranger, and appoint charges to priests and to Levites, each in his work,
and for the wood-offering at appointed times, and for first-fruits. Be mindful of me, O my God, for good.
And it cometh to pass, in the days of Ahasuerus — he [is] Ahasuerus who is reigning from Hodu even unto Cush, seven and twenty and a hundred provinces —
in those days, at the sitting of the king Ahasuerus on the throne of his kingdom, that [is] in Shushan the palace,
in the third year of his reign, he hath made a banquet to all his heads and his servants; of the force of Persia and Media, the chiefs and heads of the provinces [are] before him,
in his shewing the wealth of the honour of his kingdom, and the glory of the beauty of his greatness, many days — eighty and a hundred days.
And at the fulness of these days hath the king made to all the people who are found in Shushan the palace, from great even unto small, a banquet, seven days, in the court of the garden of the house of the king —
white linen, white cotton, and blue, fastened with cords of fine linen and purple on rings of silver, and pillars of marble, couches of gold, and of silver, on a pavement of smaragdus, and white marble, and mother-of-pearl, and black marble —
and the giving of drink in vessels of gold, and the vessels [are] divers vessels, and the royal wine [is] abundant, as a memorial of the king.
And the drinking [is] according to law, none is pressing, for so hath the king appointed for every chief one of his house, to do according to the pleasure of man and man.
Also Vashti the queen hath made a banquet for women, in the royal house that the king Ahasuerus hath.
On the seventh day, as the heart of the king is glad with wine, he hath said to Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, and Abagtha, Zethar, and Carcas, the seven eunuchs who are ministering in the presence of the king Ahasuerus,
to bring in Vashti the queen before the king, with a royal crown, to shew the peoples and the heads her beauty, for she [is] of good appearance,
and the queen Vashti refuseth to come in at the word of the king that [is] by the hand of the eunuchs, and the king is very wroth, and his fury hath burned in him.
And the king saith to wise men, knowing the times — for so [is] the word of the king before all knowing law and judgment,
and he who is near unto him [is] Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, Memucan, seven heads of Persia and Media seeing the face of the king, who are sitting first in the kingdom —
'According to law, what — to do with queen Vashti, because that she hath not done the saying of the king Ahasuerus by the hand of the eunuchs?'
And Memucan saith before the king and the heads, 'Not against the king by himself hath Vashti the queen done perversely, but against all the heads, and against all the peoples that [are] in all provinces of the king Ahasuerus;
for go forth doth the word of the queen unto all the women, to render their husbands contemptible in their eyes, in their saying, The king Ahasuerus said to bring in Vashti the queen before him, and she did not come;
yea, this day do princesses of Persia and Media, who have heard the word of the queen, say [so] to all heads of the king, even according to the sufficiency of contempt and wrath.
'If to the king [it be] good, there goeth forth a royal word from before him, and it is written with the laws of Persia and Media, and doth not pass away, that Vashti doth not come in before the king Ahasuerus, and her royalty doth the king give to her companion who [is] better than she;
and the sentence of the king that he maketh hath been heard in all his kingdom — for it [is] great — and all the wives give honour to their husbands, from great even unto small.'
And the thing is good in the eyes of the king, and of the princes, and the king doth according to the word of Memucan,
and sendeth letters unto all provinces of the king, unto province and province according to its writing, and unto people and people according to its tongue, for every man being head in his own house — and speaking according to the language of his people.
After these things, at the ceasing of the fury of the king Ahasuerus, he hath remembered Vashti, and that which she did, and that which hath been decreed concerning her;
and servants of the king, his ministers, say, 'Let them seek for the king young women, virgins, of good appearance,
and the king doth appoint inspectors in all provinces of his kingdom, and they gather every young woman — virgin, of good appearance — unto Shushan the palace, unto the house of the women, unto the hand of Hege eunuch of the king, keeper of the women, and to give their purifications,
and the young woman who is good in the eyes of the king doth reign instead of Vashti;' and the thing is good in the eyes of the king, and he doth so.
A man, a Jew, there hath been in Shushan the palace, and his name [is] Mordecai son of Jair, son of Shimei, son of Kish, a Benjamite —
who had been removed from Jerusalem with the removal that was removed with Jeconiah king of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon removed —
and he is supporting Hadassah — she [is] Esther — daughter of his uncle, for she hath neither father nor mother, and the young woman [is] of fair form, and of good appearance, and at the death of her father and her mother hath Mordecai taken her to him for a daughter.
And it cometh to pass, in the word of the king, even his law, being heard, and in many young women being gathered unto Shushan the palace, unto the hand of Hegai, that Esther is taken unto the house of the king, unto the hand of Hegai, keeper of the women,
and the young woman is good in his eyes, and she receiveth kindness before him, and he hasteneth her purifications and her portions — to give to her, and the seven young women who are provided — to give to her, from the house of the king, and he changeth her and her young women to a good [place in] the house of the women.
Esther hath not declared her people, and her kindred, for Mordecai hath laid a charge on her that she doth not declare [it];
and during every day Mordecai is walking up and down before the court of the house of the women to know the welfare of Esther, and what is done with her.
And in the drawing nigh of the turn of each young woman to come in unto the king Ahasuerus, at the end of there being to her — according to the law of the women — twelve months, for so they fulfil the days of their purifications; six months with oil of myrrh, and six months with spices, and with the purifications of women,
and with this the young woman hath come in unto the king, all that she saith is given to her, to go in with her, out of the house of the women, unto the house of the king;
in the evening she hath gone in, and in the morning she hath turned back unto the second house of the women, unto the hand of Shaashgaz eunuch of the king, keeper of the concubines; she cometh not in any more unto the king except the king hath delighted in her, and she hath been called by name.
And in the drawing nigh of the turn of Esther — daughter of Abihail, uncle of Mordecai, whom he had taken to him for a daughter — to come in unto the king, she hath not sought a thing except that which Hegai eunuch of the king, keeper of the women, saith, and Esther is receiving grace in the eyes of all seeing her.
And Esther is taken unto the king Ahasuerus, unto his royal house, in the tenth month — it [is] the month of Tebeth — in the seventh year of his reign,
and the king loveth Esther above all the women, and she receiveth grace and kindness before him above all the virgins, and he setteth a royal crown on her head, and causeth her to reign instead of Vashti,
and the king maketh a great banquet to all his heads and his servants — the banquet of Esther — and a release to the provinces hath made, and giveth gifts as a memorial of the king.
And in the virgins being gathered a second time, then Mordecai is sitting in the gate of the king;
Esther is not declaring her kindred and her people, as Mordecai hath laid a charge upon her, and the saying of Mordecai Esther is doing as when she was truly with him.
In those days, when Mordecai is sitting in the gate of the king, hath Bigthan been wroth, and Teresh, (two of the eunuchs of the king, the keepers of the threshold,) and they seek to put forth a hand on king Ahasuerus,
and the thing is known to Mordecai, and he declareth [it] to Esther the queen, and Esther speaketh to the king in the name of Mordecai,
and the thing is sought out, and found, and they are hanged both of them on a tree, and it is written in the book of the Chronicles before the king.
After these things hath the king Ahasuerus exalted Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite, and lifteth him up, and setteth his throne above all the heads who [are] with him,
and all servants of the king, who [are] in the gate of the king, are bowing and doing obeisance to Haman, for so hath the king commanded for him; and Mordecai doth not bow nor do obeisance.
And the servants of the king, who [are] in the gate of the king, say to Mordecai, 'Wherefore [art] thou transgressing the command of the king?'
And it cometh to pass, in their speaking unto him, day by day, and he hath not hearkened unto them, that they declare [it] to Haman, to see whether the words of Mordecai do stand, for he hath declared to them that he [is] a Jew.
And Haman seeth that Mordecai is not bowing and doing obeisance to him, and Haman is full of fury,
and it is contemptible in his eyes to put forth a hand on Mordecai by himself, for they have declared to him the people of Mordecai, and Haman seeketh to destroy all the Jews who [are] in all the kingdom of Ahasuerus — the people of Mordecai.
In the first month — it [is] the month of Nisan — in the twelfth year of the king Ahasuerus, hath one caused to fall Pur (that [is] the lot) before Haman, from day to day, and from month to month, [to] the twelfth, it [is] the month of Adar.
And Haman saith to the king Ahasuerus, 'There is one people scattered and separated among the peoples, in all provinces of thy kingdom, and their laws [are] diverse from all people, and the laws of the king they are not doing, and for the king it is not profitable to suffer them;
if to the king [it be] good, let it be written to destroy them, and ten thousand talents of silver I weigh into the hands of those doing the work, to bring [it] in unto the treasuries of the king.'
And the king turneth aside his signet from off his hand, and giveth it to Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite, adversary of the Jews;
and the king saith to Haman, 'The silver is given to thee, and the people, to do with it as [it is] good in thine eyes.'
And scribes of the king are called, on the first month, on the thirteenth day of it, and it is written according to all that Haman hath commanded, unto lieutenants of the king, and unto the governors who [are] over province and province, and unto the heads of people and people, province and province, according to its writing, and people and people according to its tongue, in the name of the king Ahasuerus it hath been written and sealed with the signet of the king,
and letters to be sent by the hand of the runners unto all provinces of the king, to cut off, to slay, and to destroy all the Jews, from young even unto old, infant and women, on one day, on the thirteenth of the twelfth month — it [is] the month of Adar — and their spoil to seize,
a copy of the writing to be made law in every province and province is revealed to all the peoples, to be ready for this day.
The runners have gone forth, hastened by the word of the king, and the law hath been given in Shushan the palace, and the king and Haman have sat down to drink, and the city Shushan is perplexed.
And Mordecai hath known all that hath been done, and Mordecai rendeth his garments, and putteth on sackcloth and ashes, and goeth forth into the midst of the city and crieth — a cry loud and bitter,
and he cometh in unto the front of the gate of the king, but none is to come in unto the gate of the king with a sackcloth-garment.
And in every province and province, the place where the word of the king, even his law, is coming, a great mourning have the Jews, and fasting, and weeping, and lamenting: sackcloth and ashes are spread for many.
And young women of Esther come in and her eunuchs, and declare [it] to her, and the queen is exceedingly pained, and sendeth garments to clothe Mordecai, and to turn aside his sackcloth from off him, and he hath not received [them].
And Esther calleth to Hatach, of the eunuchs of the king, whom he hath stationed before her, and giveth him a charge for Mordecai, to know what this [is], and wherefore this [is].
And Hatach goeth out unto Mordecai, unto a broad place of the city, that [is] before the gate of the king,
and Mordecai declareth to him all that hath met him, and the explanation of the money that Haman said to weigh to the treasuries of the king for the Jews, to destroy them,
and the copy of the writing of the law that had been given in Shushan to destroy them he hath given to him, to shew Esther, and to declare [it] to her, and to lay a charge on her to go in unto the king, to make supplication to him, and to seek from before him, for her people.
And Hatach cometh in and declareth to Esther the words of Mordecai,
and Esther speaketh to Hatach, and chargeth him for Mordecai:
'All servants of the king, and people of the provinces of the king, do know that any man and woman, who cometh in unto the king, unto the inner court, who is not called — one law [of] his [is] to put [them] to death, apart from him to whom the king holdeth out the golden sceptre, then he hath lived; and I — I have not been called to come in unto the king these thirty days.'
And they declare to Mordecai the words of Esther,
and Mordecai speaketh to send back unto Esther: 'Do not think in thy soul to be delivered [in] the house of the king, more than all the Jews,
but if thou keep entirely silent at this time, respite and deliverance remaineth to the Jews from another place, and thou and the house of thy fathers are destroyed; and who knoweth whether for a time like this thou hast come to the kingdom?'
And Esther speaketh to send back unto Mordecai:
'Go, gather all the Jews who are found in Shushan, and fast for me, and do not eat nor drink three days, by night and by day; also I and my young women do fast likewise, and so I go in unto the king, that [is] not according to law, and when I have perished — I have perished.'
And Mordecai passeth on, and doth according to all that Esther hath charged upon him.
And it cometh to pass on the third day, that Esther putteth on royalty, and standeth in the inner-court of the house of the king over-against the house of the king, and the king is sitting on his royal throne, in the royal-house, over-against the opening of the house,
and it cometh to pass, at the king's seeing Esther the queen standing in the court, she hath received grace in his eyes, and the king holdeth out to Esther the golden sceptre that [is] in his hand, and Esther draweth near, and toucheth the top of the sceptre.
And the king saith to her, 'What — to thee Esther, O queen? and what thy request? unto the half of the kingdom — and it is given to thee.'
And Esther saith, 'If unto the king [it be] good, the king doth come in, and Haman, to-day, unto the banquet that I have made for him;'
and the king saith, 'Haste ye Haman — to do the word of Esther;' and the king cometh in, and Haman, unto the banquet that Esther hath made.
And the king saith to Esther, during the banquet of wine, 'What [is] thy petition? and it is given to thee; and what thy request? unto the half of the kingdom — and it is done.'
And Esther answereth and saith, 'My petition and my request [is]:
if I have found grace in the eyes of the king, and if unto the king [it be] good, to give my petition, and to perform my request, the king doth come, and Haman, unto the banquet that I make for them, and to-morrow I do according to the word of the king.'
And Haman goeth forth on that day rejoicing and glad in heart, and at Haman's seeing Mordecai in the gate of the king, and he hath not risen nor moved for him, then is Haman full of fury against Mordecai.
And Haman forceth himself, and cometh in unto his house, and sendeth, and bringeth in his friends, and Zeresh his wife,
and Haman recounteth to them the glory of his wealth, and the abundance of his sons, and all that with which the king made him great, and with which he lifted him up above the heads and servants of the king.
And Haman saith, 'Yea, Esther the queen brought none in with the king, unto the feast that she made, except myself, and also for to-morrow I am called to her, with the king,
and all this is not profitable to me, during all the time that I am seeing Mordecai the Jew sitting in the gate of the king.'
And Zeresh his wife saith to him, and all his friends, 'Let them prepare a tree, in height fifty cubits, and in the morning speak to the king, and they hang Mordecai on it, and go thou in with the king unto the banquet rejoicing;' and the thing is good before Haman, and he prepareth the tree.
On that night hath the sleep of the king fled away, and he saith to bring in the book of memorials of the Chronicles, and they are read before the king,
and it is found written that Mordecai had declared concerning Bigthana and Teresh, two of the eunuchs of the king, of the keepers of the threshold, who sought to put forth a hand on king Ahasuerus.
And the king saith, 'What honour and greatness hath been done to Mordecai for this?' And the servants of the king, his ministers, say, 'Nothing hath been done with him.'
And the king saith, 'Who [is] in the court?' — and Haman hath come in to the outer court of the house of the king, to say to the king to hang Mordecai on the tree that he had prepared for him —
and the servants of the king say unto him, 'Lo, Haman is standing in the court;' and the king saith, 'Let him come in.'
And Haman cometh in, and the king saith to him, 'What — to do with the man in whose honour the king hath delighted?' And Haman saith in his heart, 'To whom doth the king delight to do honour more than myself?'
And Haman saith unto the king, 'The man in whose honour the king hath delighted,
let them bring in royal clothing that the king hath put on himself, and a horse on which the king hath ridden, and that the royal crown be put on his head,
and to give the clothing and the horse into the hand of a man of the heads of the king, the chiefs, and they have clothed the man in whose honour the king hath delighted, and caused him to ride on the horse in a broad place of the city, and called before him: Thus it is done to the man in whose honour the king hath delighted.'
And the king saith to Haman, 'Haste, take the clothing and the horse, as thou hast spoken, and do so to Mordecai the Jew, who is sitting in the gate of the king; there doth not fall a thing of all that thou hast spoken.'
And Haman taketh the clothing, and the horse, and clothed Mordecai, and causeth him to ride in a broad place of the city, and calleth before him, 'Thus it is done to the man in whose honour the king hath delighted.'
And Mordecai turneth back unto the gate of the king, and Haman hath been hastened unto his house mourning, and with covered head,
and Haman recounteth to Zeresh his wife, and to all his friends, all that hath met him, and his wise men say to him, and Zeresh his wife, 'If Mordecai [is] of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou hast begun to fall, thou art not able for him, but dost certainly fall before him.'
They are yet speaking with him, and eunuchs of the king have come, and haste to bring in Haman unto the banquet that Esther hath made.
And the king cometh in, and Haman, to drink with Esther the queen,
and the king saith to Esther also on the second day, during the banquet of wine, 'What [is] thy petition, Esther, O queen? and it is given to thee; and what thy request? unto the half of the kingdom — and it is done.'
And Esther the queen answereth and saith, 'If I have found grace in thine eyes, O king, and if to the king [it be] good, let my life be given to me at my petition, and my people at my request;
for we have been sold, I and my people, to cut off, to slay, and to destroy; and if for men-servants and for maid-servants we had been sold I had kept silent — but the adversity is not equal to the loss of the king.'
And the king Ahasuerus saith, yea, he saith to Esther the queen, 'Who [is] he — this one? and where [is] this one? — he whose heart hath filled him to do so?'
And Esther saith, 'The man — adversary and enemy — [is] this wicked Haman;' and Haman hath been afraid at the presence of the king and of the queen.
And the king hath risen, in his fury, from the banquet of wine, unto the garden of the house, and Haman hath remained to seek for his life from Esther the queen, for he hath seen that evil hath been determined against him by the king.
And the king hath turned back out of the garden of the house unto the house of the banquet of wine, and Haman is falling on the couch on which Esther [is], and the king saith, 'Also to subdue the queen with me in the house?' the word hath gone out from the mouth of the king, and the face of Haman they have covered.
And Harbonah, one of the eunuchs, saith before the king, 'Also lo, the tree that Haman made for Mordecai, who spake good for the king, is standing in the house of Haman, in height fifty cubits;' and the king saith, 'Hang him upon it.'
And they hang Haman upon the tree that he had prepared for Mordecai, and the fury of the king hath lain down.
On that day hath the king Ahasuerus given to Esther the queen the house of Haman, adversary of the Jews, and Mordecai hath come in before the king, for Esther hath declared what he [is] to her,
and the king turneth aside his signet, that he hath caused to pass away from Haman, and giveth it to Mordecai, and Esther setteth Mordecai over the house of Haman.
And Esther addeth, and speaketh before the king, and falleth before his feet, and weepeth, and maketh supplication to him, to cause the evil of Haman the Agagite to pass away, and his device that he had devised against the Jews;
and the king holdeth out to Esther the golden sceptre, and Esther riseth, and standeth before the king,
and saith, 'If to the king [it be] good, and if I have found grace before him, and the thing hath been right before the king, and I [be] good in his eyes, let it be written to bring back the letters — a device of Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite — that he wrote to destroy the Jews who [are] in all provinces of the king,
for how do I endure when I have looked on the evil that doth find my people? and how do I endure when I have looked on the destruction of my kindred?'
And the king Ahasuerus saith to Esther the queen, and to Mordecai the Jew, 'Lo, the house of Haman I have given to Esther, and him they have hanged on the tree, because that he put forth his hand on the Jews,
and ye, write ye for the Jews, as [it is] good in your eyes, in the name of the king, and seal with the signet of the king — for the writing that is written in the name of the king, and sealed with the signet of the king, there is none to turn back.'
And the scribes of the king are called, at that time, in the third month — it [is] the month of Sivan — in the three and twentieth of it, and it is written, according to all that Mordecai hath commanded, unto the Jews, and unto the lieutenants, and the governors, and the heads of the provinces, that [are] from Hodu even unto Cush, seven and twenty and a hundred provinces — province and province according to its writing, and people and people according to its tongue, and unto the Jews according to their writing, and according to their tongue.
And he writeth in the name of the king Ahasuerus, and sealeth with the signet of the king, and sendeth letters by the hand of the runners with horses, riders of the dromedary, the mules, the young mares,
that the king hath given to the Jews who [are] in every city and city, to be assembled, and to stand for their life, to cut off, to slay, and to destroy the whole force of the people and province who are distressing them, infants and women, and their spoil to seize.
In one day, in all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus, on the thirteenth of the twelfth month — it [is] the month of Adar —
a copy of the writing to be made law in every province and province is revealed to all the peoples, and for the Jews being ready at this day to be avenged of their enemies.
The runners, riding on the dromedary, [and] the mules, have gone out, hastened and pressed by the word of the king, and the law hath been given in Shushan the palace.
And Mordecai went out from before the king, in royal clothing of blue and white, and a great crown of gold, and a garment of fine linen and purple, and the city of Shushan hath rejoiced and been glad;
to the Jews hath been light, and gladness, and joy, and honour,
and in every province and province, and in every city and city, the place where the word of the king, even his law, is coming, gladness and joy [are] to the Jews, a banquet, and a good day; and many of the peoples of the land are becoming Jews, for a fear of the Jews hath fallen upon them.
And in the twelfth month — it [is] the month of Adar — on the thirteenth day of it, in which the word of the king, even his law, hath come to be done, in the day that the enemies of the Jews had hoped to rule over them, and it is turned that the Jews rule over those hating them —
the Jews have been assembled in their cities, in all provinces of the king Ahasuerus, to put forth a hand on those seeking their evil, and no man hath stood in their presence, for their fear hath fallen on all the peoples.
And all heads of the provinces, and the lieutenants, and the governors, and those doing the work that the king hath, are lifting up the Jews, for a fear of Mordecai hath fallen upon them;
for great [is] Mordecai in the house of the king, and his fame is going into all the provinces, for the man Mordecai is going on and becoming great.
And the Jews smite among all their enemies — a smiting of the sword, and slaughter, and destruction — and do with those hating them according to their pleasure,
and in Shushan the palace have the Jews slain and destroyed five hundred men;
and Parshandatha, and Dalphon, and Aspatha,
and Poratha, and Adalia, and Aridatha,
and Parmashta, and Arisai, and Aridai, and Vajezatha,
ten sons of Haman son of Hammedatha, adversary of the Jews, they have slain, and on the prey they have not put forth their hand.
On that day hath come the number of the slain in Shushan the palace before the king,
and the king saith to Esther the queen, 'In Shushan the palace have the Jews slain and destroyed five hundred men, and the ten sons of Haman; in the rest of the provinces of the king what have they done? and what [is] thy petition? and it is given to thee; and what thy request again? and it is done.'
And Esther saith, 'If to the king [it be] good, let it be given also to-morrow, to the Jews who [are] in Shushan, to do according to the law of to-day; and the ten sons of Haman they hang on the tree.'
And the king saith — 'to be done so;' and a law is given in Shushan, and the ten sons of Haman they have hanged.
And the Jews who [are] in Shushan are assembled also on the fourteenth day of the month of Adar, and they slay in Shushan three hundred men, and on the prey they have not put forth their hand.
And the rest of the Jews, who [are] in the provinces of the king, have been assembled, even to stand for their life, and to rest from their enemies, and to slay among those hating them five and seventy thousand, and on the prey they have not put forth their hand;
on the thirteenth day of the month of Adar, even to rest on the fourteenth of it, and to make it a day of banquet and of joy.
And the Jews who [are] in Shushan have been assembled, on the thirteenth day of it, and on the fourteenth of it, even to rest on the fifteenth of it, and to make it a day of banquet and of joy.
Therefore the Jews of the villages, who are dwelling in cities of the villages, are making the fourteenth day of the month of Adar — joy and banquet, and a good day, and of sending portions one to another.
And Mordecai writeth these things, and sendeth letters unto all the Jews who [are] in all provinces of the king Ahasuerus, who are near and who are far off,
to establish on them, to be keeping the fourteenth day of the month of Adar, and the fifteenth day of it, in every year and year,
as days on which the Jews have rested from their enemies, and the month that hath been turned to them from sorrow to joy, and from mourning to a good day, to make them days of banquet and of joy, and of sending portions one to another, and gifts to the needy.
And the Jews have received that which they had begun to do, and that which Mordecai hath written unto them,
because Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite, adversary of all the Jews, had devised concerning the Jews to destroy them, and had caused to fall Pur — that [is] the lot — to crush them and to destroy them;
and in her coming in before the king, he said with the letter, 'Let his evil device that he devised against the Jews turn back upon his own head,' and they have hanged him and his sons on the tree,
therefore they have called these days Purim — by the name of the lot — therefore, because of all the words of this letter, and what they have seen concerning this, and what hath come unto them,
the Jews have established and received upon them, and upon their seed, and upon all those joined unto them, and it doth not pass away, to be keeping these two days according to their writing, and according to their season, in every year and year;
and these days are remembered and kept in every generation and generation, family and family, province and province, and city and city, and these days of Purim do not pass away from the midst of the Jews, and their memorial is not ended from their seed.
And Esther the queen, daughter of Abihail, writeth, and Mordecai the Jew, with all might, to establish this second letter of Purim,
and he sendeth letters unto all the Jews, unto the seven and twenty and a hundred provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus — words of peace and truth —
to establish these days of Purim, in their seasons, as Mordecai the Jew hath established on them, and Esther the queen, and as they had established on themselves, and on their seed — matters of the fastings, and of their cry.
And a saying of Esther hath established these matters of Purim, and it is written in the Book.
And the king Ahasuerus setteth a tribute on the land and the isles of the sea;
and all the work of his strength, and his might, and the explanation of the greatness of Mordecai with which the king made him great, are they not written on the book of the Chronicles of Media and Persia?
For Mordecai the Jew [is] second to king Ahasuerus, and a great man of the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of his brethren, seeking good for his people, and speaking peace to all his seed.
A man there hath been in the land of Uz — Job his name — and that man hath been perfect and upright — both fearing God, and turning aside from evil.
And there are borne to him seven sons and three daughters,
and his substance is seven thousand sheep, and three thousand camels, and five hundred pairs of oxen, and five hundred she-asses, and a service very abundant; and that man is greater than any of the sons of the east.
And his sons have gone and made a banquet — the house of each [in] his day — and have sent and called to their three sisters to eat and to drink with them;
and it cometh to pass, when they have gone round the days of the banquet, that Job doth send and sanctify them, and hath risen early in the morning, and caused to ascend burnt-offerings — the number of them all — for Job said, 'Perhaps my sons have sinned, yet blessed God in their heart.' Thus doth Job all the days.
And the day is, that sons of God come in to station themselves by Jehovah, and there doth come also the Adversary in their midst.
And Jehovah saith unto the Adversary, 'Whence comest thou?' And the Adversary answereth Jehovah and saith, 'From going to and fro in the land, and from walking up and down on it.'
And Jehovah saith unto the Adversary, 'Hast thou set thy heart against My servant Job because there is none like him in the land, a man perfect and upright, fearing God, and turning aside from evil?'
And the Adversary answereth Jehovah and saith, 'For nought is Job fearing God?
Hast not Thou made a hedge for him, and for his house, and for all that he hath — round about?
The work of his hands Thou hast blessed, and his substance hath spread in the land, and yet, put forth, I pray Thee, Thy hand, and strike against anything that he hath — if not: to Thy face he doth bless Thee!'
And Jehovah saith unto the Adversary, 'Lo, all that he hath [is] in thy hand, only unto him put not forth thy hand.' And the Adversary goeth out from the presence of Jehovah.
And the day is, that his sons and his daughters are eating, and drinking wine, in the house of their brother, the first-born.
And a messenger hath come in unto Job and saith, 'The oxen have been plowing, and the she-asses feeding by their sides,
and Sheba doth fall, and take them, and the young men they have smitten by the mouth of the sword, and I am escaped — only I alone — to declare [it] to thee.'
While this [one] is speaking another also hath come and saith, 'Fire of God hath fallen from the heavens, and burneth among the flock, and among the young men, and consumeth them, and I am escaped — only I alone — to declare [it] to thee.'
While this [one] is speaking another also hath come and saith, 'Chaldeans made three heads, and rush on the camels, and take them, and the young men they have smitten by the mouth of the sword, and I am escaped — only I alone — to declare [it] to thee.'
While this [one] is speaking another also hath come and saith, 'Thy sons and thy daughters are eating, and drinking wine, in the house of their brother, the first-born.
And lo, a great wind hath come from over the wilderness, and striketh against the four corners of the house, and it falleth on the young men, and they are dead, and I am escaped — only I alone — to declare [it] to thee.'
And Job riseth, and rendeth his robe, and shaveth his head, and falleth to the earth, and doth obeisance,
and he saith, 'Naked came I forth from the womb of my mother, and naked I turn back thither: Jehovah hath given and Jehovah hath taken: let the name of Jehovah be blessed.'
In all this Job hath not sinned, nor given folly to God.
And the day is, that sons of God come in to station themselves by Jehovah, and there doth come also the Adversary in their midst to station himself by Jehovah.
And Jehovah saith unto the Adversary, 'Whence camest thou?' And the Adversary answereth Jehovah and saith, 'From going to and fro in the land, and from walking up and down in it.'
And Jehovah saith unto the Adversary, 'Hast thou set thy heart unto My servant Job because there is none like him in the land, a man perfect and upright, fearing God and turning aside from evil? and still he is keeping hold on his integrity, and thou dost move Me against him to swallow him up for nought!'
And the Adversary answereth Jehovah and saith, 'A skin for a skin, and all that a man hath he doth give for his life.
Yet, put forth, I pray Thee, Thy hand, and strike unto his bone and unto his flesh — if not: unto Thy face he doth bless Thee!'
And Jehovah saith unto the Adversary, 'Lo, he [is] in thy hand; only his life take care of.'
And the Adversary goeth forth from the presence of Jehovah, and smiteth Job with a sore ulcer from the sole of his foot unto his crown.
And he taketh to him a potsherd to scrape himself with it, and he is sitting in the midst of the ashes.
And his wife saith to him, 'Still thou art keeping hold on thine integrity: bless God and die.'
And he saith unto her, 'As one of the foolish women speaketh, thou speakest; yea, the good we receive from God, and the evil we do not receive.' In all this Job hath not sinned with his lips.
And three of the friends of Job hear of all this evil that hath come upon him, and they come in each from his place — Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite — and they are met together to come in to bemoan him, and to comfort him;
and they lift up their eyes from afar and have not discerned him, and they lift up their voice and weep, and rend each his robe, and sprinkle dust on their heads — heavenward.
And they sit with him on the earth seven days and seven nights, and there is none speaking unto him a word when they have seen that the pain hath been very great.
After this hath Job opened his mouth, and revileth his day.
And Job answereth and saith: —
Let the day perish in which I am born, And the night that hath said: 'A man-child hath been conceived.'
That day — let it be darkness, Let not God require it from above, Nor let light shine upon it.
Let darkness and death-shade redeem it, Let a cloud tabernacle upon it, Let them terrify it as the most bitter of days.
That night — let thick darkness take it, Let it not be united to days of the year, Into the number of months let it not come.
Lo! that night — let it be gloomy, Let no singing come into it.
Let the cursers of day mark it, Who are ready to wake up Leviathan.
Let the stars of its twilight be dark, Let it wait for light, and there is none, And let it not look on the eyelids of the dawn.
Because it hath not shut the doors Of the womb that was mine! And hide misery from mine eyes.
Why from the womb do I not die? From the belly I have come forth and gasp!
Wherefore have knees been before me? And what [are] breasts, that I suck?
For now, I have lain down, and am quiet, I have slept — then there is rest to me,
With kings and counsellors of earth, These building wastes for themselves.
Or with princes — they have gold, They are filling their houses [with] silver.
(Or as a hidden abortion I am not, As infants — they have not seen light.)
There the wicked have ceased troubling, And there rest do the wearied in power.
Together prisoners have been at ease, They have not heard the voice of an exactor,
Small and great [are] there the same. And a servant [is] free from his lord.
Why giveth He to the miserable light, and life to the bitter soul?
Who are waiting for death, and it is not, And they seek it above hid treasures.
Who are glad — unto joy, They rejoice when they find a grave.
To a man whose way hath been hidden, And whom God doth shut up?
For before my food, my sighing cometh, And poured out as waters [are] my roarings.
For a fear I feared and it meeteth me, And what I was afraid of doth come to me.
I was not safe — nor was I quiet — Nor was I at rest — and trouble cometh!
And Eliphaz the Temanite answereth and saith: —
Hath one tried a word with thee? — Thou art weary! And to keep in words who is able?
Lo, thou hast instructed many, And feeble hands thou makest strong.
The stumbling one do thy words raise up, And bowing knees thou dost strengthen.
But now, it cometh in unto thee, And thou art weary; It striketh unto thee, and thou art troubled.
Is not thy reverence thy confidence? Thy hope — the perfection of thy ways?
Remember, I pray thee, Who, being innocent, hath perished? And where have the upright been cut off?
As I have seen — ploughers of iniquity, And sowers of misery, reap it!
From the breath of God they perish, And from the spirit of His anger consumed.
The roaring of a lion, And the voice of a fierce lion, And teeth of young lions have been broken.
An old lion is perishing without prey, And the whelps of the lioness do separate.
And unto me a thing is secretly brought, And receive doth mine ear a little of it.
In thoughts from visions of the night, In the falling of deep sleep on men,
Fear hath met me, and trembling, And the multitude of my bones caused to fear.
And a spirit before my face doth pass, Stand up doth the hair of my flesh;
It standeth, and I discern not its aspect, A similitude [is] over-against mine eyes, Silence! and a voice I hear:
'Is mortal man than God more righteous? Than his Maker is a man cleaner?
Lo, in His servants He putteth no credence, Nor in His messengers setteth praise.'
Also — the inhabitants of houses of clay, (Whose foundation [is] in the dust, They bruise them before a moth.)
From morning to evening are beaten down, Without any regarding, for ever they perish.
Hath not their excellency been removed with them? They die, and not in wisdom!
Pray, call, is there any to answer thee? And unto which of the holy ones dost thou turn?
For provocation slayeth the perverse, And envy putteth to death the simple,
I — I have seen the perverse taking root, And I mark his habitation straightway,
Far are his sons from safety, And they are bruised in the gate, And there is no deliverer.
Whose harvest the hungry doth eat, And even from the thorns taketh it, And the designing swallowed their wealth.
For sorrow cometh not forth from the dust, Nor from the ground springeth up misery.
For man to misery is born, And the sparks go high to fly.
Yet I — I inquire for God, And for God I give my word,
Doing great things, and there is no searching. Wonderful, till there is no numbering.
Who is giving rain on the face of the land, And is sending waters on the out-places.
To set the low on a high place, And the mourners have been high [in] safety.
Making void thoughts of the subtile, And their hands do not execute wisdom.
Capturing the wise in their subtilty, And the counsel of wrestling ones was hastened,
By day they meet darkness, And as night — they grope at noon.
And He saveth the wasted from their mouth, And from a strong hand the needy,
And there is hope to the poor, And perverseness hath shut her mouth.
Lo, the happiness of mortal man, God doth reprove him: And the chastisement of the Mighty despise not,
For He doth pain, and He bindeth up, He smiteth, and His hands heal.
In six distresses He delivereth thee, And in seven evil striketh not on thee.
In famine He hath redeemed thee from death, And in battle from the hands of the sword.
When the tongue scourgeth thou art hid, And thou art not afraid of destruction, When it cometh.
At destruction and at hunger thou mockest, And of the beast of the earth, Thou art not afraid.
(For with sons of the field [is] thy covenant, And the beast of the field Hath been at peace with thee.)
And thou hast known that thy tent [is] peace, And inspected thy habitation, and errest not,
And hast known that numerous [is] Thy seed, And thine offspring as the herb of the earth;
Thou comest in full age unto the grave, As the going up of a stalk in its season.
Lo, this — we searched it out — it [is] right, hearken; And thou, know for thyself!
And Job answereth and saith: —
O that my provocation were thoroughly weighed, And my calamity in balances They would lift up together!
For now, than the sands of the sea it is heavier, Therefore my words have been rash.
For arrows of the Mighty [are] with me, Whose poison is drinking up my spirit. Terrors of God array themselves [for] me!
Brayeth a wild ass over tender grass? Loweth an ox over his provender?
Eaten is an insipid thing without salt? Is there sense in the drivel of dreams?
My soul is refusing to touch! They [are] as my sickening food.
O that my request may come, That God may grant my hope!
That God would please — and bruise me, Loose His hand and cut me off!
And yet it is my comfort, (And I exult in pain — He doth not spare,) That I have not hidden The sayings of the Holy One.
What [is] my power that I should hope? And what mine end That I should prolong my life?
Is my strength the strength of stones? Is my flesh brazen?
Is not my help with me, And substance driven from me?
To a despiser of his friends [is] shame, And the fear of the Mighty he forsaketh.
My brethren have deceived as a brook, As a stream of brooks they pass away.
That are black because of ice, By them doth snow hide itself.
By the time they are warm they have been cut off, By its being hot they have been Extinguished from their place.
Turn aside do the paths of their way, They ascend into emptiness, and are lost.
Passengers of Tema looked expectingly, Travellers of Sheba hoped for them.
They were ashamed that one hath trusted, They have come unto it and are confounded.
Surely now ye have become the same! Ye see a downfall, and are afraid.
Is it because I said, Give to me? And, By your power bribe for me?
And, Deliver me from the hand of an adversary? And, From the hand of terrible ones ransom me?
Shew me, and I — I keep silent, And what I have erred, let me understand.
How powerful have been upright sayings, And what doth reproof from you reprove?
For reproof — do you reckon words? And for wind — sayings of the desperate.
Anger on the fatherless ye cause to fall, And are strange to your friend.
And, now, please, look upon me, Even to your face do I lie?
Turn back, I pray you, let it not be perverseness, Yea, turn back again — my righteousness [is] in it.
Is there in my tongue perverseness? Discerneth not my palate desirable things?
Is there not a warfare to man on earth? And as the days of an hireling his days?
As a servant desireth the shadow, And as a hireling expecteth his wage,
So I have been caused to inherit months of vanity, And nights of misery they numbered to me.
If I lay down then I said, 'When do I rise!' And evening hath been measured, And I have been full of tossings till dawn.
Clothed hath been my flesh [with] worms, And a clod of dust, My skin hath been shrivelled and is loathsome,
My days swifter than a weaving machine, And they are consumed without hope.
Remember Thou that my life [is] a breath, Mine eye turneth not back to see good.
The eye of my beholder beholdeth me not. Thine eyes [are] upon me — and I am not.
Consumed hath been a cloud, and it goeth, So he who is going down to Sheol cometh not up.
He turneth not again to his house, Nor doth his place discern him again.
Also I — I withhold not my mouth — I speak in the distress of my spirit, I talk in the bitterness of my soul.
A sea -[monster] am I, or a dragon, That thou settest over me a guard?
When I said, 'My bed doth comfort me,' He taketh away in my talking my couch.
And thou hast affrighted me with dreams, And from visions thou terrifiest me,
And my soul chooseth strangling, Death rather than my bones.
I have wasted away — not to the age do I live. Cease from me, for my days [are] vanity.
What [is] man that Thou dost magnify him? And that Thou settest unto him Thy heart?
And inspectest him in the mornings, In the evenings dost try him?
How long dost Thou not look from me? Thou dost not desist till I swallow my spittle.
I have sinned, what do I to Thee, O watcher of man? Why hast Thou set me for a mark to Thee, And I am for a burden to myself — and what?
Thou dost not take away my transgression, And cause to pass away mine iniquity, Because now, for dust I lie down: And Thou hast sought me — and I am not!
And Bildad the Shuhite answereth and saith: —
Till when dost thou speak these things? And a strong wind — sayings of thy mouth?
Doth God pervert judgment? And doth the Mighty One pervert justice?
If thy sons have sinned before Him, And He doth send them away, By the hand of their transgression,
If thou dost seek early unto God, And unto the Mighty makest supplication,
If pure and upright thou [art], Surely now He waketh for thee, And hath completed The habitation of thy righteousness.
And thy beginning hath been small, And thy latter end is very great.
For, ask I pray thee of a former generation, And prepare to a search of their fathers,
(For of yesterday we [are], and we know not, For a shadow [are] our days on earth.)
Do they not shew thee — speak to thee, And from their heart bring forth words?
'Doth a rush wise without mire? A reed increase without water?
While it [is] in its budding — uncropped, Even before any herb it withereth.
So [are] the paths of all forgetting God, And the hope of the profane doth perish,
Whose confidence is loathsome, And the house of a spider his trust.
He leaneth on his house — and it standeth not: He taketh hold on it — and it abideth not.
Green he [is] before the sun, And over his garden his branch goeth out.
By a heap his roots are wrapped, A house of stones he looketh for.
If [one] doth destroy him from his place, Then it hath feigned concerning him, I have not seen thee!
Lo, this [is] the joy of his way, And from the dust others spring up.'
Lo, God doth not reject the perfect, Nor taketh hold on the hand of evil doers.
While he filleth with laughter thy mouth, And thy lips with shouting,
Those hating thee do put on shame, And the tent of the wicked is not!
And Job answereth and saith: —
Truly I have known that [it is] so, And what — is man righteous with God?
If he delight to strive with Him — He doth not answer him one of a thousand.
Wise in heart and strong in power — Who hath hardened toward Him and is at peace?
Who is removing mountains, And they have not known, Who hath overturned them in His anger.
Who is shaking earth from its place, And its pillars move themselves.
Who is speaking to the sun, and it riseth not, And the stars He sealeth up.
Stretching out the heavens by Himself, And treading on the heights of the sea,
Making Osh, Kesil, and Kimah, And the inner chambers of the south.
Doing great things till there is no searching, And wonderful, till there is no numbering.
Lo, He goeth over by me, and I see not, And He passeth on, and I attend not to it.
Lo, He snatches away, who bringeth it back? Who saith unto Him, 'What dost Thou?'
God doth not turn back His anger, Under Him bowed have proud helpers.
How much less do I — I answer Him? Choose out my words with Him?
Whom, though I were righteous, I answer not, For my judgment I make supplication.
Though I had called and He answereth me, I do not believe that He giveth ear [to] my voice.
Because with a tempest He bruiseth me, And hath multiplied my wounds for nought.
He permitteth me not to refresh my spirit, But filleth me with bitter things.
If of power, lo, the Strong One; And if of judgment — who doth convene me?
If I be righteous, Mine mouth doth declare me wicked, Perfect I am! — it declareth me perverse.
Perfect I am! — I know not my soul, I despise my life.
It is the same thing, therefore I said, 'The perfect and the wicked He is consuming.'
If a scourge doth put to death suddenly, At the trial of the innocent He laugheth.
Earth hath been given Into the hand of the wicked one. The face of its judges he covereth, If not — where, who [is] he?
My days have been swifter than a runner, They have fled, they have not seen good,
They have passed on with ships of reed, As an eagle darteth on food.
Though I say, 'I forget my talking, I forsake my corner, and I brighten up!'
I have been afraid of all my griefs, I have known that Thou dost not acquit me.
I — I am become wicked; why [is] this? [In] vain I labour.
If I have washed myself with snow-water, And purified with soap my hands,
Then in corruption Thou dost dip me, And my garments have abominated me.
But if a man like myself — I answer him, We come together into judgment.
If there were between us an umpire, He doth place his hand on us both.
He doth turn aside from off me his rod, And His terror doth not make me afraid,
I speak, and do not fear Him, But I am not right with myself.
My soul hath been weary of my life, I leave off my talking to myself, I speak in the bitterness of my soul.
I say unto God, 'Do not condemn me, Let me know why Thou dost strive [with] me.
Is it good for Thee that Thou dost oppress? That Thou despisest the labour of Thy hands, And on the counsel of the wicked hast shone?
Eyes of flesh hast Thou? As man seeth — seest Thou?
As the days of man [are] Thy days? Thy years as the days of a man?
That Thou inquirest for mine iniquity, And for my sin seekest?
For Thou knowest that I am not wicked, And there is no deliverer from Thy hand.
Thy hands have taken pains about me, And they make me together round about, And Thou swallowest me up!
Remember, I pray Thee, That as clay Thou hast made me, And unto dust Thou dost bring me back.
Dost Thou not as milk pour me out? And as cheese curdle me?
Skin and flesh Thou dost put on me, And with bones and sinews dost fence me.
Life and kindness Thou hast done with me. And Thy inspection hath preserved my spirit.
And these Thou hast laid up in Thy heart, I have known that this [is] with Thee.
If I sinned, then Thou hast observed me, And from mine iniquity dost not acquit me,
If I have done wickedly — woe to me, And righteously — I lift not up my head, Full of shame — then see my affliction,
And it riseth — as a lion Thou huntest me. And Thou turnest back — Thou shewest Thyself wonderful in me.
Thou renewest Thy witnesses against me, And dost multiply Thine anger with me, Changes and warfare [are] with me.
And why from the womb Hast Thou brought me forth? I expire, and the eye doth not see me.
As I had not been, I am, From the belly to the grave I am brought,
Are not my days few? Cease then, and put from me, And I brighten up a little,
Before I go, and return not, Unto a land of darkness and death-shade,
A land of obscurity as thick darkness, Death-shade — and no order, And the shining [is] as thick darkness.'
And Zophar the Naamathite answereth and saith: —
Is a multitude of words not answered? And is a man of lips justified?
Thy devices make men keep silent, Thou scornest, and none is causing blushing!
And thou sayest, 'Pure [is] my discourse, And clean I have been in Thine eyes.'
And yet, O that God had spoken! And doth open His lips with thee.
And declare to thee secrets of wisdom, For counsel hath foldings. And know thou that God forgetteth for thee, [Some] of thine iniquity.
By searching dost thou find out God? Unto perfection find out the Mighty One?
Heights of the heavens! — what dost thou? Deeper than Sheol! — what knowest thou?
Longer than earth [is] its measure, And broader than the sea.
If He pass on, and shut up, and assemble, Who then dost reverse it?
For he hath known men of vanity, And He seeth iniquity, And one doth not consider [it]!
And empty man is bold, And the colt of a wild ass man is born.
If thou — thou hast prepared thy heart, And hast spread out unto Him thy hands,
If iniquity [is] in thy hand, put it far off, And let not perverseness dwell in thy tents.
For then thou liftest up thy face from blemish, And thou hast been firm, and fearest not.
For thou dost forget misery, As waters passed away thou rememberest.
And above the noon doth age rise, Thou fliest — as the morning thou art.
And thou hast trusted because their is hope, And searched — in confidence thou liest down,
And thou hast rested, And none is causing trembling, And many have entreated thy face;
And the eyes of the wicked are consumed, And refuge hath perished from them, And their hope [is] a breathing out of soul!
And Job answereth and saith: —
Truly — ye [are] the people, And with you doth wisdom die.
I also have a heart like you, I am not fallen more than you, And with whom is there not like these?
A laughter to his friend I am: 'He calleth to God, and He answereth him,' A laughter [is] the perfect righteous one.
A torch — despised in the thoughts of the secure Is prepared for those sliding with the feet.
At peace are the tents of spoilers, And those provoking God have confidence, He into whose hand God hath brought.
And yet, ask, I pray thee, [One of] the beasts, and it doth shew thee, And a fowl of the heavens, And it doth declare to thee.
Or talk to the earth, and it sheweth thee, And fishes of the sea recount to thee:
'Who hath not known in all these, That the hand of Jehovah hath done this?
In whose hand [is] the breath of every living thing, And the spirit of all flesh of man.'
Doth not the ear try words? And the palate taste food for itself?
With the very aged [is] wisdom, And [with] length of days understanding.
With Him [are] wisdom and might, To him [are] counsel and understanding.
Lo, He breaketh down, and it is not built up, He shutteth against a man, And it is not opened.
Lo, He keepeth in the waters, and they are dried up, And he sendeth them forth, And they overturn the land.
With Him [are] strength and wisdom, His the deceived and deceiver.
Causing counsellors to go away a spoil, And judges He maketh foolish.
The bands of kings He hath opened, And He bindeth a girdle on their loins.
Causing ministers to go away a spoil And strong ones He overthroweth.
Turning aside the lip of the stedfast, And the reason of the aged He taketh away.
Pouring contempt upon princes, And the girdle of the mighty He made feeble.
Removing deep things out of darkness, And He bringeth out to light death-shade.
Magnifying the nations, and He destroyeth them, Spreading out the nations, and He quieteth them.
Turning aside the heart Of the heads of the people of the land, And he causeth them to wander In vacancy — no way!
They feel darkness, and not light, He causeth them to wander as a drunkard.
Lo, all — hath mine eye seen, Heard hath mine ear, and it attendeth to it.
According to your knowledge I have known — also I. I am not fallen more than you.
Yet I for the Mighty One do speak, And to argue for God I delight.
And yet, ye [are] forgers of falsehood, Physicians of nought — all of you,
O that ye would keep perfectly silent, And it would be to you for wisdom.
Hear, I pray you, my argument, And to the pleadings of my lips attend,
For God do ye speak perverseness? And for Him do ye speak deceit?
His face do ye accept, if for God ye strive?
Is [it] good that He doth search you, If, as one mocketh at a man, ye mock at Him?
He doth surely reprove you, if in secret ye accept faces.
Doth not His excellency terrify you? And His dread fall upon you?
Your remembrances [are] similes of ashes, For high places of clay your heights.
Keep silent from me, and I speak, And pass over me doth what?
Wherefore do I take my flesh in my teeth? And my soul put in my hand?
Lo, He doth slay me — I wait not! Only, my ways unto His face I argue.
Also — He [is] to me for salvation, For the profane cometh not before Him.
Hear ye diligently my word, And my declaration with your ears.
Lo, I pray you, I have set in order the cause, I have known that I am righteous.
Who [is] he that doth strive with me? For now I keep silent and gasp.
Only two things, O God, do with me: Then from Thy face I am not hidden.
Thy hand put far off from me, And Thy terror let not terrify me.
And call Thou, and I — I answer, Or — I speak, and answer Thou me.
How many iniquities and sins have I? My transgression and my sin let me know.
Why dost Thou hide Thy face? And reckonest me for an enemy to Thee?
A leaf driven away dost Thou terrify? And the dry stubble dost Thou pursue?
For Thou writest against me bitter things, And causest me to possess iniquities of my youth:
And puttest in the stocks my feet, And observest all my paths, On the roots of my feet Thou settest a print,
And he, as a rotten thing, weareth away, As a garment hath a moth consumed him.
Man, born of woman! Of few days, and full of trouble!
As a flower he hath gone forth, and is cut off, And he fleeth as a shadow and standeth not.
Also — on this Thou hast opened Thine eyes, And dost bring me into judgment with Thee.
Who giveth a clean thing out of an unclean? not one.
If determined are his days, The number of his months [are] with Thee, His limit Thou hast made, And he passeth not over;
Look away from off him that he may cease, Till he enjoy as an hireling his day.
For there is of a tree hope, if it be cut down, That again it doth change, That its tender branch doth not cease.
If its root becometh old in the earth, And its stem doth die in the dust,
From the fragrance of water it doth flourish, And hath made a crop as a plant.
And a man dieth, and becometh weak, And man expireth, and where [is] he?
Waters have gone away from a sea, And a river becometh waste and dry.
And man hath lain down, and riseth not, Till the wearing out of the heavens they awake not, Nor are roused from their sleep.
O that in Sheol Thou wouldest conceal me, Hide me till the turning of Thine anger, Set for me a limit, and remember me.
If a man dieth — doth he revive? All days of my warfare I wait, till my change come.
Thou dost call, and I — I answer Thee; To the work of Thy hands Thou hast desire.
But now, my steps Thou numberest, Thou dost not watch over my sin.
Sealed up in a bag [is] my transgression, And Thou sewest up mine iniquity.
And yet, a falling mountain wasteth away, And a rock is removed from its place.
Stones have waters worn away, Their outpourings wash away the dust of earth, And the hope of man Thou hast destroyed.
Thou prevailest [over] him for ever, and he goeth, He is changing his countenance, And Thou sendest him away.
Honoured are his sons, and he knoweth not; And they are little, and he attendeth not to them.
Only — his flesh for him is pained, And his soul for him doth mourn.'
And Eliphaz the Temanite answereth and saith: —
Doth a wise man answer [with] vain knowledge? And fill [with] an east wind his belly?
To reason with a word not useful? And speeches — no profit in them?
Yea, thou dost make reverence void, And dost diminish meditation before God.
For thy mouth teacheth thine iniquity, And thou chooseth the tongue of the subtile.
Thy mouth declareth thee wicked, and not I, And thy lips testify against thee.
The first man art thou born? And before the heights wast thou formed?
Of the secret counsel of God dost thou hear? And withdrawest thou unto thee wisdom?
What hast thou known, and we know not? Understandest thou — and it is not with us?
Both the gray-headed And the very aged [are] among us — Greater than thy father [in] days.
Too few for thee are the comforts of God? And a gentle word [is] with thee,
What — doth thine heart take thee away? And what — are thine eyes high?
For thou turnest against God thy spirit? And hast brought out words from thy mouth:
What [is] man that he is pure, And that he is righteous, one born of woman?
Lo, in His holy ones He putteth no credence, And the heavens have not been pure in His eyes.
Also — surely abominable and filthy Is man drinking as water perverseness.
I shew thee — hearken to me — And this I have seen and declare:
Which the wise declare — And have not hid — from their fathers.
To them alone was the land given, And a stranger passed not over into their midst:
'All days of the wicked he is paining himself, And few years have been laid up for the terrible one.
A fearful voice [is] in his ears, In peace doth a destroyer come to him.
He believeth not to return from darkness, And watched [is] he for the sword.
He is wandering for bread — 'Where [is] it?' He hath known that ready at his hand Is a day of darkness.
Terrify him do adversity and distress, They prevail over him As a king ready for a boaster.
For he stretched out against God his hand, And against the Mighty he maketh himself mighty.
He runneth unto Him with a neck, With thick bosses of his shields.
For he hath covered his face with his fat, And maketh vigour over [his] confidence.
And he inhabiteth cities cut off, houses not dwelt in, That have been ready to become heaps.
He is not rich, nor doth his wealth rise, Nor doth he stretch out on earth their continuance.
He turneth not aside from darkness, His tender branch doth a flame dry up, And he turneth aside at the breath of His mouth!
Let him not put credence in vanity, He hath been deceived, For vanity is his recompence.
Not in his day is it completed, And his bending branch is not green.
He shaketh off as a vine his unripe fruit, And casteth off as an olive his blossom.
For the company of the profane [is] gloomy, And fire hath consumed tents of bribery.
To conceive misery, and to bear iniquity, Even their heart doth prepare deceit.
And Job answereth and saith: —
I have heard many such things, Miserable comforters [are] ye all.
Is there an end to words of wind? Or what doth embolden thee that thou answerest?
I also, like you, might speak, If your soul were in my soul's stead. I might join against you with words, And nod at you with my head.
I might harden you with my mouth, And the moving of my lips might be sparing.
If I speak, my pain is not restrained, And I cease — what goeth from me?
Only, now, it hath wearied me; Thou hast desolated all my company,
And Thou dost loathe me, For a witness it hath been, And rise up against me doth my failure, In my face it testifieth.
His anger hath torn, and he hateth me, He hath gnashed at me with his teeth, My adversary sharpeneth his eyes for me.
They have gaped on me with their mouth, In reproach they have smitten my cheeks, Together against me they set themselves.
God shutteth me up unto the perverse, And to the hands of the wicked turneth me over.
At ease I have been, and he breaketh me, And he hath laid hold on my neck, And he breaketh me in pieces, And he raiseth me to him for a mark.
Go round against me do his archers. He splitteth my reins, and spareth not, He poureth out to the earth my gall.
He breaketh me — breach upon breach, He runneth upon me as a mighty one.
Sackcloth I have sewed on my skin, And have rolled in the dust my horn.
My face is foul with weeping, And on mine eyelids [is] death-shade.
Not for violence in my hands, And my prayer [is] pure.
O earth, do not thou cover my blood! And let there not be a place for my cry.
Also, now, lo, in the heavens [is] my witness, And my testifier in the high places.
My interpreter [is] my friend, Unto God hath mine eye dropped:
And he reasoneth for a man with God, And a son of man for his friend.
When a few years do come, Then a path I return not do I go.
My spirit hath been destroyed, My days extinguished — graves [are] for me.
If not — mockeries [are] with me. And in their provocations mine eye lodgeth.
Place, I pray Thee, my pledge with Thee; Who is he that striketh hand with me?
For their heart Thou hast hidden From understanding, Therefore Thou dost not exalt them.
For a portion he sheweth friendship, And the eyes of his sons are consumed.
And he set me up for a proverb of the peoples, And a wonder before them I am.
And dim from sorrow is mine eye, And my members as a shadow all of them.
Astonished are the upright at this, And the innocent against the profane Stirreth himself up.
And the righteous layeth hold [on] his way, And the clean of hands addeth strength, And — dumb are they all.
Return, and come in, I pray you, And I find not among you a wise man.
My days have passed by, My devices have been broken off, The possessions of my heart!
Night for day they appoint, Light [is] near because of darkness.
If I wait — Sheol [is] my house, In darkness I have spread out my couch.
To corruption I have called: — 'Thou [art] my father.' 'My mother' and 'my sister' — to the worm.
And where [is] now my hope? Yea, my hope, who doth behold it?
[To] the parts of Sheol ye go down, If together on the dust we may rest.
And Bildad the Shuhite answereth and saith: —
When do ye set an end to words? Consider ye, and afterwards do we speak.
Wherefore have we been reckoned as cattle? We have been defiled in your eyes!
(He is tearing himself in his anger.) For thy sake is earth forsaken? And removed is a rock from its place?
Also, the light of the wicked is extinguished. And there doth not shine a spark of his fire.
The light hath been dark in his tent, And his lamp over him is extinguished.
Straitened are the steps of his strength, And cast him down doth his own counsel.
For he is sent into a net by his own feet, And on a snare he doth walk habitually.
Seize on the heel doth a gin, Prevail over him do the designing.
Hidden in the earth is his cord, And his trap on the path.
Round about terrified him have terrors, And they have scattered him — at his feet.
Hungry is his sorrow, And calamity is ready at his side.
It consumeth the parts of his skin, Consume his parts doth death's first-born.
Drawn from his tent is his confidence, And it causeth him to step to the king of terrors.
It dwelleth in his tent — out of his provender, Scattered over his habitation is sulphur.
From beneath his roots are dried up, And from above cut off is his crop.
His memorial hath perished from the land, And he hath no name on the street.
They thrust him from light unto darkness, And from the habitable earth cast him out.
He hath no continuator, Nor successor among his people, And none is remaining in his dwellings.
At this day westerns have been astonished And easterns have taken fright.
Only these [are] tabernacles of the perverse, And this the place God hath not known.
And Job answereth and saith: —
Till when do ye afflict my soul, And bruise me with words?
These ten times ye put me to shame, ye blush not. Ye make yourselves strange to me —
And also — truly, I have erred, With me doth my error remain.
If, truly, over me ye magnify yourselves, And decide against me my reproach;
Know now, that God turned me upside down, And His net against me hath set round,
Lo, I cry out — violence, and am not answered, I cry aloud, and there is no judgment.
My way He hedged up, and I pass not over, And on my paths darkness He placeth.
Mine honour from off me He hath stripped, And He turneth the crown from my head.
He breaketh me down round about, and I go, And removeth like a tree my hope.
And He kindleth against me His anger, And reckoneth me to Him as His adversaries.
Come in do His troops together, And they raise up against me their way, And encamp round about my tent.
My brethren from me He hath put far off, And mine acquaintances surely Have been estranged from me.
Ceased have my neighbours And my familiar friends have forgotten me,
Sojourners of my house and my maids, For a stranger reckon me: An alien I have been in their eyes.
To my servant I have called, And he doth not answer, With my mouth I make supplication to him.
My spirit is strange to my wife, And my favours to the sons of my [mother's] womb.
Also sucklings have despised me, I rise, and they speak against me.
Abominate me do all the men of my counsel, And those I have loved, Have been turned against me.
To my skin and to my flesh Cleaved hath my bone, And I deliver myself with the skin of my teeth.
Pity me, pity me, ye my friends, For the hand of God hath stricken against me.
Why do you pursue me as God? And with my flesh are not satisfied?
Who doth grant now, That my words may be written? Who doth grant that in a book they may be graven?
With a pen of iron and lead — For ever in a rock they may be hewn.
That — I have known my Redeemer, The Living and the Last, For the dust he doth rise.
And after my skin hath compassed this [body], Then from my flesh I see God:
Whom I — I see on my side, And mine eyes have beheld, and not a stranger, Consumed have been my reins in my bosom.
But ye say, 'Why do we pursue after him?' And the root of the matter hath been found in me.
Be ye afraid because of the sword, For furious [are] the punishments of the sword, That ye may know that [there is] a judgment.
And Zophar the Naamathite answereth and saith: —
Therefore my thoughts cause me to answer, And because of my sensations in me.
The chastisement of my shame I hear, And the spirit of mine understanding Doth cause me to answer:
This hast thou known from antiquity? Since the placing of man on earth?
That the singing of the wicked [is] short, And the joy of the profane for a moment,
Though his excellency go up to the heavens, And his head against a cloud he strike —
As his own dung for ever he doth perish, His beholders say: 'Where [is] he?'
As a dream he fleeth, and they find him not, And he is driven away as a vision of the night,
The eye hath not seen him, and addeth not. And not again doth his place behold him.
His sons do the poor oppress, And his hands give back his wealth.
His bones have been full of his youth, And with him on the dust it lieth down.
Though he doth sweeten evil in his mouth, Doth hide it under his tongue,
Hath pity on it, and doth not forsake it, And keep it back in the midst of his palate,
His food in his bowels is turned, The bitterness of asps [is] in his heart.
Wealth he hath swallowed, and doth vomit it. From his belly God driveth it out.
Gall of asps he sucketh, Slay him doth the tongue of a viper.
He looketh not on rivulets, Flowing of brooks of honey and butter.
He is giving back [what] he laboured for, And doth not consume [it]; As a bulwark [is] his exchange, and he exults not.
For he oppressed — he forsook the poor, A house he hath taken violently away, And he doth not build it.
For he hath not known ease in his belly. With his desirable thing he delivereth not himself.
There is not a remnant to his food, Therefore his good doth not stay.
In the fulness of his sufficiency he is straitened. Every perverse hand doth meet him.
It cometh to pass, at the filling of his belly, He sendeth forth against him The fierceness of His anger, Yea, He raineth on him in his eating.
He fleeth from an iron weapon, Pass through him doth a bow of brass.
One hath drawn, And it cometh out from the body, And a glittering weapon from his gall proceedeth. On him [are] terrors.
All darkness is hid for his treasures, Consume him doth a fire not blown, Broken is the remnant in his tent.
Reveal do the heavens his iniquity, And earth is raising itself against him.
Remove doth the increase of his house, Poured forth in a day of His anger.
This [is] the portion of a wicked man from God. And an inheritance appointed him by God.
And Job answereth and saith: —
Hear ye diligently my word, And this is your consolation.
Bear with me, and I speak, And after my speaking — ye may deride.
I — to man [is] my complaint? and if [so], wherefore May not my temper become short?
Turn unto me, and be astonished, And put hand to mouth.
Yea, if I have remembered, then I have been troubled. And my flesh hath taken fright.
Wherefore do the wicked live? They have become old, Yea, they have been mighty in wealth.
Their seed is established, Before their face with them, And their offspring before their eyes.
Their houses [are] peace without fear, Nor [is] a rod of God upon them.
His bullock hath eaten corn, and doth not loath. His cow bringeth forth safely, And doth not miscarry.
They send forth as a flock their sucklings, And their children skip,
They lift [themselves] up at timbrel and harp, And rejoice at the sound of an organ.
They wear out in good their days, And in a moment [to] Sheol go down.
And they say to God, 'Turn aside from us, And the knowledge of Thy ways We have not desired.
What [is] the Mighty One that we serve Him? And what do we profit when we meet with Him?'
Lo, not in their hand [is] their good, (The counsel of the wicked Hath been far from me.)
How oft is the lamp of the wicked extinguished, And come on them doth their calamity? Pangs He apportioneth in His anger.
They are as straw before wind, And as chaff a hurricane hath stolen away,
God layeth up for his sons his sorrow, He giveth recompense unto him — and he knoweth.
His own eyes see his destruction, And of the wrath of the Mighty he drinketh.
For what [is] his delight in his house after him, And the number of his months cut off?
To God doth [one] teach knowledge, And He the high doth judge?
This [one] dieth in his perfect strength, Wholly at ease and quiet.
His breasts have been full of milk, And marrow his bones doth moisten.
And this [one] dieth with a bitter soul, And have not eaten with gladness.
Together — on the dust they lie down, And the worm doth cover them over.
Lo, I have known your thoughts, And the devices against me ye do wrongfully.
For ye say, 'Where [is] the house of the noble? And where the tent — The tabernacles of the wicked?'
Have ye not asked those passing by the way? And their signs do ye not know?
That to a day of calamity is the wicked spared. To a day of wrath they are brought.
Who doth declare to his face his way? And [for] that which he hath done, Who doth give recompence to him?
And he — to the graves he is brought. And over the heap a watch is kept.
Sweet to him have been the clods of the valley, And after him every man he draweth, And before him there is no numbering.
And how do ye comfort me [with] vanity, And in your answers hath been left trespass?
And Eliphaz the Temanite answereth and saith: —
To God is a man profitable, Because a wise man to himself is profitable?
Is it a delight to the Mighty One That thou art righteous? is it gain, That thou makest perfect thy ways?
Because of thy reverence Doth He reason [with] thee? He entereth with thee into judgment:
Is not thy wickedness abundant? And there is no end to thine iniquities.
For thou takest a pledge of thy brother for nought, And the garments of the naked Thou dost strip off.
Thou causest not the weary to drink water, And from the hungry thou withholdest bread.
As to the man of arm — he hath the earth, And the accepted of face — he dwelleth in it.
Widows thou hast sent away empty, And the arms of the fatherless are bruised.
Therefore round about thee [are] snares, And trouble thee doth fear suddenly.
Or darkness — thou dost not see, And abundance of waters doth cover thee.
Is not God high [in] heaven? And see the summit of the stars, That they are high.
And thou hast said, 'What — hath God known? Through thickness doth He judge?
Thick clouds [are] a secret place to Him, And He doth not see;' And the circle of the heavens He walketh habitually,
The path of the age dost thou observe, That men of iniquity have trodden?
Who have been cut down unexpectedly, A flood is poured out on their foundation.
Those saying to God, 'Turn aside from us,' And what doth the Mighty One to them?
And he hath filled their houses [with] good: (And the counsel of the wicked Hath been far from me.)
See do the righteous and they rejoice, And the innocent mocketh at them,
'Surely our substance hath not been cut off, And their excellency hath fire consumed.'
Acquaint thyself, I pray thee, with Him, And be at peace, Thereby thine increase [is] good.
Receive, I pray thee, from His mouth a law, And set His sayings in thy heart.
If thou dost return unto the Mighty Thou art built up, Thou puttest iniquity far from thy tents.
So as to set on the dust a defence, And on a rock of the valleys a covering.
And the Mighty hath been thy defence, And silver [is] strength to thee.
For then on the Mighty thou delightest thyself, And dost lift up unto God thy face,
Thou dost make supplication unto Him, And He doth hear thee, And thy vows thou completest.
And thou decreest a saying, And it is established to thee, And on thy ways hath light shone.
For they have made low, And thou sayest, 'Lift up.' And the bowed down of eyes he saveth.
He delivereth the not innocent, Yea, he hath been delivered By the cleanness of thy hands.
And Job answereth and saith: —
Also — to-day [is] my complaint bitter, My hand hath been heavy because of my sighing.
O that I had known — and I find Him, I come in unto His seat,
I arrange before Him the cause, And my mouth fill [with] arguments.
I know the words He doth answer me, And understand what He saith to me.
In the abundance of power doth He strive with me? No! surely He putteth [it] in me.
There the upright doth reason with Him, And I escape for ever from my judge.
Lo, forward I go — and He is not, And backward — and I perceive him not.
[To] the left in His working — and I see not, He is covered [on] the right, and I behold not.
For He hath known the way with me, He hath tried me — as gold I go forth.
On His step hath my foot laid hold, His way I have kept, and turn not aside,
The command of His lips, and I depart not. Above my allotted portion I have laid up The sayings of His mouth.
And He [is] in one [mind], And who doth turn Him back? And His soul hath desired — and He doth [it].
For He doth complete my portion, And many such things [are] with Him.
Therefore, from His presence I am troubled, I consider, and am afraid of Him.
And God hath made my heart soft, And the Mighty hath troubled me.
For I have not been cut off before darkness, And before me He covered thick darkness.
Wherefore from the Mighty One Times have not been hidden, And those knowing Him have not seen His days.
The borders they reach, A drove they have taken violently away, Yea, they do evil.
The ass of the fatherless they lead away, They take in pledge the ox of the widow,
They turn aside the needy from the way, Together have hid the poor of the earth.
Lo, wild asses in a wilderness, They have gone out about their work, Seeking early for prey, A mixture for himself — food for young ones.
In a field his provender they reap, And the vineyard of the wicked they glean.
The naked they cause to lodge Without clothing. And there is no covering in the cold.
From the inundation of hills they are wet, And without a refuge — have embraced a rock.
They take violently away From the breast the orphan, And on the poor they lay a pledge.
Naked, they have gone without clothing, And hungry — have taken away a sheaf.
Between their walls they make oil, Wine-presses they have trodden, and thirst.
Because of enmity men do groan, And the soul of pierced ones doth cry, And God doth not give praise.
They have been among rebellious ones of light, They have not discerned His ways, Nor abode in His paths.
At the light doth the murderer rise, He doth slay the poor and needy, And in the night he is as a thief.
And the eye of an adulterer Hath observed the twilight, Saying, 'No eye doth behold me.' And he putteth the face in secret.
He hath dug in the darkness — houses; By day they shut themselves up, They have not known light.
When together, morning [is] to them death shade, When he discerneth the terrors of death shade.
Light he [is] on the face of the waters, Vilified is their portion in the earth, He turneth not the way of vineyards.
Drought — also heat — consume snow-waters, Sheol [those who] have sinned.
Forget him doth the womb, Sweeten [on] him doth the worm, No more is he remembered, And broken as a tree is wickedness.
Treating evil the barren [who] beareth not, And [to] the widow he doth no good,
And hath drawn the mighty by his power, He riseth, and none believeth in life.
He giveth to him confidence, and he is supported, And his eyes [are] on their ways.
High they were [for] a little, and they are not, And they have been brought low. As all [others] they are shut up, And as the head of an ear of corn cut off.
And if not now, who doth prove me a liar, And doth make of nothing my word?
And Bildad the Shuhite answereth and saith: —
The rule and fear [are] with Him, Making peace in His high places.
Is their [any] number to His troops? And on whom ariseth not His light?
And what? is man righteous with God? And what? is he pure — born of a woman?
Lo — unto the moon, and it shineth not, And stars have not been pure in His eyes.
How much less man — a grub, And the son of man — a worm!
And Job answereth and saith: —
What — thou hast helped the powerless, Saved an arm not strong!
What — thou hast given counsel to the unwise, And wise plans in abundance made known.
With whom hast thou declared words? And whose breath came forth from thee?
The Rephaim are formed, Beneath the waters, also their inhabitants.
Naked [is] Sheol over-against Him, And there is no covering to destruction.
Stretching out the north over desolation, Hanging the earth upon nothing,
Binding up the waters in His thick clouds, And the cloud is not rent under them.
Taking hold of the face of the throne, Spreading over it His cloud.
A limit He hath placed on the waters, Unto the boundary of light with darkness.
Pillars of the heavens do tremble, And they wonder because of His rebuke.
By His power He hath quieted the sea, And by His understanding smitten the proud.
By His Spirit the heavens He beautified, Formed hath His hand the fleeing serpent.
Lo, these [are] the borders of His way, And how little a matter is heard of Him, And the thunder of His might Who doth understand?
And Job addeth to lift up his simile, and saith: —
God liveth! He turned aside my judgment, And the Mighty — He made my soul bitter.
For all the while my breath [is] in me, And the spirit of God in my nostrils.
My lips do not speak perverseness, And my tongue doth not utter deceit.
Pollution to me — if I justify you, Till I expire I turn not aside mine integrity from me.
On my righteousness I have laid hold, And I do not let it go, My heart doth not reproach me while I live.
As the wicked is my enemy, And my withstander as the perverse.
For what [is] the hope of the profane, When He doth cut off? When God doth cast off his soul?
His cry doth God hear, When distress cometh on him?
On the Mighty doth he delight himself? Call God at all times?
I shew you by the hand of God, That which [is] with the Mighty I hide not.
Lo, ye — all of you — have seen, And why [is] this — ye are altogether vain?
This [is] the portion of wicked man with God, And the inheritance of terrible ones From the Mighty they receive.
If his sons multiply — for them [is] a sword. And his offspring [are] not satisfied [with] bread.
His remnant in death are buried, And his widows do not weep.
If he heap up as dust silver, And as clay prepare clothing,
He prepareth — and the righteous putteth [it] on, And the silver the innocent doth apportion.
He hath built as a moth his house, And as a booth a watchman hath made.
Rich he lieth down, and he is not gathered, His eyes he hath opened, and he is not.
Overtake him as waters do terrors, By night stolen him away hath a whirlwind.
Take him up doth an east wind, and he goeth, And it frighteneth him from his place,
And it casteth at him, and doth not spare, From its hand he diligently fleeth.
It clappeth at him its hands, And it hisseth at him from his place.
Surely there is for silver a source, And a place for the gold they refine;
Iron from the dust is taken, And [from] the firm stone brass.
An end hath he set to darkness, And to all perfection he is searching, A stone of darkness and death-shade.
A stream hath broken out from a sojourner, Those forgotten of the foot, They were low, from man they wandered.
The earth! from it cometh forth bread, And its under-part is turned like fire.
A place of the sapphire [are] its stones, And it hath dust of gold.
A path — not known it hath a ravenous fowl, Nor scorched it hath an eye of the kite,
Nor trodden it have the sons of pride, Not passed over it hath the fierce lion.
Against the flint he sent forth his hand, He overturned from the root mountains.
Among rocks, brooks he hath cleaved, And every precious thing hath his eye seen.
From overflowing floods he hath bound, And the hidden thing bringeth out [to] light.
And the wisdom — whence is it found? And where [is] this, the place of understanding?
Man hath not known its arrangement, Nor is it found in the land of the living.
The deep hath said, 'It [is] not in me,' And the sea hath said, 'It is not with me.'
Gold is not given for it, Nor is silver weighed — its price.
It is not valued with pure gold of Ophir, With precious onyx and sapphire,
Not equal it do gold and crystal, Nor [is] its exchange a vessel of fine gold.
Corals and pearl are not remembered, The acquisition of wisdom [is] above rubies.
Not equal it doth the topaz of Cush, With pure gold it is not valued.
And the wisdom — whence doth it come? And where [is] this, the place of understanding?
It hath been hid from the eyes of all living. And from the fowl of the heavens It hath been hidden.
Destruction and death have said: 'With our ears we have heard its fame.'
God hath understood its way, And He hath known its place.
For He to the ends of the earth doth look, Under the whole heavens He doth see,
To make for the wind a weight, And the waters He meted out in measure.
In His making for the rain a limit, And a way for the brightness of the voices,
Then He hath seen and declareth it, He hath prepared it, and also searched it out,
And He saith to man: — 'Lo, fear of the Lord, that [is] wisdom, And to turn from evil [is] understanding.'
And Job addeth to lift up his simile, and saith: —
Who doth make me as [in] months past, As [in] the days of God's preserving me?
In His causing His lamp to shine on my head, By His light I walk [through] darkness.
As I have been in days of my maturity, And the counsel of God upon my tent.
When yet the Mighty One [is] with me. Round about me — my young ones,
When washing my goings with butter, And the firm rock [is] with me rivulets of oil.
When I go out to the gate by the city, In a broad place I prepare my seat.
Seen me have youths, and they, been hidden, And the aged have risen — they stood up.
Princes have kept in words, And a hand they place on their mouth.
The voice of leaders hath been hidden, And their tongue to the palate hath cleaved.
For the ear heard, and declareth me happy, And the eye hath seen, and testifieth [to] me.
For I deliver the afflicted who is crying, And the fatherless who hath no helper.
The blessing of the perishing cometh on me, And the heart of the widow I cause to sing.
Righteousness I have put on, and it clotheth me, As a robe and a diadem my justice.
Eyes I have been to the blind, And feet to the lame [am] I.
A father I [am] to the needy, And the cause I have not known I search out.
And I break the jaw-teeth of the perverse, And from his teeth I cast away prey.
And I say, 'With my nest I expire, And as the sand I multiply days.'
My root is open unto the waters, And dew doth lodge on my branch.
My honour [is] fresh with me, And my bow in my hand is renewed.
To me they have hearkened, Yea, they wait, and are silent for my counsel.
After my word they change not, And on them doth my speech drop,
And they wait as [for] rain for me, And their mouth they have opened wide [As] for the latter rain.
I laugh unto them — they give no credence, And the light of my face cause not to fall.
I choose their way, and sit head, And I dwell as a king in a troop, When mourners he doth comfort.
And now, laughed at me, Have the younger in days than I, Whose fathers I have loathed to set With the dogs of my flock.
Also — the power of their hands, why [is it] to me? On them hath old age perished.
With want and with famine gloomy, Those fleeing to a dry place, Formerly a desolation and waste,
Those cropping mallows near a shrub, And broom-roots [is] their food.
From the midst they are cast out, (They shout against them as a thief),
In a frightful place of valleys to dwell, Holes of earth and clefts.
Among shrubs they do groan, Under nettles they are gathered together.
Sons of folly — even sons without name, They have been smitten from the land.
And now, their song I have been, And I am to them for a byword.
They have abominated me, They have kept far from me, And from before me have not spared to spit.
Because His cord He loosed and afflicteth me, And the bridle from before me, They have cast away.
On the right hand doth a brood arise, My feet they have cast away, And they raise up against me, Their paths of calamity.
They have broken down my path, By my calamity they profit, 'He hath no helper.'
As a wide breach they come, Under the desolation have rolled themselves.
He hath turned against me terrors, It pursueth as the wind mine abundance, And as a thick cloud, Hath my safety passed away.
And now, in me my soul poureth itself out, Seize me do days of affliction.
At night my bone hath been pierced in me, And mine eyelids do not lie down.
By the abundance of power, Is my clothing changed, As the mouth of my coat it doth gird me.
Casting me into mire, And I am become like dust and ashes.
I cry unto Thee, And Thou dost not answer me, I have stood, and Thou dost consider me.
Thou art turned to be fierce to me, With the strength of Thy hand, Thou oppressest me.
Thou dost lift me up, On the wind Thou dost cause me to ride, And Thou meltest — Thou levellest me.
For I have known To death Thou dost bring me back, And [to] the house appointed for all living.
Surely not against the heap Doth He send forth the hand, Though in its ruin they have safety.
Did not I weep for him whose day is hard? Grieved hath my soul for the needy.
When good I expected, then cometh evil, And I wait for light, and darkness cometh.
My bowels have boiled, and have not ceased, Gone before me have days of affliction.
Mourning I have gone without the sun, I have risen, in an assembly I cry.
A brother I have been to dragons, And a companion to daughters of the ostrich.
My skin hath been black upon me, And my bone hath burned from heat,
And my harp doth become mourning, And my organ the sound of weeping.
A covenant I made for mine eyes, And what — do I attend to a virgin?
And what [is] the portion of God from above? And the inheritance of the Mighty from the heights?
Is not calamity to the perverse? And strangeness to workers of iniquity?
Doth not He see my ways, And all my steps number?
If I have walked with vanity, And my foot doth hasten to deceit,
He doth weigh me in righteous balances, And God doth know my integrity.
If my step doth turn aside from the way, And after mine eyes hath my heart gone, And to my hands cleaved hath blemish,
Let me sow — and another eat, And my products let be rooted out.
If my heart hath been enticed by woman, And by the opening of my neighbour I laid wait,
Grind to another let my wife, And over her let others bend.
For it [is] a wicked thing, and a judicial iniquity;
For a fire it [is], to destruction it consumeth, And among all mine increase doth take root,
If I despise the cause of my man-servant, And of my handmaid, In their contending with me,
Then what do I do when God ariseth? And when He doth inspect, What do I answer Him?
Did not He that made me in the womb make him? Yea, prepare us in the womb doth One.
If I withhold from pleasure the poor, And the eyes of the widow do consume,
And I do eat my morsel by myself, And the orphan hath not eat of it,
(But from my youth He grew up with me as [with] a father, And from the belly of my mother I am led.)
If I see [any] perishing without clothing, And there is no covering to the needy,
If his loins have not blessed me, And from the fleece of my sheep He doth not warm himself,
If I have waved at the fatherless my hand, When I see in [him] the gate of my court,
My shoulder from its blade let fall, And mine arm from the bone be broken.
For a dread unto me [is] calamity [from] God, And because of His excellency I am not able.
If I have made gold my confidence, And to the pure gold have said, 'My trust,'
If I rejoice because great [is] my wealth, And because abundance hath my hand found,
If I see the light when it shineth, And the precious moon walking,
And my heart is enticed in secret, And my hand doth kiss my mouth,
It also [is] a judicial iniquity, For I had lied to God above.
If I rejoice at the ruin of my hater, And stirred up myself when evil found him,
Yea, I have not suffered my mouth to sin, To ask with an oath his life.
If not — say ye, O men of my tent, 'O that we had of his flesh, we are not satisfied.'
In the street doth not lodge a stranger, My doors to the traveller I open.
If I have covered as Adam my transgressions, To hide in my bosom mine iniquity,
Because I fear a great multitude, And the contempt of families doth affright me, Then I am silent, I go not out of the opening.
Who giveth to me a hearing? lo, my mark. The Mighty One doth answer me, And a bill hath mine adversary written.
If not — on my shoulder I take it up, I bind it a crown on myself.
The number of my steps I tell Him, As a leader I approach Him.
If against me my land doth cry out, And together its furrows weep,
If its strength I consumed without money, And the life of its possessors, I have caused to breathe out,
Instead of wheat let a thorn go forth, And instead of barley a useless weed! The words of Job are finished.
And these three men cease from answering Job, for he [is] righteous in his own eyes,
and burn doth the anger of Elihu son of Barachel the Buzite, of the family of Ram; against Job hath his anger burned, because of his justifying himself more than God;
and against his three friends hath his anger burned, because that they have not found an answer, and condemn Job.
And Elihu hath waited earnestly beside Job with words, for they are older than he in days.
And Elihu seeth that there is no answer in the mouth of the three men, and his anger burneth.
And Elihu son of Barachel the Buzite answereth and saith: — Young I [am] in days, and ye [are] age Therefore I have feared, And am afraid of shewing you my opinion.
I said: Days do speak, And multitude of years teach wisdom.
Surely a spirit is in man, And the breath of the Mighty One Doth cause them to understand.
The multitude are not wise, Nor do the aged understand judgment.
Therefore I have said: Hearken to me, I do shew my opinion — even I.
Lo, I have waited for your words, I give ear unto your reasons, Till ye search out sayings.
And unto you I attend, And lo, there is no reasoner for Job, [Or] answerer of his sayings among you.
Lest ye say, We have found wisdom, God doth thrust him away, not man.
And he hath not set in array words for me, And with your sayings I do not answer him.
(They have broken down, They have not answered again, They removed from themselves words.
And I have waited, but they do not speak, For they have stood still, They have not answered any more.)
I answer, even I — my share, I shew my opinion — even I.
For I have been full of words, Distressed me hath the spirit of my breast,
Lo, my breast [is] as wine not opened, Like new bottles it is broken up.
I speak, and there is refreshment to me, I open my lips and answer.
Let me not, I pray you, accept the face of any, Nor unto man give flattering titles,
For I have not known to give flattering titles, In a little doth my Maker take me away.
And yet, I pray thee, O Job, Hear my speech and [to] all my words give ear.
Lo, I pray thee, I have opened my mouth, My tongue hath spoken in the palate.
Of the uprightness of my heart [are] my sayings, And knowledge have my lips clearly spoken.
The Spirit of God hath made me, And the breath of the Mighty doth quicken me.
If thou art able — answer me, Set in array before me — station thyself.
Lo, I [am], according to thy word, for God, From the clay I — I also, have been formed.
Lo, my terror doth not frighten thee, And my burden on thee is not heavy.
Surely — thou hast said in mine ears, And the sounds of words I hear:
'Pure [am] I, without transgression, Innocent [am] I, and I have no iniquity.
Lo, occasions against me He doth find, He doth reckon me for an enemy to Him,
He doth put in the stocks my feet, He doth watch all my paths.'
Lo, [in] this thou hast not been righteous, I answer thee, that greater is God than man.
Wherefore against Him hast thou striven, When [for] all His matters He answereth not?
For once doth God speak, and twice, (He doth not behold it.)
In a dream — a vision of night, In the falling of deep sleep on men, In slumberings on a bed.
Then He uncovereth the ear of men, And for their instruction sealeth:
To turn aside man [from] doing, And pride from man He concealeth.
He keepeth back his soul from corruption, And his life from passing away by a dart.
And he hath been reproved With pain on his bed, And the strife of his bones [is] enduring.
And his life hath nauseated bread, And his soul desirable food.
His flesh is consumed from being seen, And high are his bones, they were not seen!
And draw near to the pit doth his soul, And his life to those causing death.
If there is by him a messenger, An interpreter — one of a thousand, To declare for man his uprightness:
Then He doth favour him and saith, 'Ransom him from going down to the pit, I have found an atonement.'
Fresher [is] his flesh than a child's, He returneth to the days of his youth.
He maketh supplication unto God, And He accepteth him. And he seeth His face with shouting, And He returneth to man His righteousness.
He looketh on men, and saith, 'I sinned, And uprightness I have perverted, And it hath not been profitable to me.
He hath ransomed my soul From going over into the pit, And my life on the light looketh.'
Lo, all these doth God work, Twice — thrice with man,
To bring back his soul from the pit, To be enlightened with the light of the living.
Attend, O Job, hearken to me, Keep silent, and I — I do speak.
If there are words — answer me, Speak, for I have a desire to justify thee.
If there are not — hearken thou to me, Keep silent, and I teach thee wisdom.
And Elihu answereth and saith:
Hear, O wise men, my words, And, O knowing ones, give ear to me.
For the ear doth try words, And the palate tasteth to eat.
Judgment let us choose for ourselves, Let us know among ourselves what [is] good.
For Job hath said, 'I have been righteous, And God hath turned aside my right,
Against my right do I lie? Mortal [is] mine arrow — without transgression.'
Who [is] a man like Job? He drinketh scoffing like water,
And he hath travelled for company With workers of iniquity, So as to go with men of wickedness.
For he hath said, 'It doth not profit a man, When he delighteth himself with God.'
Therefore, O men of heart, hearken to me; Far be it from God to do wickedness, And [from] the Mighty to do perverseness:
For the work of man he repayeth to him, And according to the path of each He doth cause him to find.
Yea, truly, God doth not do wickedly, And the Mighty doth not pervert judgment.
Who hath inspected for Himself the earth? And who hath placed all the habitable world?
If He doth set on him His heart, His spirit and his breath unto Him He gathereth.
Expire doth all flesh together, And man to dust returneth.
And if [there is] understanding, hear this, Give ear to the voice of my words.
Yea, doth one hating justice govern? Or the Most Just dost thou condemn?
Who hath said to a king — 'Worthless,' Unto princes — 'Wicked?'
That hath not accepted the person of princes, Nor hath known the rich before the poor, For a work of His hands [are] all of them.
[In] a moment they die, and at midnight Shake do people, and they pass away, And they remove the mighty without hand.
For His eyes [are] on the ways of each, And all his steps He doth see.
There is no darkness nor death-shade, For workers of iniquity to be hidden there;
For He doth not suffer man any more, To go unto God in judgment,
He breaketh the mighty — no searching! And He appointeth others in their stead.
Therefore He knoweth their works, And He hath overturned by night, And they are bruised.
As wicked He hath stricken them, In the place of beholders.
Because that against right They have turned aside from after Him, And none of His ways have considered wisely,
To cause to come in unto Him The cry of the poor, And the cry of the afflicted He heareth.
And He giveth rest, and who maketh wrong? And hideth the face, and who beholdeth it? And in reference to a nation and to a man, [It is] the same.
From the reigning of a profane man, From the snares of a people;
For unto God hath any said: 'I have taken away, I do not corruptly,
Besides [that which] I see, shew Thou me, If iniquity I have done — I do not add?'
By thee doth He recompense, That thou hast refused — That thou dost choose, and not I? And what thou hast known, speak.
Let men of heart say to me, And a wise man is hearkening to me.
Job — not with knowledge doth he speak, And his words [are] not with wisdom.
My Father! let Job be tried — unto victory, Because of answers for men of iniquity,
For he doth add to his sin, Transgression among us he vomiteth, And multiplieth his sayings to God.
And Elihu answereth and saith: —
This hast thou reckoned for judgment: Thou hast said — 'My righteousness [is] more than God's?'
For thou sayest, 'What doth it profit Thee! What do I profit from my sin?'
I return thee words, and thy friends with thee,
Behold attentively the heavens — and see, And behold the clouds, They have been higher than thou.
If thou hast sinned, what dost thou against Him? And thy transgressions have been multiplied, What dost thou to Him?
If thou hast been righteous, What dost thou give to Him? Or what from thy hand doth He receive?
For a man like thyself [is] thy wickedness, And for a son of man thy righteousness.
Because of the multitude of oppressions They cause to cry out, They cry because of the arm of the mighty.
And none said, 'Where [is] God my maker? Giving songs in the night,
Teaching us more than the beasts of the earth, Yea, than the fowl of the heavens He maketh us wiser.'
There they cry, and He doth not answer, Because of the pride of evil doers.
Surely vanity God doth not hear, And the Mighty doth not behold it.
Yea, though thou sayest thou dost not behold Him, Judgment [is] before Him, and stay for Him.
And, now, because there is not, He hath appointed His anger, And He hath not known in great extremity.
And Job [with] vanity doth open his mouth, Without knowledge words he multiplieth.
And Elihu addeth and saith: —
Honour me a little, and I shew thee, That yet for God [are] words.
I lift up my knowledge from afar, And to my Maker I ascribe righteousness.
For, truly, my words [are] not false, The perfect in knowledge [is] with thee.
Lo, God [is] mighty, and despiseth not, Mighty [in] power [and] heart.
He reviveth not the wicked, And the judgment of the poor appointeth;
He withdraweth not from the righteous His eyes, And [from] kings on the throne, And causeth them to sit for ever, and they are high,
And if prisoners in fetters They are captured with cords of affliction,
Then He declareth to them their work, And their transgressions, Because they have become mighty,
And He uncovereth their ear for instruction, And saith that they turn back from iniquity.
If they do hear and serve, They complete their days in good, And their years in pleasantness.
And if they do not hearken, By the dart they pass away, And expire without knowledge.
And the profane in heart set the face, They cry not when He hath bound them.
Their soul dieth in youth, And their life among the defiled.
He draweth out the afflicted in his affliction, And uncovereth in oppression their ear.
And also He moved thee from a strait place, [To] a broad place — no straitness under it, And the sitting beyond of thy table Hath been full of fatness.
And the judgment of the wicked thou hast fulfilled, Judgment and justice are upheld — because of fury,
Lest He move thee with a stroke, And the abundance of an atonement turn thee not aside.
Doth He value thy riches? He hath gold, and all the forces of power.
Desire not the night, For the going up of peoples in their stead.
Take heed — do not turn unto iniquity, For on this thou hast fixed Rather than [on] affliction.
Lo, God doth sit on high by His power, Who [is] like Him — a teacher?
Who hath appointed unto Him his way? And who said, 'Thou hast done iniquity?'
Remember that thou magnify His work That men have beheld.
All men have looked on it, Man looketh attentively from afar.
Lo, God [is] high, And we know not the number of His years, Yea, there [is] no searching.
When He doth diminish droppings of the waters, They refine rain according to its vapour,
Which clouds do drop, They distil on man abundantly.
Yea, doth [any] understand The spreadings out of a cloud? The noises of His tabernacle?
Lo, He hath spread over it His light, And the roots of the sea He hath covered,
For by them He doth judge peoples, He giveth food in abundance.
By two palms He hath covered the light, And layeth a charge over it in meeting,
He sheweth by it [to] his friend substance, Anger against perversity.
Also, at this my heart trembleth, And it moveth from its place.
Hearken diligently to the trembling of His voice, Yea, the sound from His mouth goeth forth.
Under the whole heavens He directeth it, And its light [is] over the skirts of the earth.
After it roar doth a voice — He thundereth with the voice of His excellency, And He doth not hold them back, When His voice is heard.
God thundereth with His voice wonderfully, Doing great things and we know not.
For to snow He saith, 'Be [on] the earth.' And the small rain and great rain of His power.
Into the hand of every man he sealeth, For the knowledge by all men of His work.
And enter doth the beast into covert, And in its habitations it doth continue.
From the inner chamber cometh a hurricane, And from scatterings winds — cold,
From the breath of God is frost given, And the breadth of waters is straitened,
Yea, by filling He doth press out a cloud, Scatter a cloud doth His light.
And it is turning itself round by His counsels, For their doing all He commandeth them, On the face of the habitable earth.
Whether for a rod, or for His land, Or for kindness — He doth cause it to come.
Hear this, O Job, Stand and consider the wonders of God.
Dost thou know when God doth place them, And caused to shine the light of His cloud?
Dost thou know the balancings of a cloud? The wonders of the Perfect in knowledge?
How thy garments [are] warm, In the quieting of the earth from the south?
Thou hast made an expanse with Him For the clouds — strong as a hard mirror!
Let us know what we say to Him, We set not in array because of darkness.
Is it declared to Him that I speak? If a man hath spoken, surely he is swallowed up.
And now, they have not seen the light, Bright it [is] in the clouds, And the wind hath passed by and cleanseth them.
From the golden north it cometh, Beside God [is] fearful honour.
The Mighty! we have not found Him out, High in power and judgment, He doth not answer! And abundant in righteousness,
Therefore do men fear Him, He seeth not any of the wise of heart.
And Jehovah answereth Job out of the whirlwind, and saith: —
Who [is] this — darkening counsel, By words without knowledge?
Gird, I pray thee, as a man, thy loins, And I ask thee, and cause thou Me to know.
Where wast thou when I founded earth? Declare, if thou hast known understanding.
Who placed its measures — if thou knowest? Or who hath stretched out upon it a line?
On what have its sockets been sunk? Or who hath cast its corner-stone?
In the singing together of stars of morning, And all sons of God shout for joy,
And He shutteth up with doors the sea, In its coming forth, from the womb it goeth out.
In My making a cloud its clothing, And thick darkness its swaddling band,
And I measure over it My statute, And place bar and doors,
And say, 'Hitherto come thou, and add not, And a command is placed On the pride of thy billows.'
Hast thou commanded morning since thy days? Causest thou the dawn to know its place?
To take hold on the skirts of the earth, And the wicked are shaken out of it,
It turneth itself as clay of a seal And they station themselves as clothed.
And withheld from the wicked is their light, And the arm lifted up is broken.
Hast thou come in to springs of the sea? And in searching the deep Hast thou walked up and down?
Revealed to thee were the gates of death? And the gates of death-shade dost thou see?
Thou hast understanding, Even unto the broad places of earth! Declare — if thou hast known it all.
Where [is] this — the way light dwelleth? And darkness, where [is] this — its place?
That thou dost take it unto its boundary, And that thou dost understand The paths of its house.
Thou hast known — for then thou art born And the number of thy days [are] many!
Hast thou come in unto the treasure of snow? Yea, the treasures of hail dost thou see?
That I have kept back for a time of distress, For a day of conflict and battle.
Where [is] this, the way light is apportioned? It scattereth an east wind over the earth.
Who hath divided for the flood a conduit? And a way for the lightning of the voices?
To cause [it] to rain on a land — no man, A wilderness — no man in it.
To satisfy a desolate and waste place, And to cause to shoot up The produce of the tender grass?
Hath the rain a father? Or who hath begotten the drops of dew?
From whose belly came forth the ice? And the hoar-frost of the heavens, Who hath begotten it?
As a stone waters are hidden, And the face of the deep is captured.
Dost thou bind sweet influences of Kimah? Or the attractions of Kesil dost thou open?
Dost thou bring out Mazzaroth in its season? And Aysh for her sons dost thou comfort?
Hast thou known the statutes of heaven? Or dost thou appoint Its dominion in the earth?
Dost thou lift up to the cloud thy voice, And abundance of water doth cover thee?
Dost thou send out lightnings, and they go And say unto thee, 'Behold us?'
Who hath put in the inward parts wisdom? Or who hath given To the covered part understanding?
Who doth number the clouds by wisdom? And the bottles of the heavens, Who doth cause to lie down,
In the hardening of dust into hardness, And clods cleave together?
Dost thou hunt for a lion prey? And the desire of young lions fulfil?
When they bow down in dens — Abide in a thicket for a covert?
Who doth prepare for a raven his provision, When his young ones cry unto God? They wander without food.
Hast thou known the time of The bearing of the wild goats of the rock? The bringing forth of hinds thou dost mark!
Thou dost number the months they fulfil? And thou hast known the time of their bringing forth!
They bow down, Their young ones they bring forth safely, Their pangs they cast forth.
Safe are their young ones, They grow up in the field, they have gone out, And have not returned to them.
Who hath sent forth the wild ass free? Yea, the bands of the wild ass who opened?
Whose house I have made the wilderness, And his dwellings the barren land,
He doth laugh at the multitude of a city, The cries of an exactor he heareth not.
The range of mountains [is] his pasture, And after every green thing he seeketh.
Is a Reem willing to serve thee? Doth he lodge by thy crib?
Dost thou bind a Reem in a furrow [with] his thick band? Doth he harrow valleys after thee?
Dost thou trust in him because great [is] his power? And dost thou leave unto him thy labour?
Dost thou trust in him That he doth bring back thy seed? And [to] thy threshing-floor doth gather [it]?
The wing of the rattling ones exulteth, Whether the pinion of the ostrich or hawk.
For she leaveth on the earth her eggs, And on the dust she doth warm them,
And she forgetteth that a foot may press it, And a beast of the field tread it down.
Her young ones it hath hardened without her, In vain [is] her labour without fear.
For God hath caused her to forget wisdom, And He hath not given a portion To her in understanding:
At the time on high she lifteth herself up, She laugheth at the horse and at his rider.
Dost thou give to the horse might? Dost thou clothe his neck [with] a mane?
Dost thou cause him to rush as a locust? The majesty of his snorting [is] terrible.
They dig in a valley, and he rejoiceth in power, He goeth forth to meet the armour.
He laugheth at fear, and is not affrighted, And he turneth not back from the face of the sword.
Against him rattle doth quiver, The flame of a spear, and a halbert.
With trembling and rage he swalloweth the ground, And remaineth not stedfast Because of the sound of a trumpet.
Among the trumpets he saith, Aha, And from afar he doth smell battle, Roaring of princes and shouting.
By thine understanding flieth a hawk? Spreadeth he his wings to the south?
At thy command goeth an eagle up high? Or lifteth he up his nest?
A rock he doth inhabit, Yea, he lodgeth on the tooth of a rock, and fortress.
From thence he hath sought food, To a far off place his eyes look attentively,
And his brood gulp up blood, And where the pierced [are] — there [is] he!
And Jehovah doth answer Job, and saith: —
Is the striver with the Mighty instructed? The reprover of God, let him answer it.
And Job answereth Jehovah, and saith: —
Lo, I have been vile, What do I return to Thee? My hand I have placed on my mouth.
Once I have spoken, and I answer not, And twice, and I add not.
And Jehovah answereth Job out of the whirlwind, and saith: —
Gird, I pray thee, as a man, thy loins, I ask thee, and cause thou Me to know.
Dost thou also make void My judgment? Dost thou condemn Me, That thou mayest be righteous?
And an arm like God hast thou? And with a voice like Him dost thou thunder?
Put on, I pray thee, excellency and loftiness, Yea, honour and beauty put on.
Scatter abroad the wrath of thine anger, And see every proud one, and make him low.
See every proud one — humble him, And tread down the wicked in their place.
Hide them in the dust together, Their faces bind in secret.
And even I — I do praise thee, For thy right hand giveth salvation to thee.
Lo, I pray thee, Behemoth, that I made with thee: Grass as an ox he eateth.
Lo, I pray thee, his power [is] in his loins, And his strength in the muscles of his belly.
He doth bend his tail as a cedar, The sinews of his thighs are wrapped together,
His bones [are] tubes of brass, His bones [are] as a bar of iron.
He [is] a beginning of the ways of God, His Maker bringeth nigh his sword;
For food do mountains bear for him, And all the beasts of the field play there.
Under shades he lieth down, In a secret place of reed and mire.
Cover him do shades, [with] their shadow, Cover him do willows of the brook.
Lo, a flood oppresseth — he doth not haste, He is confident though Jordan Doth come forth unto his mouth.
Before his eyes doth [one] take him, With snares doth [one] pierce the nose?
Dost thou draw leviathan with an angle? And with a rope thou lettest down — his tongue?
Dost thou put a reed in his nose? And with a thorn pierce his jaw?
Doth he multiply unto thee supplications? Doth he speak unto thee tender things?
Doth he make a covenant with thee? Dost thou take him for a servant age-during?
Dost thou play with him as a bird? And dost thou bind him for thy damsels?
(Feast upon him do companions, They divide him among the merchants!)
Dost thou fill with barbed irons his skin? And with fish-spears his head?
Place on him thy hand, Remember the battle — do not add!
Lo, the hope of him is found a liar, Also at his appearance is not one cast down?
None so fierce that he doth awake him, And who [is] he before Me stationeth himself?
Who hath brought before Me and I repay? Under the whole heavens it [is] mine.
I do not keep silent concerning his parts, And the matter of might, And the grace of his arrangement.
Who hath uncovered the face of his clothing? Within his double bridle who doth enter?
The doors of his face who hath opened? Round about his teeth [are] terrible.
A pride — strong ones of shields, Shut up — a close seal.
One unto another they draw nigh, And air doth not enter between them.
One unto another they adhere, They stick together and are not separated.
His sneezings cause light to shine, And his eyes [are] as the eyelids of the dawn.
Out of his mouth do flames go, sparks of fire escape.
Out of his nostrils goeth forth smoke, As a blown pot and reeds.
His breath setteth coals on fire, And a flame from his mouth goeth forth.
In his neck lodge doth strength, And before him doth grief exult.
The flakes of his flesh have adhered — Firm upon him — it is not moved.
His heart [is] firm as a stone, Yea, firm as the lower piece.
From his rising are the mighty afraid, From breakings they keep themselves free.
The sword of his overtaker standeth not, Spear — dart — and lance.
He reckoneth iron as straw, brass as rotten wood.
The son of the bow doth not cause him to flee, Turned by him into stubble are stones of the sling.
As stubble have darts been reckoned, And he laugheth at the shaking of a javelin.
Under him [are] sharp points of clay, He spreadeth gold on the mire.
He causeth to boil as a pot the deep, The sea he maketh as a pot of ointment.
After him he causeth a path to shine, One thinketh the deep to be hoary.
There is not on the earth his like, That is made without terror.
Every high thing he doth see, He [is] king over all sons of pride.
And Job answereth Jehovah and saith: —
Thou hast known that [for] all things Thou art able, And not withheld from Thee is [any] device:
'Who [is] this, hiding counsel without knowledge?' Therefore, I have declared, and understand not, Too wonderful for me, and I know not.
'Hear, I pray thee, and I — I do speak, I ask thee, and cause thou me to know.'
By the hearing of the ear I heard Thee, And now mine eye hath seen Thee.
Therefore do I loathe [it], And I have repented on dust and ashes.
And it cometh to pass after Jehovah's speaking these words unto Job, that Jehovah saith unto Eliphaz the Temanite, 'Burned hath Mine anger against thee, and against thy two friends, because ye have not spoken concerning Me rightly, like My servant Job.
And now, take to you seven bullocks and seven rams, and go ye unto My servant Job, and ye have caused a burnt-offering to ascend for you; and Job My servant doth pray for you, for surely his face I accept, so as not to do with you folly, because ye have not spoken concerning Me rightly, like My servant Job.
And they go — Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, Zophar the Naamathite — and do as Jehovah hath spoken unto them; and Jehovah doth accept the face of Job.
And Jehovah hath turned [to] the captivity of Job in his praying for his friends, and Jehovah doth add [to] all that Job hath — to double.
And come unto him do all his brethren, and all his sisters, and all his former acquaintances, and they eat bread with him in his house, and bemoan him, and comfort him concerning all the evil that Jehovah had brought upon him, and they gave to him each one kesitah, and each one ring of gold.
And Jehovah hath blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning, and he hath fourteen thousand of a flock, and six thousand camels, and a thousand pairs of oxen, and a thousand she-asses.
And he hath seven sons and three daughters;
and he calleth the name of the one Jemima, and the name of the second Kezia, and the name of the third Keren-Happuch.
And there have not been found women fair as the daughters of Job in all the land, and their father doth give to them an inheritance in the midst of their brethren.
And Job liveth after this a hundred and forty years, and seeth his sons, and his sons' sons, four generations;
and Job dieth, aged and satisfied [with] days.
O the happiness of that one, who Hath not walked in the counsel of the wicked. And in the way of sinners hath not stood, And in the seat of scorners hath not sat;
But — in the law of Jehovah [is] his delight, And in His law he doth meditate by day and by night:
And he hath been as a tree, Planted by rivulets of water, That giveth its fruit in its season, And its leaf doth not wither, And all that he doth he causeth to prosper.
Not so the wicked: But — as chaff that wind driveth away!
Therefore the wicked rise not in judgment, Nor sinners in the company of the righteous,
For Jehovah is knowing the way of the righteous, And the way of the wicked is lost!
Why have nations tumultuously assembled? And do peoples meditate vanity?
Station themselves do kings of the earth, And princes have been united together, Against Jehovah, and against His Messiah:
'Let us draw off Their cords, And cast from us Their thick bands.'
He who is sitting in the heavens doth laugh, The Lord doth mock at them.
Then doth He speak unto them in His anger, And in His wrath He doth trouble them:
'And I — I have anointed My King, Upon Zion — My holy hill.'
I declare concerning a statute: Jehovah said unto me, 'My Son Thou [art], I to-day have brought thee forth.
Ask of Me and I give nations — thy inheritance, And thy possession — the ends of earth.
Thou dost rule them with a sceptre of iron, As a vessel of a potter Thou dost crush them.'
And now, O kings, act wisely, Be instructed, O judges of earth,
Serve ye Jehovah with fear, And rejoice with trembling.
Kiss the Chosen One, lest He be angry, And ye lose the way, When His anger burneth but a little, O the happiness of all trusting in Him!

A Psalm of David, in his fleeing from the face of Absalom his son. Jehovah, how have my distresses multiplied! Many are rising up against me.
Many are saying of my soul, 'There is no salvation for him in God.' Selah.
And Thou, O Jehovah, [art] a shield for me, My honour, and lifter up of my head.
My voice [is] unto Jehovah: I call: And He answereth me from his holy hill, Selah.
I — I have lain down, and I sleep, I have waked, for Jehovah sustaineth me.
I am not afraid of myriads of people, That round about they have set against me.
Rise, O Jehovah! save me, my God. Because Thou hast smitten All mine enemies [on] the cheek. The teeth of the wicked Thou hast broken.
Of Jehovah [is] this salvation; On Thy people [is] Thy blessing! Selah.

To the Overseer with Stringed Instruments. — A Psalm of David. In my calling answer Thou me, O God of my righteousness. In adversity Thou gavest enlargement to me; Favour me, and hear my prayer.
Sons of men! till when [is] my glory for shame? Ye love a vain thing, ye seek a lie. Selah.
And know ye that Jehovah Hath separated a saintly one to Himself. Jehovah heareth in my calling to Him.
'Tremble ye, and do not sin;' Say ye [thus] in your heart on your bed, And be ye silent. Selah.
Sacrifice ye sacrifices of righteousness, And trust ye unto Jehovah.
Many are saying, 'Who doth show us good?' Lift on us the light of Thy face, O Jehovah,
Thou hast given joy in my heart, From the time their corn and their wine Have been multiplied.
In peace together I lie down and sleep, For Thou, O Jehovah, alone, In confidence dost cause me to dwell!

To the Overseer, 'Concerning the Inheritances.' — A Psalm of David. My sayings hear, O Jehovah, Consider my meditation.
Be attentive to the voice of my cry, My king and my God, For unto Thee I pray habitually.
Jehovah, [at] morning Thou hearest my voice, [At] morning I set in array for Thee, And I look out.
For not a God desiring wickedness [art] Thou, Evil inhabiteth Thee not.
The boastful station not themselves before Thine eyes: Thou hast hated all working iniquity.
Thou destroyest those speaking lies, A man of blood and deceit Jehovah doth abominate.
And I, in the abundance of Thy kindness, I enter Thy house, I bow myself toward Thy holy temple in Thy fear.
O Jehovah, lead me in Thy righteousness, Because of those observing me, Make straight before me Thy way,
For there is no stability in their mouth. Their heart [is] mischiefs, An open grave [is] their throat, Their tongue they make smooth.
Declare them guilty, O God, Let them fall from their own counsels, In the abundance of their transgressions Drive them away, Because they have rebelled against Thee.
And rejoice do all trusting in Thee, To the age they sing, and Thou coverest them over, And those loving Thy name exult in Thee.
For Thou blessest the righteous, O Jehovah, As a buckler with favour dost compass him!

To the Overseer with stringed instruments, on the octave. — A Psalm of David. O Jehovah, in Thine anger reprove me not, Nor in Thy fury chastise me.
Favour me, O Jehovah, for I [am] weak, Heal me, O Jehovah, For troubled have been my bones,
And my soul hath been troubled greatly, And Thou, O Jehovah, till when?
Turn back, O Jehovah, draw out my soul, Save me for Thy kindness' sake.
For there is not in death Thy memorial, In Sheol, who doth give thanks to Thee?
I have been weary with my sighing, I meditate through all the night [on] my bed, With my tear my couch I waste.
Old from provocation is mine eye, It is old because of all mine adversaries,
Turn from me all ye workers of iniquity, For Jehovah heard the voice of my weeping,
Jehovah hath heard my supplication, Jehovah my prayer receiveth.
Ashamed and troubled greatly are all mine enemies, They turn back — ashamed [in] a moment!

'The Erring One,' by David, that he sung to Jehovah concerning the words of Cush a Benjamite. O Jehovah, my God, in Thee I have trusted, Save me from all my pursuers, and deliver me.
Lest he tear as a lion my soul, Rending, and there is no deliverer.
O Jehovah, my God, if I have done this, If there is iniquity in my hands,
If I have done my well-wisher evil, And draw mine adversary without cause,
An enemy pursueth my soul, and overtaketh, And treadeth down to the earth my life, And my honour placeth in the dust. Selah.
Rise, O Jehovah, in Thine anger, Be lifted up at the wrath of mine adversaries, And awake Thou for me: Judgment Thou hast commanded:
And a company of peoples compass Thee, And over it on high turn Thou back,
Jehovah doth judge the peoples; Judge me, O Jehovah, According to my righteousness, And according to mine integrity on me,
Let, I pray Thee be ended the evil of the wicked, And establish Thou the righteous, And a trier of hearts and reins is the righteous God.
My shield [is] on God, Saviour of the upright in heart!
God [is] a righteous judge, And He is not angry at all times.
If [one] turn not, His sword he sharpeneth, His bow he hath trodden — He prepareth it,
Yea, for him He hath prepared Instruments of death, His arrows for burning pursuers He maketh.
Lo, he travaileth [with] iniquity, And he hath conceived perverseness, And hath brought forth falsehood.
A pit he hath prepared, and he diggeth it, And he falleth into a ditch he maketh.
Return doth his perverseness on his head, And on his crown his violence cometh down.
I thank Jehovah, According to His righteousness, And praise the name of Jehovah Most High!

To the Overseer, 'On the Gittith.' A Psalm of David. Jehovah, our Lord, How honourable Thy name in all the earth! Who settest thine honour on the heavens.
From the mouths of infants and sucklings Thou hast founded strength, Because of Thine adversaries, To still an enemy and a self-avenger.
For I see Thy heavens, a work of Thy fingers, Moon and stars that Thou didst establish.
What [is] man that Thou rememberest him? The son of man that Thou inspectest him?
And causest him to lack a little of Godhead, And with honour and majesty compassest him.
Thou dost cause him to rule Over the works of Thy hands, All Thou hast placed under his feet.
Sheep and oxen, all of them, And also beasts of the field,
Bird of the heavens, and fish of the sea, Passing through the paths of the seas!
Jehovah, our Lord, How honourable Thy name in all the earth!

To the Overseer, 'On the Death of Labben.' — A Psalm of David. I confess, O Jehovah, with all my heart, I recount all Thy wonders,
I rejoice and exult in Thee, I praise Thy Name, O Most High.
In mine enemies turning backward, they stumble and perish from Thy face.
For Thou hast done my judgment and my right. Thou hast sat on a throne, A judge of righteousness.
Thou hast rebuked nations, Thou hast destroyed the wicked, Their name Thou hast blotted out to the age and for ever.
O thou Enemy, Finished have been destructions for ever, As to cities thou hast plucked up, Perished hath their memorial with them.
And Jehovah to the age abideth, He is preparing for judgment His throne.
And He judgeth the world in righteousness, He judgeth the peoples in uprightness.
And Jehovah is a tower for the bruised, A tower for times of adversity.
They trust in Thee who do know Thy name, For Thou hast not forsaken Those seeking Thee, O Jehovah.
Sing ye praise to Jehovah, inhabiting Zion, Declare ye among the peoples His acts,
For He who is seeking for blood Them hath remembered, He hath not forgotten the cry of the afflicted.
Favour me, O Jehovah, See mine affliction by those hating me, Thou who liftest me up from the gates of death,
So that I recount all Thy praise, In the gates of the daughter of Zion. I rejoice on Thy salvation.
Sunk have nations in a pit they made, In a net that they hid hath their foot been captured.
Jehovah hath been known, Judgment He hath done, By a work of his hands Hath the wicked been snared. Meditation. Selah.
The wicked do turn back to Sheol, All nations forgetting God.
For not for ever is the needy forgotten, The hope of the humble lost to the age.
Rise, O Jehovah, let not man be strong, Let nations be judged before Thy face.
Appoint, O Jehovah, a director to them, Let nations know they [are] men! Selah.
Why, Jehovah, dost Thou stand at a distance? Thou dost hide in times of adversity,
Through the pride of the wicked, Is the poor inflamed, They are caught in devices that they devised.
Because the wicked hath boasted Of the desire of his soul, And a dishonest gainer he hath blessed, He hath despised Jehovah.
The wicked according to the height of his face, inquireth not. 'God is not!' [are] all his devices.
Pain do his ways at all times, On high [are] Thy judgments before him, All his adversaries — he puffeth at them.
He hath said in his heart, 'I am not moved,' To generation and generation not in evil.
Of oaths his mouth is full, And deceits, and fraud: Under his tongue [is] perverseness and iniquity,
He doth sit in an ambush of the villages, In secret places he doth slay the innocent. His eyes for the afflicted watch secretly,
He lieth in wait in a secret place, as a lion in a covert. He lieth in wait to catch the poor, He catcheth the poor, drawing him into his net.
He is bruised — he boweth down, Fallen by his mighty ones hath the afflicted.
He said in his heart, 'God hath forgotten, He hath hid His face, He hath never seen.'
Arise, O Jehovah! O God, lift up Thy hand! Forget not the humble.
Wherefore hath the wicked despised God? He hath said in his heart, 'It is not required.'
Thou hast seen, For Thou perverseness and anger beholdest; By giving into Thy hand, On Thee doth the afflicted leave [it], Of the fatherless Thou hast been an helper.
Break the arm of the wicked and the evil, Seek out his wickedness, find none;
Jehovah [is] king to the age, and for ever, The nations have perished out of His land!
The desire of the humble Thou hast heard, O Jehovah. Thou preparest their heart; Thou causest Thine ear to attend,
To judge the fatherless and bruised: He addeth no more to oppress — man of the earth!
To the Overseer. — By David. In Jehovah I trusted, how say ye to my soul, 'They moved [to] Thy mountain for the bird?
For lo, the wicked tread a bow, They have prepared their arrow on the string, To shoot in darkness at the upright in heart.
When the foundations are destroyed, The righteous — what hath he done?
'Jehovah [is] in his holy temple: Jehovah — in the heavens [is] His throne. His eyes see — His eyelids try the sons of men.
Jehovah the righteous doth try. And the wicked and the lover of violence, Hath His soul hated,
He poureth on the wicked snares, fire, and brimstone, And a horrible wind [is] the portion of their cup.
For righteous [is] Jehovah, Righteousness He hath loved, The upright doth His countenance see!'

To the Overseer, on the octave. — A Psalm of David. Save, Jehovah, for the saintly hath failed, For the stedfast have ceased From the sons of men:
Vanity they speak each with his neighbour, Lip of flattery! With heart and heart they speak.
Jehovah doth cut off all lips of flattery, A tongue speaking great things,
Who said, 'By our tongue we do mightily: Our lips [are] our own; who [is] lord over us?'
Because of the spoiling of the poor, Because of the groaning of the needy, Now do I arise, saith Jehovah, I set in safety [him who] doth breathe for it.
Sayings of Jehovah [are] pure sayings; Silver tried in a furnace of earth refined sevenfold.
Thou, O Jehovah, dost preserve them, Thou keepest us from this generation to the age.
Around the wicked walk continually, According as vileness is exalted by sons of men!

To the Overseer. — A Psalm of David. Till when, O Jehovah, Dost Thou forget me? — for ever? Till when dost Thou hide Thy face from me?
Till when do I set counsels in my soul? Sorrow in my heart daily? Till when is mine enemy exalted over me?
Look attentively; Answer me, O Jehovah, my God, Enlighten mine eyes, lest I sleep in death,
Lest mine enemy say, 'I overcame him,' Mine adversaries joy when I am moved.
And I, in Thy kindness I have trusted, Rejoice doth my heart in Thy salvation. I do sing to Jehovah, For He hath conferred benefits upon me!
To the Overseer. — By David. A fool hath said in his heart, 'God is not;' They have done corruptly, They have done abominable actions, There is not a doer of good.
Jehovah from the heavens Hath looked on the sons of men, To see if there is a wise one — seeking God.
The whole have turned aside, Together they have been filthy: There is not a doer of good, not even one.
Have all working iniquity not known? Those consuming my people have eaten bread, Jehovah they have not called.
There they have feared a fear, For God [is] in the generation of the righteous.
The counsel of the poor ye cause to stink, Because Jehovah [is] his refuge.
'Who doth give from Zion the salvation of Israel? When Jehovah doth turn back [To] a captivity of His people, Jacob doth rejoice — Israel is glad!
A Psalm of David. Jehovah, who doth sojourn in Thy tent? Who doth dwell in Thy holy hill?
He who is walking uprightly, And working righteousness, And speaking truth in his heart.
He hath not slandered by his tongue, He hath not done to his friend evil; And reproach he hath not lifted up Against his neighbour.
Despised in his eyes [is] a rejected one, And those fearing Jehovah he doth honour. He hath sworn to suffer evil, and changeth not;
His silver he hath not given in usury, And a bribe against the innocent Hath not taken; Whoso is doing these is not moved to the age!
A Secret Treasure of David. Preserve me, O God, for I did trust in Thee.
Thou hast said to Jehovah, 'My Lord Thou [art];' My good [is] not for thine own sake;
For the holy ones who [are] in the land, And the honourable, all my delight [is] in them.
Multiplied are their griefs, [Who] have hastened backward; I pour not out their libations of blood, Nor do I take up their names on my lips.
Jehovah [is] the portion of my share, and of my cup, Thou — Thou dost uphold my lot.
Lines have fallen to me in pleasant places, Yea, a beauteous inheritance [is] for me.
I bless Jehovah who hath counselled me; Also [in] the nights my reins instruct me.
I did place Jehovah before me continually, Because — at my right hand I am not moved.
Therefore hath my heart been glad, And my honour doth rejoice, Also my flesh dwelleth confidently:
For Thou dost not leave my soul to Sheol, Nor givest thy saintly one to see corruption.
Thou causest me to know the path of life; Fulness of joys [is] with Thy presence, Pleasant things by Thy right hand for ever!
A Prayer of David. Hear, O Jehovah, righteousness, attend my cry, Give ear [to] my prayer, without lips of deceit.
From before thee my judgment doth go out; Thine eyes do see uprightly.
Thou hast proved my heart, Thou hast inspected by night, Thou hast tried me, Thou findest nothing; My thoughts pass not over my mouth.
As to doings of man, Through a word of Thy lips I have observed The paths of a destroyer;
To uphold my goings in Thy paths, My steps have not slidden.
I — I called Thee, for Thou dost answer me, O God, incline Thine ear to me, hear my speech.
Separate wonderfully Thy kindness, O Saviour of the confiding, By Thy right hand, from withstanders.
Keep me as the apple, the daughter of the eye; In shadow of Thy wings thou dost hide me.
From the face of the wicked who spoiled me. Mine enemies in soul go round against me.
Their fat they have closed up, Their mouths have spoken with pride:
'Our steps now have compassed [him];' Their eyes they set to turn aside in the land.
His likeness as a lion desirous to tear, As a young lion dwelling in secret places.
Arise, O Jehovah, go before his face, Cause him to bend. Deliver my soul from the wicked, Thy sword,
From men, Thy hand, O Jehovah, From men of the world, their portion [is] in life, And [with] Thy hidden things Thou fillest their belly, They are satisfied [with] sons; And have left their abundance to their sucklings.
I — in righteousness, I see Thy face; I am satisfied, in awaking, [with] Thy form!

To the Overseer. — By a servant of Jehovah, by David, who hath spoken to Jehovah the words of this song in the day Jehovah delivered him from the hand of all his enemies, and from the hand of Saul, and he saith: — I love Thee, O Jehovah, my strength.
Jehovah [is] my rock, and my bulwark, And my deliverer, My God [is] my rock, I trust in Him: My shield, and a horn of my salvation, My high tower.
The 'Praised One' I call Jehovah, And from my enemies I am saved.
Compassed me have cords of death, And streams of the worthless make me afraid.
Cords of Sheol have surrounded me, Before me have been snares of death.
In mine adversity I call Jehovah, And unto my God I cry. He heareth from His temple my voice, And My cry before Him cometh into His ears.
And shake and tremble doth the earth, And foundations of hills are troubled, And they shake — because He hath wrath.
Gone up hath smoke by His nostrils, And fire from His mouth consumeth, Coals have been kindled by it.
And He inclineth the heavens, and cometh down, And thick darkness [is] under His feet.
And He rideth on a cherub, and doth fly, And He flieth on wings of wind.
He maketh darkness His secret place, Round about Him His tabernacle, Darkness of waters, thick clouds of the skies.
From the brightness over-against Him His thick clouds have passed on, Hail and coals of fire.
And thunder in the heavens doth Jehovah, And the Most High giveth forth His voice, Hail and coals of fire.
And He sendeth His arrows and scattereth them, And much lightning, and crusheth them.
And seen are the streams of waters, And revealed are foundations of the earth. From Thy rebuke, O Jehovah, From the breath of the spirit of Thine anger.
He sendeth from above — He taketh me, He draweth me out of many waters.
He delivereth me from my strong enemy, And from those hating me, For they have been stronger than I.
They go before me in a day of my calamity And Jehovah is for a support to me.
And He bringeth me forth to a large place, He draweth me out, because He delighted in me.
Jehovah doth recompense me According to my righteousness, According to the cleanness of my hands, He doth return to me.
For I have kept the ways of Jehovah, And have not done wickedly against my God.
For all His judgments [are] before me, And His statutes I turn not from me.
And I am perfect with him, And I keep myself from mine iniquity.
And Jehovah doth return to me, According to my righteousness, According to the cleanness of my hands, Over-against his eyes.
With the kind Thou showest Thyself kind, With a perfect man showest Thyself perfect.
With the pure Thou showest Thyself pure, And with the perverse showest Thyself a wrestler,
For Thou a poor people savest, And the eyes of the high causest to fall.
For Thou — Thou lightest my lamp, Jehovah my God enlighteneth my darkness.
For by Thee I run — a troop! And by my God I leap a wall.
God! perfect [is] His way, The saying of Jehovah is tried, A shield [is] He to all those trusting in Him.
For who [is] God besides Jehovah? And who [is] a rock save our God?
God! who is girding me [with] strength, And He maketh perfect my way.
Making my feet like hinds, And on my high places causeth me to stand.
Teaching my hands for battle, And a bow of brass was brought down by my arms.
And Thou givest to me the shield of Thy salvation, And Thy right hand doth support me, And Thy lowliness maketh me great.
Thou enlargest my step under me, And mine ankles have not slidden.
I pursue mine enemies, and overtake them, And turn back not till they are consumed.
I smite them, and they are not able to rise, They fall under my feet,
And Thou girdest me [with] strength for battle, Causest my withstanders to bow under me.
As to mine enemies — Thou hast given to me the neck, As to those hating me — I cut them off.
They cry, and there is no saviour, On Jehovah, and He doth not answer them.
And I beat them as dust before wind, As mire of the streets I empty them out.
Thou dost deliver me From the strivings of the people, Thou placest me for a head of nations, A people I have not known do serve me.
At the hearing of the ear they hearken to me, Sons of a stranger feign obedience to me,
Sons of a stranger fade away, And are slain out of their close places.
Jehovah liveth — and blessed [is] my rock, And exalted is the God of my salvation.
God — who is giving vengeance to me, And He subdueth peoples under me,
My deliverer from mine enemies, Above my withstanders Thou raisest me, From a man of violence dost deliver me.
Therefore I confess Thee among nations, O Jehovah, And to Thy name I sing praise,
Magnifying the salvation of His king, And doing kindness to His anointed, To David, and to his seed — unto the age!

To the Overseer. — A Psalm of David. The heavens [are] recounting the honour of God, And the work of His hands The expanse [is] declaring.
Day to day uttereth speech, And night to night sheweth knowledge.
There is no speech, and there are no words. Their voice hath not been heard.
Into all the earth hath their line gone forth, And to the end of the world their sayings, For the sun He placed a tent in them,
And he, as a bridegroom, goeth out from his covering, He rejoiceth as a mighty one To run the path.
From the end of the heavens [is] his going out, And his revolution [is] unto their ends, And nothing is hid from his heat.
The law of Jehovah [is] perfect, refreshing the soul, The testimonies of Jehovah [are] stedfast, Making wise the simple,
The precepts of Jehovah [are] upright, Rejoicing the heart, The command of Jehovah [is] pure, enlightening the eyes,
The fear of Jehovah [is] clean, standing to the age, The judgments of Jehovah [are] true, They have been righteous — together.
They are more desirable than gold, Yea, than much fine gold; and sweeter than honey, Even liquid honey of the comb.
Also — Thy servant is warned by them, 'In keeping them [is] a great reward.'
Errors! who doth understand? From hidden ones declare me innocent,
Also — from presumptuous ones keep back Thy servant, Let them not rule over me, Then am I perfect, And declared innocent of much transgression,
Let the sayings of my mouth, And the meditation of my heart, Be for a pleasing thing before Thee, O Jehovah, my rock, and my redeemer!

To the Overseer. — A Psalm of David. Jehovah doth answer thee, In a day of adversity, The name of the God of Jacob doth set thee on high,
He doth send thy help from the sanctuary, And from Zion doth support thee,
He doth remember all thy presents, And thy burnt-offering doth reduce to ashes. Selah.
He doth give to thee according to thy heart, And all thy counsel doth fulfil.
We sing of thy salvation, And in the name of our God set up a banner. Jehovah doth fulfil all thy requests.
Now I have known That Jehovah hath saved His anointed, He answereth him from His holy heavens, With the saving might of His right hand.
Some of chariots, and some of horses, And we of the name of Jehovah our God Make mention.
They — they have bowed and have fallen, And we have risen and station ourselves upright.
O Jehovah, save the king, He doth answer us in the day we call!

To the Overseer. — A Psalm of David. Jehovah, in Thy strength is the king joyful, In Thy salvation how greatly he rejoiceth.
The desire of his heart Thou gavest to him, And the request of his lips Thou hast not withheld. Selah.
For Thou puttest before him blessings of goodness, Thou settest on his head a crown of fine gold.
Life he hath asked from Thee, Thou hast given to him — length of days, Age-during — and for ever.
Great [is] his honour in Thy salvation, Honour and majesty Thou placest on him.
For Thou makest him blessings for ever, Thou dost cause him to rejoice with joy, By Thy countenance.
For the king is trusting in Jehovah, And in the kindness of the Most High He is not moved.
Thy hand cometh to all Thine enemies, Thy right hand doth find Thy haters.
Thou makest them as a furnace of fire, At the time of Thy presence. Jehovah in His anger doth swallow them, And fire doth devour them.
Their fruit from earth Thou destroyest, And their seed from the sons of men.
For they stretched out against Thee evil, They devised a wicked device, they prevail not,
For Thou makest them a butt, When Thy strings Thou preparest against their faces.
Be Thou exalted, O Jehovah in, Thy strength, We sing and we praise Thy might!

To the Overseer, on 'The Hind of the Morning.' — A Psalm of David. My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me? Far from my salvation, The words of my roaring?
My God, I call by day, and Thou answerest not, And by night, and there is no silence to me.
And Thou [art] holy, Sitting — the Praise of Israel.
In Thee did our fathers trust — they trusted, And Thou dost deliver them.
Unto Thee they cried, and were delivered, In Thee they trusted, and were not ashamed.
And I [am] a worm, and no man, A reproach of man, and despised of the people.
All beholding me do mock at me, They make free with the lip — shake the head,
'Roll unto Jehovah, He doth deliver him, He doth deliver him, for he delighted in him.'
For thou [art] He bringing me forth from the womb, Causing me to trust, On the breasts of my mother.
On Thee I have been cast from the womb, From the belly of my mother Thou [art] my God.
Be not far from me, For adversity is near, for there is no helper.
Many bulls have surrounded me, Mighty ones of Bashan have compassed me,
They have opened against me their mouth, A lion tearing and roaring.
As waters I have been poured out, And separated themselves have all my bones, My heart hath been like wax, It is melted in the midst of my bowels.
Dried up as an earthen vessel is my power, And my tongue is cleaving to my jaws.
And to the dust of death thou appointest me, For surrounded me have dogs, A company of evil doers have compassed me, Piercing my hands and my feet.
I count all my bones — they look expectingly, They look upon me,
They apportion my garments to themselves, And for my clothing they cause a lot to fall.
And Thou, O Jehovah, be not far off, O my strength, to help me haste.
Deliver from the sword my soul, From the paw of a dog mine only one.
Save me from the mouth of a lion: — And — from the horns of the high places Thou hast answered me!
I declare Thy name to my brethren, In the midst of the assembly I praise Thee.
Ye who fear Jehovah, praise ye Him, All the seed of Jacob, honour ye Him, And be afraid of Him, all ye seed of Israel.
For He hath not despised, nor abominated, The affliction of the afflicted, Nor hath He hidden His face from him, And in his crying unto Him He heareth.
Of Thee my praise [is] in the great assembly. My vows I complete before His fearers.
The humble do eat and are satisfied, Praise Jehovah do those seeking Him, Your heart doth live for ever.
Remember and return unto Jehovah, Do all ends of the earth, And before Thee bow themselves, Do all families of the nations,
For to Jehovah [is] the kingdom, And He is ruling among nations.
And the fat ones of earth have eaten, And they bow themselves, Before Him bow do all going down to dust, And he [who] hath not revived his soul.
A seed doth serve Him, It is declared of the Lord to the generation.
They come and declare His righteousness, To a people that is borne, that He hath made!
A Psalm of David. Jehovah [is] my shepherd, I do not lack,
In pastures of tender grass He causeth me to lie down, By quiet waters He doth lead me.
My soul He refresheth, He leadeth me in paths of righteousness, For His name's sake,
Also — when I walk in a valley of death-shade, I fear no evil, for Thou [art] with me, Thy rod and Thy staff — they comfort me.
Thou arrangest before me a table, Over-against my adversaries, Thou hast anointed with oil my head, My cup is full!
Only — goodness and kindness pursue me, All the days of my life, And my dwelling [is] in the house of Jehovah, For a length of days!
A Psalm of David. To Jehovah [is] the earth and its fulness, The world and the inhabitants in it.
For He on the seas hath founded it, And on the floods He doth establish it.
Who goeth up into the hill of Jehovah? And who riseth up in His holy place?
The clean of hands, and pure of heart, Who hath not lifted up to vanity his soul, Nor hath sworn to deceit.
He beareth away a blessing from Jehovah, Righteousness from the God of his salvation.
This [is] a generation of those seeking Him. Seeking Thy face, O Jacob! Selah.
Lift up, O gates, your heads, And be lifted up, O doors age-during, And come in doth the king of glory!
Who [is] this — 'the king of glory?' Jehovah — strong and mighty, Jehovah, the mighty in battle.
Lift up, O gates, your heads, And be lifted up, O doors age-during, And come in doth the king of glory!
Who [is] He — this 'king of glory?' Jehovah of hosts — He [is] the king of glory! Selah.
By David. Unto Thee, O Jehovah, my soul I lift up.
My God, in Thee I have trusted, Let me not be ashamed, Let not mine enemies exult over me.
Also let none waiting on Thee be ashamed, Let the treacherous dealers without cause be ashamed.
Thy ways, O Jehovah, cause me to know, Thy paths teach Thou me.
Cause me to tread in Thy truth, and teach me, For Thou [art] the God of my salvation, Near Thee I have waited all the day.
Remember Thy mercies, O Jehovah, And Thy kindnesses, for from the age [are] they.
Sins of my youth, and my transgressions, Do not Thou remember. According to Thy kindness be mindful of me, For Thy goodness' sake, O Jehovah.
Good and upright [is] Jehovah, Therefore He directeth sinners in the way.
He causeth the humble to tread in judgment, And teacheth the humble His way.
All the paths of Jehovah [are] kindness and truth, To those keeping His covenant, And His testimonies.
For Thy name's sake, O Jehovah, Thou hast pardoned mine iniquity, for it [is] great.
Who [is] this — the man fearing Jehovah? He directeth him in the way He doth choose.
His soul in good doth remain, And his seed doth possess the land.
The secret of Jehovah [is] for those fearing Him, And His covenant — to cause them to know.
Mine eyes [are] continually unto Jehovah, For He bringeth out from a net my feet.
Turn Thou unto me, and favour me, For lonely and afflicted [am] I.
The distresses of my heart have enlarged themselves, From my distresses bring me out.
See mine affliction and my misery, And bear with all my sins.
See my enemies, for they have been many, And with violent hatred they have hated me.
Keep my soul, and deliver me, Let me not be ashamed, for I trusted in Thee.
Integrity and uprightness do keep me, For I have waited [on] Thee.
Redeem Israel, O God, from all his distresses!
By David. Judge me, O Jehovah, for I in mine integrity have walked, And in Jehovah I have trusted, I slide not.
Try me, O Jehovah, and prove me, Purified [are] my reins and my heart.
For Thy kindness [is] before mine eyes, And I have walked habitually in Thy truth.
I have not sat with vain men, And with dissemblers I enter not.
I have hated the assembly of evil doers, And with the wicked I sit not.
I wash in innocency my hands, And I compass Thine altar, O Jehovah.
To sound with a voice of confession, And to recount all Thy wonders.
Jehovah, I have loved the habitation of Thy house, And the place of the tabernacle of Thine honour.
Do not gather with sinners my soul, And with men of blood my life,
In whose hand [is] a wicked device, And their right hand [is] full of bribes.
And I, in mine integrity I walk, Redeem me, and favour me.
My foot hath stood in uprightness, In assemblies I bless Jehovah!
By David. Jehovah [is] my light and my salvation, Whom do I fear? Jehovah [is] the strength of my life, Of whom am I afraid?
When evil doers come near to me to eat my flesh, My adversaries and mine enemies to me, They have stumbled and fallen.
Though a host doth encamp against me, My heart doth not fear, Though war riseth up against me, In this I [am] confident.
One [thing] I asked of Jehovah — it I seek. My dwelling in the house of Jehovah, All the days of my life, To look on the pleasantness of Jehovah, And to inquire in His temple.
For He hideth me in a tabernacle in the day of evil, He hideth me in a secret place of His tent, On a rock he raiseth me up.
And now, lifted up is my head, Above my enemies — my surrounders, And I sacrifice in His tent sacrifices of shouting, I sing, yea, I sing praise to Jehovah.
Hear, O Jehovah, my voice — I call, And favour me, and answer me.
To Thee said my heart 'They sought my face, Thy face, O Jehovah, I seek.'
Hide not Thy face from me, Turn not aside in anger Thy servant, My help Thou hast been. Leave me not, nor forsake me, O God of my salvation.
When my father and my mother Have forsaken me, then doth Jehovah gather me.
Shew me, O Jehovah, Thy way, And lead me in a path of uprightness, For the sake of my beholders.
Give me not to the will of my adversaries, For risen against me have false witnesses, And they breathe out violence to me.
I had not believed to look on the goodness of Jehovah In the land of the living!
Look unto Jehovah — be strong, And He doth strengthen thy heart, Yea, look unto Jehovah!
By David. Unto Thee, O Jehovah, I call, My rock, be not silent to me! Lest Thou be silent to me, And I have been compared With those going down to the pit.
Hear the voice of my supplications, In my crying unto Thee, In my lifting up my hands toward thy holy oracle.
Draw me not with the wicked, And with workers of iniquity, Speaking peace with their neighbours, And evil in their heart.
Give to them according to their acting, And according to the evil of their doings. According to the work of their hands give to them. Return their deed to them.
For they attend not to the doing of Jehovah, And unto the work of His hands. He throweth them down, And doth not build them up.
Blessed [is] Jehovah, For He hath heard the voice of my supplications.
Jehovah [is] my strength, and my shield, In Him my heart trusted, and I have been helped. And my heart exulteth, And with my song I thank Him.
Jehovah [is] strength to him, Yea, the strength of the salvation of His anointed [is] He.
Save Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance, And feed them, and carry them to the age!
A Psalm of David. Ascribe to Jehovah, ye sons of the mighty, Ascribe to Jehovah honour and strength.
Ascribe to Jehovah the honour of His name, Bow yourselves to Jehovah, In the beauty of holiness.
The voice of Jehovah [is] on the waters, The God of glory hath thundered, Jehovah [is] on many waters.
The voice of Jehovah [is] with power, The voice of Jehovah [is] with majesty,
The voice of Jehovah [is] shivering cedars, Yea, Jehovah shivers the cedars of Lebanon.
And He causeth them to skip as a calf, Lebanon and Sirion as a son of Reems,
The voice of Jehovah is hewing fiery flames,
The voice of Jehovah paineth a wilderness, Jehovah paineth the wilderness of Kadesh.
The voice of Jehovah paineth the oaks, And maketh bare the forests, And in His temple every one saith, 'Glory.'
Jehovah on the deluge hath sat, And Jehovah sitteth king — to the age,
Jehovah strength to his people giveth, Jehovah blesseth His people with peace!

A Psalm. — A song of the dedication of the house of David. I exalt Thee, O Jehovah, For Thou hast drawn me up, and hast not let mine enemies rejoice over me.
Jehovah my God, I have cried to Thee, And Thou dost heal me.
Jehovah, Thou hast brought up from Sheol my soul, Thou hast kept me alive, From going down [to] the pit.
Sing praise to Jehovah, ye His saints, And give thanks at the remembrance of His holiness,
For — a moment [is] in His anger, Life [is] in His good-will, At even remaineth weeping, and at morn singing.
And I — I have said in mine ease, 'I am not moved — to the age.
O Jehovah, in Thy good pleasure, Thou hast caused strength to remain for my mountain,' Thou hast hidden Thy face — I have been troubled.
Unto Thee, O Jehovah, I call, And unto Jehovah I make supplication.
'What gain [is] in my blood? In my going down unto corruption? Doth dust thank Thee? doth it declare Thy truth?
Hear, O Jehovah, and favour me, O Jehovah, be a helper to me.'
Thou hast turned my mourning to dancing for me, Thou hast loosed my sackcloth, And girdest me [with] joy.
So that honour doth praise Thee, and is not silent, O Jehovah, my God, to the age I thank Thee!

To the Overseer. — A Psalm of David. In Thee, O Jehovah, I have trusted, Let me not be ashamed to the age, In Thy righteousness deliver me.
Incline unto me Thine ear hastily, deliver me, Be to me for a strong rock, For a house of bulwarks to save me.
For my rock and my bulwark [art] Thou, For Thy name's sake lead me and tend me.
Bring me out from the net that they hid for me, For Thou [art] my strength.
Into Thy hand I commit my spirit, Thou hast redeemed me, Jehovah God of truth.
I have hated the observers of lying vanities, And I toward Jehovah have been confident.
I rejoice, and am glad in Thy kindness, In that Thou hast seen mine affliction, Thou hast known in adversities my soul.
And Thou hast not shut me up, Into the hand of an enemy, Thou hast caused my feet to stand in a broad place.
Favour me, O Jehovah, for distress [is] to me, Mine eye, my soul, and my body Have become old by provocation.
For my life hath been consumed in sorrow And my years in sighing. Feeble because of mine iniquity hath been my strength, And my bones have become old.
Among all mine adversaries I have been a reproach, And to my neighbours exceedingly, And a fear to mine acquaintances, Those seeing me without — fled from me.
I have been forgotten as dead out of mind, I have been as a perishing vessel.
For I have heard an evil account of many, Fear [is] round about. In their being united against me, To take my life they have devised,
And I on Thee — I have trusted, O Jehovah, I have said, 'Thou [art] my God.'
In Thy hand [are] my times, Deliver me from the hand of my enemies, And from my pursuers.
Cause Thy face to shine on Thy servant, Save me in Thy kindness.
O Jehovah, let me not be ashamed, For I have called Thee, let the wicked be ashamed, Let them become silent to Sheol.
Let lips of falsehood become dumb, That are speaking against the righteous, Ancient sayings, in pride and contempt.
How abundant is Thy goodness, That Thou hast laid up for those fearing Thee,
Thou hast wrought for those trusting in Thee, Before sons of men. Thou hidest them in the secret place of Thy presence, From artifices of man, Thou concealest them in a tabernacle, From the strife of tongues.
Blessed [is] Jehovah, For He hath made marvellous His kindness To me in a city of bulwarks.
And I — I have said in my haste, 'I have been cut off from before Thine eyes,' But Thou hast heard the voice of my supplications, In my crying unto Thee.
Love Jehovah, all ye His saints, Jehovah is keeping the faithful, And recompensing abundantly a proud doer.
Be strong, and He strengtheneth your heart, All ye who are waiting for Jehovah!
By David. — An Instruction. O the happiness of him whose transgression [is] forgiven, Whose sin is covered.
O the happiness of a man, To whom Jehovah imputeth not iniquity, And in whose spirit there is no deceit.
When I have kept silence, become old have my bones, Through my roaring all the day.
When by day and by night Thy hand is heavy upon me, My moisture hath been changed Into the droughts of summer. Selah.
My sin I cause Thee to know, And mine iniquity I have not covered. I have said, 'I confess concerning My transgressions to Jehovah,' And Thou — Thou hast taken away, The iniquity of my sin. Selah.
For this doth every saintly one pray to Thee, As the time to find. Surely at an overflowing of many waters, Unto him they come not.
Thou [art] a hiding-place for me, From distress Thou dost keep me, [With] songs of deliverance dost compass me. Selah.
I cause thee to act wisely, And direct thee in the way that thou goest, I cause mine eye to take counsel concerning thee.
Be ye not as a horse — as a mule, Without understanding, With bridle and bit, its ornaments, to curb, Not to come near unto thee.
Many [are] the pains of the wicked; As to him who is trusting in Jehovah, Kindness doth compass him.
Be glad in Jehovah, and rejoice, ye righteous, And sing, all ye upright of heart!
Sing, ye righteous, in Jehovah, For upright ones praise [is] comely.
Give ye thanks to Jehovah with a harp, With psaltery of ten strings sing praise to Him,
Sing ye to Him a new song, Play skilfully with shouting.
For upright [is] the word of Jehovah, And all His work [is] in faithfulness.
Loving righteousness and judgment, Of the kindness of Jehovah is the earth full.
By the word of Jehovah The heavens have been made, And by the breath of His mouth all their host.
Gathering as a heap the waters of the sea, Putting in treasuries the depths.
Afraid of Jehovah are all the earth, Of Him are all the inhabitants of the world afraid.
For He hath said, and it is, He hath commanded, and it standeth.
Jehovah made void the counsel of nations, He disallowed the thoughts of the peoples.
The counsel of Jehovah to the age standeth, The thoughts of His heart to all generations.
O the happiness of the nation whose God [is] Jehovah, Of the people He did choose, For an inheritance to Him.
From the heavens hath Jehovah looked, He hath seen all the sons of men.
From the fixed place of His dwelling, He looked unto all inhabitants of the earth;
Who is forming their hearts together, Who is attending unto all their works.
The king is not saved by the multitude of a force. A mighty man is not delivered, By abundance of power.
A false thing [is] the horse for safety, And by the abundance of his strength He doth not deliver.
Lo, the eye of Jehovah [is] to those fearing Him, To those waiting for His kindness,
To deliver from death their soul, And to keep them alive in famine.
Our soul hath waited for Jehovah, Our help and our shield [is] He,
For in Him doth our heart rejoice, For in His holy name we have trusted.
Let Thy kindness, O Jehovah, be upon us, As we have waited for Thee!

By David, in his changing his behaviour before Abimelech, and he driveth him away, and he goeth. I do bless Jehovah at all times, Continually His praise [is] in my mouth.
In Jehovah doth my soul boast herself, Hear do the humble and rejoice.
Ascribe ye greatness to Jehovah with me, And we exalt His name together.
I sought Jehovah, and He answered me, And from all my fears did deliver me.
They looked expectingly unto Him, And they became bright, And their faces are not ashamed.
This poor [one] called, and Jehovah heard, And from all his distresses saved him.
A messenger of Jehovah is encamping, Round about those who fear Him, And He armeth them.
Taste ye and see that Jehovah [is] good, O the happiness of the man who trusteth in Him.
Fear Jehovah, ye His holy ones, For there is no lack to those fearing Him.
Young lions have lacked and been hungry, And those seeking Jehovah lack not any good,
Come ye, children, hearken to me, The fear of Jehovah I do teach you.
Who [is] the man that is desiring life? Loving days to see good?
Keep thy tongue from evil, And thy lips from speaking deceit.
Turn aside from evil and do good, Seek peace and pursue it.
The eyes of Jehovah [are] unto the righteous, And His ears unto their cry.
(The face of Jehovah [is] on doers of evil, To cut off from earth their memorial.)
They cried, and Jehovah heard, And from all their distresses delivered them.
Near [is] Jehovah to the broken of heart, And the bruised of spirit He saveth.
Many [are] the evils of the righteous, Out of them all doth Jehovah deliver him.
He is keeping all his bones, One of them hath not been broken.
Evil doth put to death the wicked, And those hating the righteous are desolate.
Jehovah redeemeth the soul of His servants, And none trusting in Him are desolate!
By David. Strive, Jehovah, with my strivers, fight with my fighters,
Take hold of shield and buckler, and rise for my help,
And draw out spear and lance, To meet my pursuers. Say to my soul, 'Thy salvation I [am].'
They are ashamed and blush, those seeking my soul, Turned backward and confounded, Those devising my evil.
They are as chaff before wind, And a messenger of Jehovah driving away.
Their way is darkness and slipperiness, And a messenger of Jehovah their pursuer.
For without cause they hid for me their netpit, Without cause they digged for my soul.
Meet him doth desolation — he knoweth not, And his net that he hid catcheth him, For desolation he falleth into it.
And my soul is joyful in Jehovah, It rejoiceth in His salvation.
All my bones say, 'Jehovah, who is like Thee, Delivering the poor from the stronger than he, And the poor and needy from his plunderer.'
Violent witnesses rise up, That which I have not known they ask me.
They pay me evil for good, bereaving my soul,
And I — in their sickness my clothing [is] sackcloth, I have humbled with fastings my soul, And my prayer unto my bosom returneth.
As [if] a friend, as [if] my brother, I walked habitually, As a mourner for a mother, Mourning I have bowed down.
And — in my halting they have rejoiced, And have been gathered together, Gathered against me were the smiters, And I have not known, They have rent, and they have not ceased;
With profane ones, mockers in feasts, Gnashing against me their teeth.
Lord, how long dost thou behold? Keep back my soul from their desolations, From young lions my only one.
I thank Thee in a great assembly, Among a mighty people I praise Thee.
Mine enemies rejoice not over me [with] falsehood, Those hating me without cause wink the eye.
For they speak not peace, And against the quiet of the land, Deceitful words they devise,
And they enlarge against me their mouth, They said, 'Aha, aha, our eye hath seen.'
Thou hast seen, O Jehovah, Be not silent, O Lord — be not far from me,
Stir up, and wake to my judgment, My God, and my Lord, to my plea.
Judge me according to Thy righteousness, O Jehovah my God, And they do not rejoice over me.
They do not say in their heart, 'Aha, our desire.' They do not say, 'We swallowed him up.'
They are ashamed and confounded together, Who are rejoicing at my evil. They put on shame and confusion, Who are magnifying themselves against me.
They sing and rejoice, who are desiring my righteousness, And they say continually, 'Jehovah is magnified, Who is desiring the peace of His servant.'
And my tongue uttereth Thy righteousness, All the day Thy praise!

To the Overseer. — By a servant of Jehovah, by David. The transgression of the wicked Is affirming within my heart, 'Fear of God is not before his eyes,
For he made [it] smooth to himself in his eyes, To find his iniquity to be hated.
The words of his mouth [are] iniquity and deceit, He ceased to act prudently — to do good.
Iniquity he deviseth on his bed, He stationeth himself on a way not good, Evil he doth not refuse.'
O Jehovah, in the heavens [is] Thy kindness, Thy faithfulness [is] unto the clouds.
Thy righteousness [is] as mountains of God, Thy judgments [are] a great deep. Man and beast Thou savest, O Jehovah.
How precious [is] Thy kindness, O God, And the sons of men In the shadow of Thy wings do trust.
They are filled from the fatness of Thy house, And the stream of Thy delights Thou dost cause them to drink.
For with Thee [is] a fountain of life, In Thy light we see light.
Draw out Thy kindness to those knowing Thee, And Thy righteousness to the upright of heart.
Let not a foot of pride meet me, And a hand of the wicked let not move me.
There have workers of iniquity fallen, They have been overthrown, And have not been able to arise!
By David. Do not fret because of evil doers, Be not envious against doers of iniquity,
For as grass speedily they are cut off, And as the greenness of the tender grass do fade.
Trust in Jehovah, and do good, Dwell [in] the land, and enjoy faithfulness,
And delight thyself on Jehovah, And He giveth to thee the petitions of thy heart.
Roll on Jehovah thy way, And trust upon Him, and He worketh,
And hath brought out as light thy righteousness, And thy judgment as noon-day.
Be silent for Jehovah, and stay thyself for Him, Do not fret because of him Who is making prosperous his way, Because of a man doing wicked devices.
Desist from anger, and forsake fury, Fret not thyself only to do evil.
For evil doers are cut off, As to those waiting on Jehovah, they possess the land.
And yet a little, and the wicked is not, And thou hast considered his place, and it is not.
And the humble do possess the land, And they have delighted themselves In the abundance of peace.
The wicked is devising against the righteous, And gnashing against him his teeth.
The Lord doth laugh at him, For He hath seen that his day cometh.
A sword have the wicked opened, And they have trodden their bow, To cause to fall the poor and needy, To slaughter the upright of the way.
Their sword doth enter into their own heart, And their bows are shivered.
Better [is] the little of the righteous, Than the store of many wicked.
For the arms of the wicked are shivered, And Jehovah is sustaining the righteous.
Jehovah knoweth the days of the perfect, And their inheritance is — to the age.
They are not ashamed in a time of evil, And in days of famine they are satisfied.
But the wicked perish, and the enemies of Jehovah, As the preciousness of lambs, Have been consumed, In smoke they have been consumed.
The wicked is borrowing and repayeth not, And the righteous is gracious and giving.
For His blessed ones do possess the land, And His reviled ones are cut off.
From Jehovah [are] the steps of a man, They have been prepared, And his way he desireth.
When he falleth, he is not cast down, For Jehovah is sustaining his hand.
Young I have been, I have also become old, And I have not seen the righteous forsaken, And his seed seeking bread.
All the day he is gracious and lending, And his seed [is] for a blessing.
Turn aside from evil, and do good, and dwell to the age.
For Jehovah is loving judgment, And He doth not forsake His saintly ones, To the age they have been kept, And the seed of the wicked is cut off.
The righteous possess the land, And they dwell for ever on it.
The mouth of the righteous uttereth wisdom, And his tongue speaketh judgment.
The law of his God [is] his heart, His steps do not slide.
The wicked is watching for the righteous, And is seeking to put him to death.
Jehovah doth not leave him in his hand, Nor condemn him in his being judged.
Look unto Jehovah, and keep His way, And He doth exalt thee to possess the land, In the wicked being cut off — thou seest!
I have seen the wicked terrible, And spreading as a green native plant,
And he passeth away, and lo, he is not, And I seek him, and he is not found!
Observe the perfect, and see the upright, For the latter end of each [is] peace.
And transgressors were destroyed together, The latter end of the wicked was cut off.
And the salvation of the righteous [is] from Jehovah, Their strong place in a time of adversity.
And Jehovah doth help them and deliver them, He delivereth them from the wicked, And saveth them, Because they trusted in Him!

A Psalm of David, 'To cause to remember.' Jehovah, in Thy wrath reprove me not, Nor in Thy fury chastise me.
For Thine arrows have come down on me, And Thou lettest down upon me Thy hand.
Soundness is not in my flesh, Because of Thine indignation, Peace is not in my bones because of my sin.
For mine iniquities have passed over my head, As a heavy burden — too heavy for me.
Stunk — become corrupt have my wounds, Because of my folly.
I have been bent down, I have been bowed down — unto excess, All the day I have gone mourning.
For my flanks have been full of drought, And soundness is not in my flesh.
I have been feeble and smitten — unto excess, I have roared from disquietude of heart.
Lord, before Thee [is] all my desire, And my sighing from Thee hath not been hid.
My heart [is] panting, my power hath forsaken me, And the light of mine eyes, Even they are not with me.
My lovers and my friends over-against my plague stand. And my neighbours afar off have stood.
And those seeking my soul lay a snare, And those seeking my evil Have spoken mischievous things, And they do deceits meditate all the day.
And I, as deaf, hear not. And as a dumb one who openeth not his mouth.
Yea, I am as a man who heareth not, And in his mouth are no reproofs.
Because for Thee, O Jehovah, I have waited, Thou dost answer, O Lord my God.
When I said, 'Lest they rejoice over me, In the slipping of my foot against me they magnified themselves.
For I am ready to halt, And my pain [is] before me continually.
For mine iniquity I declare, I am sorry for my sin.
And mine enemies [are] lively, They have been strong, and those hating me without cause, Have been multiplied.
And those paying evil for good accuse me, Because of my pursuing good.
Do not forsake me, O Jehovah, My God, be not far from me,
Haste to help me, O Lord, my salvation!

To the Overseer, to Jeduthun. — A Psalm of David. I have said, 'I observe my ways, Against sinning with my tongue, I keep for my mouth a curb, while the wicked [is] before me.'
I was dumb [with] silence, I kept silent from good, and my pain is excited.
Hot [is] my heart within me, In my meditating doth the fire burn, I have spoken with my tongue.
'Cause me to know, O Jehovah, mine end, And the measure of my days — what it [is],' I know how frail I [am].
Lo, handbreadths Thou hast made my days, And mine age [is] as nothing before Thee, Only, all vanity [is] every man set up. Selah.
Only, in an image doth each walk habitually, Only, [in] vain, they are disquieted, He heapeth up and knoweth not who gathereth them.
And, now, what have I expected? O Lord, my hope — it [is] of Thee.
From all my transgressions deliver me, A reproach of the fool make me not.
I have been dumb, I open not my mouth, Because Thou — Thou hast done [it].
Turn aside from off me Thy stroke, From the striving of Thy hand I have been consumed.
With reproofs against iniquity, Thou hast corrected man, And dost waste as a moth his desirableness, Only, vanity [is] every man. Selah.
Hear my prayer, O Jehovah, And [to] my cry give ear, Unto my tear be not silent, For a sojourner I [am] with Thee, A settler like all my fathers.
Look from me, and I brighten up before I go and am not!

To the Overseer. — A Psalm of David. I have diligently expected Jehovah, And He inclineth to me, and heareth my cry,
And He doth cause me to come up From a pit of desolation — from mire of mud, And He raiseth up on a rock my feet, He is establishing my steps.
And He putteth in my mouth a new song, 'Praise to our God.' Many do see and fear, and trust in Jehovah.
O the happiness of the man Who hath made Jehovah his trust, And hath not turned unto the proud, And those turning aside to lies.
Much hast Thou done, Jehovah my God; Thy wonders and Thy thoughts toward us, There is none to arrange unto Thee, I declare and speak: They have been more than to be numbered.
Sacrifice and present Thou hast not desired, Ears Thou hast prepared for me, Burnt and sin-offering Thou hast not asked.
Then said I, 'Lo, I have come,' In the roll of the book it is written of me,
To do Thy pleasure, my God, I have delighted, And Thy law [is] within my heart.
I have proclaimed tidings of righteousness In the great assembly, lo, my lips I restrain not, O Jehovah, Thou hast known.
Thy righteousness I have not concealed In the midst of my heart, Thy faithfulness and Thy salvation I have told, I have not hidden Thy kindness and Thy truth, To the great assembly.
Thou, O Jehovah, restrainest not Thy mercies from me, Thy kindness and Thy truth do continually keep me.
For compassed me have evils innumerable, Overtaken me have mine iniquities, And I have not been able to see; They have been more than the hairs of my head, And my heart hath forsaken me.
Be pleased, O Jehovah, to deliver me, O Jehovah, for my help make haste.
They are ashamed and confounded together, Who are seeking my soul to destroy it, They are turned backward, And are ashamed, who are desiring my evil.
They are desolate because of their shame, Who are saying to me, 'Aha, aha.'
All seeking Thee rejoice and are glad in Thee, Those loving Thy salvation say continually, 'Jehovah is magnified.'
And I [am] poor and needy, The Lord doth devise for me. My help and my deliverer [art] Thou, O my God, tarry Thou not.

To the Overseer. — A Psalm of David. O the happiness of him Who is acting wisely unto the poor, In a day of evil doth Jehovah deliver him.
Jehovah doth preserve him and revive him, He is happy in the land, And Thou givest him not into the will of his enemies.
Jehovah supporteth on a couch of sickness, All his bed Thou hast turned in his weakness.
I — I said, 'O Jehovah, favour me, Heal my soul, for I did sin against Thee,'
Mine enemies say evil of me: When he dieth — his name hath perished!
And if he came to see — vanity he speaketh, His heart gathereth iniquity to itself, He goeth out — at the street he speaketh.
All hating me whisper together against me, Against me they devise evil to me:
A thing of Belial is poured out on him, And because he lay down he riseth not again.
Even mine ally, in whom I trusted, One eating my bread, made great the heel against me,
And Thou, Jehovah, favour me, And cause me to rise, And I give recompence to them.
By this I have known, That Thou hast delighted in me, Because my enemy shouteth not over me.
As to me, in mine integrity, Thou hast taken hold upon me, And causest me to stand before Thee to the age.
Blessed [is] Jehovah, God of Israel, From the age — and unto the age. Amen and Amen.

To the Overseer. — An Instruction. By sons of Korah. As a hart doth pant for streams of water, So my soul panteth toward Thee, O God.
My soul thirsted for God, for the living God, When do I enter and see the face of God?
My tear hath been to me bread day and night, In their saying unto me all the day, 'Where [is] thy God?'
These I remember, and pour out my soul in me, For I pass over into the booth, I go softly with them unto the house of God, With the voice of singing and confession, The multitude keeping feast!
What! bowest thou thyself, O my soul? Yea, art thou troubled within me? Wait for God, for still I confess Him: The salvation of my countenance — My God!
In me doth my soul bow itself, Therefore I remember Thee from the land of Jordan, And of the Hermons, from the hill Mizar.
Deep unto deep is calling At the noise of Thy water-spouts, All Thy breakers and Thy billows passed over me.
By day Jehovah commandeth His kindness, And by night a song [is] with me, A prayer to the God of my life.
I say to God my rock, 'Why hast Thou forgotten me? Why go I mourning in the oppression of an enemy?
With a sword in my bones Have mine adversaries reproached me, In their saying unto me all the day, 'Where [is] thy God?'
What! bowest thou thyself, O my soul? And what! art thou troubled within me? Wait for God, for still I confess Him, The salvation of my countenance, and my God!
Judge me, O God, And plead my cause against a nation not pious, From a man of deceit and perverseness Thou dost deliver me,
For thou [art] the God of my strength. Why hast Thou cast me off? Why mourning do I go up and down, In the oppression of an enemy?
Send forth Thy light and Thy truth, They — they lead me, they bring me in, Unto Thy holy hill, and unto Thy tabernacles.
And I go in unto the altar of God, Unto God, the joy of my rejoicing. And I thank Thee with a harp, O God, my God.
What! bowest thou thyself, O my soul? And what! art thou troubled within me? Wait for God, for still I confess Him, The salvation of my countenance, and my God!

To the Overseer. — By sons of Korah. An Instruction. O God, with our ears we have heard, Our fathers have recounted to us, The work Thou didst work in their days, In the days of old.
Thou, [with] Thy hand, nations hast dispossessed. And Thou dost plant them. Thou afflictest peoples, and sendest them away.
For, not by their sword Possessed they the land, And their arm gave not salvation to them, But Thy right hand, and Thine arm, And the light of Thy countenance, Because Thou hadst accepted them.
Thou [art] He, my king, O God, Command the deliverances of Jacob.
By Thee our adversaries we do push, By Thy name tread down our withstanders,
For, not in my bow do I trust, And my sword doth not save me.
For Thou hast saved us from our adversaries, And those hating us Thou hast put to shame.
In God we have boasted all the day, And Thy name to the age we thank. Selah.
In anger Thou hast cast off and causest us to blush, And goest not forth with our hosts.
Thou causest us to turn backward from an adversary, And those hating us, Have spoiled for themselves.
Thou makest us food like sheep, And among nations Thou hast scattered us.
Thou sellest Thy people — without wealth, And hast not become great by their price.
Thou makest us a reproach to our neighbours, A scorn and a reproach to our surrounders.
Thou makest us a simile among nations, A shaking of the head among peoples.
All the day my confusion [is] before me, And the shame of my face hath covered me.
Because of the voice of a reproacher and reviler, Because of an enemy and a self-avenger.
All this met us, and we did not forget Thee, Nor have we dealt falsely in Thy covenant.
We turn not backward our heart, Nor turn aside doth our step from Thy path.
But Thou hast smitten us in a place of dragons, And dost cover us over with death-shade.
If we have forgotten the name of our God, And spread our hands to a strange God,
Doth not God search out this? For He knoweth the secrets of the heart.
Surely, for Thy sake we have been slain all the day, Reckoned as sheep of the slaughter.
Stir up — why dost Thou sleep, O Lord? Awake, cast us not off for ever.
Why Thy face hidest Thou? Thou forgettest our afflictions and our oppression,
For bowed to the dust hath our soul, Cleaved to the earth hath our belly.
Arise, a help to us, And ransom us for thy kindness' sake.

To the Overseer. — 'On the Lilies.' — By sons of Korah. — An Instruction. — A song of loves. My heart hath indited a good thing, I am telling my works to a king, My tongue [is] the pen of a speedy writer.
Thou hast been beautified above the sons of men, Grace hath been poured into thy lips, Therefore hath God blessed thee to the age.
Gird Thy sword upon the thigh, O mighty, Thy glory and Thy majesty!
As to Thy majesty — prosper! — ride! Because of truth, and meekness — righteousness, And Thy right hand showeth Thee fearful things.
Thine arrows [are] sharp, — Peoples fall under Thee — In the heart of the enemies of the king.
Thy throne, O God, [is] age-during, and for ever, A sceptre of uprightness [Is] the sceptre of Thy kingdom.
Thou hast loved righteousness and hatest wickedness, Therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee, Oil of joy above thy companions.
Myrrh and aloes, cassia! all thy garments, Out of palaces of ivory Stringed instruments have made thee glad.
Daughters of kings [are] among thy precious ones, A queen hath stood at thy right hand, In pure gold of Ophir.
Hearken, O daughter, and see, incline thine ear, And forget thy people, and thy father's house,
And the king doth desire thy beauty, Because he [is] thy lord — bow thyself to him,
And the daughter of Tyre with a present, The rich of the people do appease thy face.
All glory [is] the daughter of the king within, Of gold-embroidered work [is] her clothing.
In divers colours she is brought to the king, Virgins — after her — her companions, Are brought to thee.
They are brought with joy and gladness, They come into the palace of the king.
Instead of thy fathers are thy sons, Thou dost appoint them for princes in all the earth.
I make mention of Thy name in all generations, Therefore do peoples praise Thee, To the age, and for ever!

To the Overseer. — By sons of Korah. 'For the Virgins.' — A song. God [is] to us a refuge and strength, A help in adversities found most surely.
Therefore we fear not in the changing of earth, And in the slipping of mountains Into the heart of the seas.
Roar — troubled are its waters, Mountains they shake in its pride. Selah.
A river — its rivulets rejoice the city of God, Thy holy place of the tabernacles of the Most High.
God [is] in her midst — she is not moved, God doth help her at the turn of the morn!
Troubled have been nations, Moved have been kingdoms, He hath given forth with His voice, earth melteth.
Jehovah of Hosts [is] with us, A tower for us [is] the God of Jacob. Selah.
Come ye, see the works of Jehovah, Who hath done astonishing things in the earth,
Causing wars to cease, Unto the end of the earth, the bow he shivereth, And the spear He hath cut asunder, Chariots he doth burn with fire.
Desist, and know that I [am] God, I am exalted among nations, I am exalted in the earth.
Jehovah of hosts [is] with us, A tower for us [is] the God of Jacob! Selah.

To the Overseer. — By sons of Korah. A Psalm. All ye peoples, clap the hand, Shout to God with a voice of singing,
For Jehovah Most High [is] fearful, A great king over all the earth.
He leadeth peoples under us, and nations under our feet.
He doth choose for us our inheritance, The excellency of Jacob that He loves. Selah.
God hath gone up with a shout, Jehovah with the sound of a trumpet.
Praise God — praise — give praise to our king, praise.
For king of all the earth [is] God, Give praise, O understanding one.
God hath reigned over nations, God hath sat on His holy throne,
Nobles of peoples have been gathered, [With] the people of the God of Abraham, For to God [are] the shields of earth, Greatly hath He been exalted!

A Song, a Psalm, by sons of Korah. Great [is] Jehovah, and praised greatly, In the city of our God — His holy hill.
Beautiful [for] elevation, A joy of all the land, [is] Mount Zion, The sides of the north, the city of a great king.
God in her high places is known for a tower.
For, lo, the kings met, they passed by together,
They have seen — so they have marvelled, They have been troubled, they were hastened away.
Trembling hath seized them there, Pain, as of a travailing woman.
By an east wind Thou shiverest ships of Tarshish.
As we have heard, so we have seen, In the city of Jehovah of hosts, In the city of our God, God doth establish her — to the age. Selah.
We have thought, O God, of Thy kindness, In the midst of Thy temple,
As [is] Thy name, O God, so [is] Thy praise, Over the ends of the earth, Righteousness hath filled Thy right hand.
Rejoice doth Mount Zion, The daughters of Judah are joyful, For the sake of Thy judgments.
Compass Zion, and go round her, count her towers,
Set your heart to her bulwark, Consider her high places, So that ye recount to a later generation,
That this God [is] our God — To the age and for ever, He — he doth lead us over death!

To the Overseer. — By sons of Korah. A Psalm. Hear this, all ye peoples, Give ear, all ye inhabitants of the world.
Both low and high, together rich and needy.
My mouth speaketh wise things, And the meditations of my heart [are] things of understanding.
I incline to a simile mine ear, I open with a harp my riddle:
Why do I fear in days of evil? The iniquity of my supplanters doth compass me.
Those trusting on their wealth, And in the multitude of their riches, Do shew themselves foolish.
A brother doth no one at all ransom, He doth not give to God his atonement.
And precious [is] the redemption of their soul, And it hath ceased — to the age.
And still he liveth for ever, He seeth not the pit.
For he seeth wise men die, Together the foolish and brutish perish, And have left to others their wealth.
Their heart [is]: Their houses [are] to the age, Their tabernacles to all generations. They proclaimed their names over the lands.
And man in honour doth not remain, He hath been like the beasts, they have been cut off.
This their way [is] folly for them, And their posterity with their sayings are pleased. Selah.
As sheep for Sheol they have set themselves, Death doth afflict them, And the upright rule over them in the morning, And their form [is] for consumption. Sheol [is] a dwelling for him.
Only, God doth ransom my soul from the hand of Sheol, For He doth receive me. Selah.
Fear not, when one maketh wealth, When the honour of his house is abundant,
For at his death he receiveth nothing, His honour goeth not down after him.
For his soul in his life he blesseth, (And they praise thee when thou dost well for thyself.)
It cometh to the generation of his fathers, For ever they see not the light.
Man in honour, who understandest not, Hath been like the beasts, they have been cut off!
A Psalm of Asaph. The God of gods — Jehovah — hath spoken, And He calleth to the earth From the rising of the sun unto its going in.
From Zion, the perfection of beauty, God shone.
Our God cometh, and is not silent, Fire before Him doth devour, And round about him it hath been very tempestuous.
He doth call unto the heavens from above, And unto the earth, to judge His people.
Gather ye to Me My saints, Making covenant with Me over a sacrifice.
And the heavens declare His righteousness, For God Himself [is] judge. Selah.
Hear, O My people, and I speak, O Israel, and I testify against thee, God, thy God [am] I.
Not for thy sacrifices do I reprove thee, Yea, thy burnt-offerings [Are] before Me continually.
I take not from thy house a bullock, From thy folds he goats.
For Mine [is] every beast of the forest, The cattle on the hills of oxen.
I have known every fowl of the mountains, And the wild beast of the field [is] with Me.
If I am hungry I tell not to thee, For Mine [is] the world and its fulness.
Do I eat the flesh of bulls, And drink the blood of he-goats?
Sacrifice to God confession, And complete to the Most High thy vows.
And call Me in a day of adversity, I deliver thee, and thou honourest Me.
And to the wicked hath God said: What to thee — to recount My statutes? That thou liftest up My covenant on thy mouth?
Yea, thou hast hated instruction, And dost cast My words behind thee.
If thou hast seen a thief, Then thou art pleased with him, And with adulterers [is] thy portion.
Thy mouth thou hast sent forth with evil, And thy tongue joineth deceit together,
Thou sittest, against thy brother thou speakest, Against a son of thy mother givest slander.
These thou didst, and I kept silent, Thou hast thought that I am like thee, I reprove thee, and set in array before thine eyes.
Understand this, I pray you, Ye who are forgetting God, Lest I tear, and there is no deliverer.
He who is sacrificing praise honoureth Me, As to him who maketh a way, I cause him to look on the salvation of God!


To the Overseer. — A Psalm of David, in the coming in unto him of Nathan the prophet, when he hath gone in unto Bath-Sheba. Favour me, O God, according to Thy kindness, According to the abundance of Thy mercies, Blot out my transgressions.
Thoroughly wash me from mine iniquity, And from my sin cleanse me,
For my transgressions I do know, And my sin [is] before me continually.
Against Thee, Thee only, I have sinned, And done the evil thing in Thine eyes, So that Thou art righteous in Thy words, Thou art pure in Thy judging.
Lo, in iniquity I have been brought forth, And in sin doth my mother conceive me.
Lo, truth Thou hast desired in the inward parts, And in the hidden part Wisdom Thou causest me to know.
Thou cleansest me with hyssop and I am clean, Washest me, and than snow I am whiter.
Thou causest me to hear joy and gladness, Thou makest joyful bones Thou hast bruised.
Hide Thy face from my sin. And all mine iniquities blot out.
A clean heart prepare for me, O God, And a right spirit renew within me.
Cast me not forth from Thy presence, And Thy Holy Spirit take not from me.
Restore to me the joy of Thy salvation, And a willing spirit doth sustain me.
I teach transgressors Thy ways, And sinners unto Thee do return.
Deliver me from blood, O God, God of my salvation, My tongue singeth of Thy righteousness.
O Lord, my lips thou dost open, And my mouth declareth Thy praise.
For Thou desirest not sacrifice, or I give [it], Burnt-offering Thou acceptest not.
The sacrifices of God [are] a broken spirit, A heart broken and bruised, O God, Thou dost not despise.
Do good in Thy good pleasure with Zion, Thou dost build the walls of Jerusalem.
Then Thou desirest sacrifices of righteousness, Burnt-offering, and whole burnt-offering, Then they offer bullocks on thine altar!


To the Overseer. — An instruction, by David, in the coming in of Doeg the Edomite, and he declareth to Saul, and saith to him, 'David came in unto the house of Ahimelech.' What, boasteth thou in evil, O mighty one? The kindness of God [is] all the day.
Mischiefs doth thy tongue devise, Like a sharp razor, working deceit.
Thou hast loved evil rather than good, Lying, than speaking righteousness. Selah.
Thou hast loved all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue.
Also — God doth break thee down for ever, Taketh thee, and pulleth thee out of the tent, And He hath uprooted thee Out of the land of the living. Selah.
And the righteous see, And fear, and laugh at him.
'Lo, the man who maketh not God his strong place, And trusteth in the abundance of his riches, He is strong in his mischiefs.'
And I, as a green olive in the house of God, I have trusted in the kindness of God, To the age and for ever,
I thank Thee to the age, because Thou hast done [it], And I wait [on] Thy name for [it is] good before Thy saints!

To the Overseer. — 'On a disease.' — An instruction, by David. A fool said in his heart, 'There is no God.' They have done corruptly, Yea, they have done abominable iniquity, There is none doing good.
God from the heavens looked on the sons of men, To see if there be an understanding one, [One] seeking God.
Every one went back, together they became filthy, There is none doing good — not even one.
Have not workers of iniquity known, Those eating my people have eaten bread, God they have not called.
There they feared a fear — there was no fear, For God hath scattered the bones of him Who is encamping against thee, Thou hast put to shame, For God hath despised them.
Who doth give from Zion the salvation of Israel? When God turneth back [to] a captivity of His people, Jacob doth rejoice — Israel is glad!


To the Overseer with stringed instruments. — An instruction, by David, in the coming in of the Ziphim, and they say to Saul, 'Is not David hiding himself with us?' O God, by Thy name save me, and by Thy might judge me.
O God, hear my prayer, Give ear to the sayings of my mouth,
For strangers have risen up against me And terrible ones have sought my soul, They have not set God before them. Selah.
Lo, God [is] a helper to me, The Lord [is] with those supporting my soul,
Turn back doth the evil thing to mine enemies, In Thy truth cut them off.
With a free will-offering I sacrifice to Thee, I thank Thy name, O Jehovah, for [it is] good,
For, from all adversity He delivered me, And on mine enemies hath mine eye looked!

To the Overseer with stringed instruments. — An instruction, by David. Give ear, O God, [to] my prayer, And hide not from my supplication.
Attend to me, and answer me, I mourn in my meditation, and make a noise,
Because of the voice of an enemy, Because of the oppression of the wicked, For they cause sorrow to move against me, And in anger they hate me.
My heart is pained within me, And terrors of death have fallen on me.
Fear and trembling come in to me, And horror doth cover me.
And I say, 'Who doth give to me a pinion as a dove? I fly away and rest,
Lo, I move far off, I lodge in a wilderness. Selah.
I hasten escape for myself, From a rushing wind, from a whirlwind.
Swallow up, O Lord, divide their tongue, For I saw violence and strife in a city.
By day and by night they go round it, on its walls. Both iniquity and perverseness [are] in its midst,
Mischiefs [are] in its midst. Fraud and deceit depart not from its street.
For an enemy reproacheth me not, or I bear [it], He who is hating me Hath not magnified himself against me, Or I hide from him.
But thou, a man — as mine equal, My familiar friend, and mine acquaintance.
When together we sweeten counsel, Into the house of God we walk in company.
Desolations [are] upon them, They go down [to] Sheol — alive, For wickedness [is] in their dwelling, in their midst.
I — to God I call, and Jehovah saveth me.
Evening, and morning, and noon, I meditate, and make a noise, and He heareth my voice,
He hath ransomed in peace my soul From him who is near to me, For with the multitude they were with me.
God doth hear and afflict them, And He sitteth of old. Selah. Because they have no changes, and fear not God,
He hath sent forth his hands against his well-wishers, He hath polluted his covenant.
Sweeter than honey hath been his mouth, And his heart [is] war! Softer have been his words than oil, And they [are] drawn [swords].
Cast on Jehovah that which He hath given thee, And He doth sustain thee, He doth not suffer for ever the moving of the righteous.
And Thou, O God, dost bring them down To a pit of destruction, Men of blood and deceit reach not to half their days, And I — I do trust in Thee!

To the Overseer. — 'On the Dumb Dove far off.' — A secret treasure of David, in the Philistines' taking hold of him in Gath. Favour me, O God, for man swallowed me up, All the day fighting he oppresseth me,
Mine enemies have swallowed up all the day, For many [are] fighting against me, O most High,
The day I am afraid I am confident toward Thee.
In God I praise His word, in God I have trusted, I fear not what flesh doth to me.
All the day they wrest my words, Concerning me all their thoughts [are] for evil,
They assemble, they hide, they watch my heels, When they have expected my soul.
By iniquity they escape, In anger the peoples put down, O God.
My wandering Thou hast counted, Thou — place Thou my tear in Thy bottle, Are they not in Thy book?
Then turn back do mine enemies in the day I call. This I have known, that God [is] for me.
In God I praise the word, In Jehovah I praise the word.
In God I trusted, I fear not what man doth to me,
On me, O God, [are] Thy vows, I repay thank-offerings to Thee.
For Thou hast delivered my soul from death, Dost Thou not my feet from falling? To walk habitually before God in the light of the living!

To the Overseer. — 'Destroy not.' — A secret treasure of David, in his fleeing from the face of Saul into a cave. Favour me, O God, favour me, For in Thee is my soul trusting, And in the shadow of Thy wings I trust, Until the calamities pass over.
I call to God Most High, To God [who] is perfecting for me.
He sendeth from the heaven, and saveth me, He reproached — who is panting after me. Selah. God sendeth forth His kindness and His truth.
My soul [is] in the midst of lions, I lie down [among] flames — sons of men, Their teeth [are] a spear and arrows, And their tongue a sharp sword.
Be Thou exalted above the heavens, O God, Above all the earth Thine honour.
A net they have prepared for my steps, Bowed down hath my soul, They have digged before me a pit, They have fallen into its midst. Selah.
Prepared is my heart, O God, Prepared is my heart, I sing and praise.
Awake, mine honour, awake, psaltery and harp, I awake the morning dawn.
I thank Thee among the peoples, O Lord, I praise Thee among the nations.
For great unto the heavens [is] Thy kindness, And unto the clouds Thy truth.
Be thou exalted above the heavens, O God. Above all the earth Thine honour!

To the Overseer. — 'Destroy not.' — A secret treasure, by David. Is it true, O dumb one, righteously ye speak? Uprightly ye judge, O sons of men?
Even in heart ye work iniquities, In the land the violence of your hands ye ponder.
The wicked have been estranged from the womb, They have erred from the belly, speaking lies.
Their poison [is] as poison of a serpent, As a deaf asp shutting its ear,
Which hearkeneth not to the voice of whisperers, A charmer of charms most skilful.
O God, break their teeth in their mouth, The jaw-teeth of young lions break down, O Jehovah.
They are melted as waters, They go up and down for themselves, His arrow proceedeth as they cut themselves off.
As a snail that melteth he goeth on, [As] an untimely birth of a woman, They have not seen the sun.
Before your pots discern the bramble, As well the raw as the heated He whirleth away.
The righteous rejoiceth that he hath seen vengeance, His steps he washeth in the blood of the wicked.
And man saith: 'Surely fruit [is] for the righteous: Surely there is a God judging in the earth!'

To the Overseer. — 'Destroy not,' by David. — A secret treasure, in Saul's sending, and they watch the house to put him to death. Deliver me from mine enemies, O my God, From my withstanders set me on high.
Deliver me from workers of iniquity, And from men of blood save me.
For, lo, they laid wait for my soul, Assembled against me are strong ones, Not my transgression nor my sin, O Jehovah.
Without punishment they run and prepare themselves, Stir up to meet me, and see.
And Thou, Jehovah, God of Hosts, God of Israel, Awake to inspect all the nations. Favour not any treacherous dealers of iniquity. Selah.
They turn back at evening, They make a noise like a dog, And go round about the city.
Lo, they belch out with their mouths, Swords [are] in their lips, for 'Who heareth?'
And Thou, O Jehovah dost laugh at them, Thou dost mock at all the nations.
O my Strength, unto Thee I take heed, For God [is] my tower — the God of my kindness.
God doth go before me, He causeth me to look on mine enemies.
Slay them not, lest my people forget, Shake them by Thy strength, And bring them down, O Lord our shield.
The sin of their mouth [is] a word of their lips, And they are captured in their pride, And from the curse and lying they recount.
Consume in fury, consume and they are not, And they know that God is ruling in Jacob, To the ends of the earth. Selah.
And they turn back at evening, They make a noise like a dog, And they go round about the city.
They — they wander for food, If they are not satisfied — then they murmur.
And I — I sing [of] Thy strength, And I sing at morn [of] Thy kindness, For thou hast been a tower to me, And a refuge for me in a day of adversity.
O my Strength, unto Thee I sing praise, For God [is] my tower, the God of my kindness!


To the Overseer. — 'Concerning the Lily of Testimony,' a secret treasure of David, to teach, in his striving with Aram-Naharaim, and with Aram-Zobah, and Joab turneth back and smiteth Edom in the valley of Salt — twelve thousand. O God, Thou hadst cast us off, Thou hadst broken us — hadst been angry! — Thou dost turn back to us.
Thou hast caused the land to tremble, Thou hast broken it, Heal its breaches, for it hath moved.
Thou hast shewn Thy people a hard thing, Thou hast caused us to drink wine of trembling.
Thou hast given to those fearing thee an ensign. To be lifted up as an ensign Because of truth. Selah.
That Thy beloved ones may be drawn out, Save [with] Thy right hand, and answer us.
God hath spoken in His holiness: I exult — I apportion Shechem, And the valley of Succoth I measure,
Mine [is] Gilead, and mine [is] Manasseh, And Ephraim [is] the strength of my head, Judah [is] my lawgiver,
Moab [is] my pot for washing, over Edom I cast my shoe, Shout, concerning me, O Philistia.
Who doth bring me [to] a city of bulwarks? Who hath led me unto Edom?
Is it not Thou, O God? hast Thou cast us off? And dost Thou not go forth, O God, with our hosts!
Give to us help from adversity, And vain [is] the deliverance of man.
In God we do mightily, And He treadeth down our adversaries!

To the Overseer, on stringed instruments. — By David. Hear, O God, my loud cry, attend to my prayer.
From the end of the land unto Thee I call, In the feebleness of my heart, Into a rock higher than I Thou dost lead me.
For Thou hast been a refuge for me, A tower of strength because of the enemy.
I sojourn in Thy tent to the ages, I trust in the secret place of Thy wings. Selah.
For Thou, O God, hast hearkened to my vows, Thou hast appointed the inheritance Of those fearing Thy name.
Days to the days of the king Thou addest, His years as generation and generation.
He dwelleth to the age before God, Kindness and truth appoint — they keep him.
So do I praise Thy name for ever, When I pay my vows day by day!

To the Overseer, for Jeduthun. — A Psalm of David. Only — toward God [is] my soul silent, From Him [is] my salvation.
Only — He [is] my rock, and my salvation, My tower, I am not much moved.
Till when do ye devise mischief against a man? Ye are destroyed all of you, As a wall inclined, a hedge that is cast down.
Only — from his excellency They have consulted to drive away, They enjoy a lie, with their mouth they bless, And with their heart revile. Selah.
Only — for God, be silent, O my soul, For from Him [is] my hope.
Only — He [is] my rock and my salvation, My tower, I am not moved.
On God [is] my salvation, and my honour, The rock of my strength, my refuge [is] in God.
Trust in Him at all times, O people, Pour forth before Him your heart, God [is] a refuge for us. Selah.
Only — vanity [are] the low, a lie the high. In balances to go up they than vanity [are] lighter.
Trust not in oppression, And in robbery become not vain, Wealth — when it increaseth — set not the heart.
Once hath God spoken, twice I heard this, That 'strength [is] with God.'
And with Thee, O Lord, [is] kindness, For Thou dost recompense to each, According to his work!

A Psalm of David, in his being in the wilderness of Judah. O God, Thou [art] my God, earnestly do I seek Thee, Thirsted for Thee hath my soul, Longed for Thee hath my flesh, In a land dry and weary, without waters.
So in the sanctuary I have seen Thee, To behold Thy strength and Thine honour.
Because better [is] Thy kindness than life, My lips do praise Thee.
So I bless Thee in my life, in Thy name I lift up my hands.
As [with] milk and fatness is my soul satisfied, And [with] singing lips doth my mouth praise.
If I have remembered Thee on my couch, In the watches — I meditate on Thee.
For Thou hast been a help to me, And in the shadow of Thy wings I sing.
Cleaved hath my soul after Thee, On me hath Thy right hand taken hold.
And they who for desolation seek my soul, Go in to the lower parts of the earth.
They cause him to run on the edge of the sword, A portion for foxes they are.
And the king doth rejoice in God, Boast himself doth every one swearing by Him, But stopped is the mouth of those speaking lies!

To the Overseer. — A Psalm of David. Hear, O God, my voice, in my meditation, From the fear of an enemy Thou keepest my life,
Hidest me from the secret counsel of evil doers, From the tumult of workers of iniquity.
Who sharpened as a sword their tongue, They directed their arrow — a bitter word.
To shoot in secret places the perfect, Suddenly they shoot him, and fear not.
They strengthen for themselves an evil thing, They recount of the hiding of snares, They have said, 'Who doth look at it?'
They search out perverse things, 'We perfected a searching search,' And the inward part of man, and the heart [are] deep.
And God doth shoot them [with] an arrow, Sudden have been their wounds,
And they cause him to stumble, Against them [is] their own tongue, Every looker on them fleeth away.
And all men fear, and declare the work of God, And His deed they have considered wisely.
The righteous doth rejoice in Jehovah, And hath trusted in Him, And boast themselves do all the upright of heart!

To the Overseer. — A Psalm of David. A Song. To Thee, silence — praise, O God, [is] in Zion, And to Thee is a vow completed.
Hearer of prayer, to Thee all flesh cometh.
Matters of iniquities were mightier than I, Our transgressions — Thou dost cover them.
O the happiness of [him whom] Thou choosest, And drawest near, he inhabiteth Thy courts, We are satisfied with the goodness of Thy house, Thy holy temple.
By fearful things in righteousness Thou answerest us, O God of our salvation, The confidence of all far off ends of earth and sea.
Establishing mountains by His power, He hath been girded with might,
Restraining the noise of seas, the noise of their billows, And the multitude of the peoples.
And the inhabitants of the uttermost parts From Thy signs are afraid, The outgoings of morning and evening Thou causest to sing.
Thou hast inspected the earth, and waterest it, Thou makest it very rich, the rivulet of God [is] full of water, Thou preparest their corn, When thus Thou dost prepare it,
Its ridges have been filled, Deepened hath been its furrow, With showers Thou dost soften it, Its springing up Thou blessest.
Thou hast crowned the year of Thy goodness, And Thy paths drop fatness.
Drop do the pastures of a wilderness, And joy of the heights Thou girdest on.
Clothed have lambs the flock, And valleys are covered with corn, They shout — yea, they sing!
To the Overseer. — A Song, a Psalm. Shout ye to God, all the earth.
Praise ye the honour of His name, Make ye honourable His praise.
Say to God, 'How fearful [are] Thy works, By the abundance of Thy strength, Thine enemies feign obedience to Thee.
All the earth do bow to Thee, They sing praise to Thee, they praise Thy name.' Selah.
Come ye, and see the works of God, Fearful acts toward the sons of men.
He hath turned a sea to dry land, Through a river they pass over on foot, There do we rejoice in Him.
Ruling by His might to the age, His eyes among the nations do watch, The refractory exalt not themselves. Selah.
Bless, ye peoples, our God, And sound the voice of His praise,
Who hath placed our soul in life, And suffered not our feet to be moved.
For Thou hast tried us, O God, Thou hast refined us as the refining of silver.
Thou hast brought us into a net, Thou hast placed pressure on our loins.
Thou hast caused man to ride at our head. We have entered into fire and into water, And Thou bringest us out to a watered place.
I enter Thy house with burnt-offerings, I complete to Thee my vows,
For opened were my lips, And my mouth spake in my distress:
'Burnt-offerings of fatlings I offer to Thee, With perfume of rams, I prepare a bullock with he-goats.' Selah.
Come, hear, all ye who fear God, And I recount what he did for my soul.
Unto Him [with] my mouth I have called, And exaltation [is] under my tongue.
Iniquity, if I have seen in my heart, The Lord doth not hear.
But God hath heard, He hath attended to the voice of my prayer.
Blessed [is] God, Who hath not turned aside my prayer, And His loving-kindness, from me!

To the Overseer, with stringed instruments. — A Psalm, a Song. God doth favour us and bless us, Doth cause His face to shine with us. Selah.
For the knowledge in earth of Thy way, among all nations of Thy salvation.
Praise Thee do peoples, O God, Praise Thee do peoples, all of them.
Rejoice and sing do nations, For Thou judgest peoples uprightly, And peoples on earth comfortest. Selah.
Confess Thee do peoples, O God, Confess Thee do peoples — all of them.
Earth hath given her increase, God doth bless us — our God,
God doth bless us, and all ends of earth fear Him!

To the Overseer. — A Psalm, a song of David. Rise doth God — scattered are His enemies! And those hating Him flee from His face.
As the driving away of smoke Thou drivest away, As the melting of wax before fire, The wicked perish at the presence of God.
And the righteous rejoice, they exult before God, And they joy with gladness.
Sing ye to God — praise His name, Raise up a highway for Him who is riding in deserts, In Jah [is] His name, and exult before Him.
Father of the fatherless, and judge of the widows, [Is] God in His holy habitation.
God — causing the lonely to dwell at home, Bringing out bound ones into prosperity, Only — the refractory have inhabited a dry place.
O God, in Thy going forth before Thy people, In Thy stepping through the wilderness, Selah.
The earth hath shaken, Yea, the heavens have dropped before God, This Sinai — before God, the God of Israel.
A shower of free-will gifts thou shakest out, O God. Thine inheritance, when it hath been weary, Thou hast established it.
Thy company have dwelt in it, Thou preparest in Thy goodness for the poor, O God.
The Lord doth give the saying, The female proclaimers [are] a numerous host.
Kings of hosts flee utterly away, And a female inhabitant of the house apportioneth spoil.
Though ye do lie between two boundaries, Wings of a dove covered with silver, And her pinions with yellow gold.
When the Mighty spreadeth kings in it, It doth snow in Salmon.
A hill of God [is] the hill of Bashan, A hill of heights [is] the hill of Bashan.
Why do ye envy, O high hills, The hill God hath desired for His seat? Jehovah also doth tabernacle for ever.
The chariots of God [are] myriads, thousands of changes, The Lord [is] among them, in Sinai, in the sanctuary.
Thou hast ascended on high, Thou hast taken captive captivity, Thou hast taken gifts for men, That even the refractory may rest, O Jah God.
Blessed [is] the Lord, day by day He layeth on us. God Himself [is] our salvation. Selah.
God Himself [is] to us a God for deliverances, And Jehovah Lord hath the outgoings of death.
Only — God doth smite The head of His enemies, The hairy crown of a habitual walker in his guilt.
The Lord said: 'From Bashan I bring back, I bring back from the depths of the sea.
So that thou dashest thy foot in blood, [In the blood of] enemies — the tongue of Thy dogs.'
They have seen Thy goings, O God, Goings of my God, my king, in the sanctuary.
Singers have been before, Behind [are] players on instruments, In the midst virgins playing with timbrels.
In assemblies bless ye God, The Lord — from the fountain of Israel.
There [is] little Benjamin their ruler, Heads of Judah their defence, Heads of Zebulun — heads of Naphtali.
Thy God hath commanded thy strength, Be strong, O God, this Thou hast wrought for us.
Because of Thy temple at Jerusalem, To Thee do kings bring a present.
Rebuke a beast of the reeds, a company of bulls, With calves of the peoples, Each humbling himself with pieces of silver, Scatter Thou peoples delighting in conflicts.
Come do fat ones out of Egypt, Cush causeth her hands to run to God.
Kingdoms of the earth, sing ye to God, Praise ye the Lord. Selah.
To him who is riding on the heavens of the heavens of old, Lo, He giveth with His voice a strong voice.
Ascribe ye strength to God, Over Israel [is] His excellency, and His strength in the clouds.
Fearful, O God, out of Thy sanctuaries, The God of Israel Himself, Giving strength and might to the people. Blessed [is] God!

To the Overseer. — 'On the Lilies,' by David. Save me, O God, for come have waters unto the soul.
I have sunk in deep mire, And there is no standing, I have come into the depths of the waters, And a flood hath overflown me.
I have been wearied with my calling, Burnt hath been my throat, Consumed have been mine eyes, waiting for my God.
Those hating me without cause Have been more than the hairs of my head, Mighty have been my destroyers, My lying enemies, That which I took not away — I bring back.
O God, Thou — Thou hast known Concerning my overturn, And my desolations from Thee have not been hid.
Let not those waiting on Thee be ashamed because of me, O Lord, Jehovah of Hosts, Let not those seeking Thee Blush because of me, O God of Israel.
For because of Thee I have borne reproach, Shame hath covered my face.
A stranger I have been to my brother, And a foreigner to sons of my mother.
For zeal for Thy house hath consumed me, And the reproaches of Thy reproachers Have fallen upon me.
And I weep in the fasting of my soul, And it is for a reproach to me.
And I make my clothing sackcloth, And I am to them for a simile.
Those sitting at the gate meditate concerning me, And those drinking strong drink, Play on instruments.
And I — my prayer [is] to Thee, O Jehovah, A time of good pleasure, O God, In the abundance of Thy kindness, Answer me in the truth of Thy salvation.
Deliver me from the mire, and let me not sink, Let me be delivered from those hating me, And from deep places of waters.
Let not a flood of waters overflow me, Nor let the deep swallow me up, Nor let the pit shut her mouth upon me.
Answer me, O Jehovah, for good [is] Thy kindness, According to the abundance Of Thy mercies turn Thou unto me,
And hide not Thy face from Thy servant, For I am in distress — haste, answer me.
Be near unto my soul — redeem it, Because of mine enemies ransom me.
Thou — Thou hast known my reproach, And my shame, and my blushing, Before Thee [are] all mine adversaries.
Reproach hath broken my heart, and I am sick, And I look for a bemoaner, and there is none, And for comforters, and I have found none.
And they give for my food gall, And for my thirst cause me to drink vinegar.
Their table before them is for a snare, And for a recompence — for a trap.
Darkened are their eyes from seeing, And their loins continually shake Thou.
Pour upon them Thine indignation, And the fierceness of Thine anger doth seize them.
Their tower is desolated, In their tents there is no dweller.
For they have pursued him Thou hast smitten, And recount of the pain of Thy pierced ones.
Give punishment for their iniquity, And they enter not into Thy righteousness.
They are blotted out of the book of life, And with the righteous are not written.
And I [am] afflicted and pained, Thy salvation, O God, doth set me on high.
I praise the name of God with a song, And I magnify Him with thanksgiving,
And it is better to Jehovah than an ox, A bullock — horned — hoofed.
The humble have seen — they rejoice, Ye who seek God — and your heart liveth.
For Jehovah hearkeneth unto the needy, And His bound ones He hath not despised.
The heavens and earth do praise Him, Seas, and every moving thing in them.
For God doth save Zion, And doth build the cities of Judah, And they have dwelt there, and possess it.
And the seed of His servants inherit it, And those loving His name dwell in it!

To the Overseer, by David. — 'To cause to remember.' O God, to deliver me, O Jehovah, for my help, haste.
Let them be ashamed and confounded Who are seeking my soul, Let them be turned backward and blush Who are desiring my evil.
Let them turn back because of their shame, Who are saying, 'Aha, aha.'
Let all those seeking Thee joy and be glad in Thee, And let those loving Thy salvation Say continually, 'God is magnified.'
And I [am] poor and needy, O God, haste to me, My help and my deliverer [art] Thou, O Jehovah, tarry Thou not!
In Thee, O Jehovah, I have trusted, Let me not be ashamed to the age.
In Thy righteousness Thou dost deliver me, And dost cause me to escape, Incline unto me Thine ear, and save me.
Be to me for a rock — a habitation, To go in continually, Thou hast given command to save me, For my rock and my bulwark [art] Thou.
O my God, cause me to escape From the hand of the wicked, From the hand of the perverse and violent.
For Thou [art] my hope, O Lord Jehovah, My trust from my youth.
By Thee I have been supported from the womb, From my mother's bowels Thou dost cut me out, In Thee [is] my praise continually.
As a wonder I have been to many, And Thou [art] my strong refuge.
Filled is my mouth [with] Thy praise, All the day [with] Thy beauty.
Cast me not off at the time of old age, According to the consumption of my power forsake me not.
For mine enemies have spoken against me, And those watching my soul have taken counsel together,
Saying, 'God hath forsaken him, Pursue and catch him, for there is no deliverer.'
O God, be not far from me, O my God, for my help make haste.
They are ashamed, they are consumed, Who are opposing my soul, They are covered [with] reproach and blushing, Who are seeking my evil,
And I continually do wait with hope, And have added unto all Thy praise.
My mouth recounteth Thy righteousness, All the day Thy salvation, For I have not known the numbers.
I come in the might of the Lord Jehovah, I mention Thy righteousness — Thine only.
God, Thou hast taught me from my youth, And hitherto I declare Thy wonders.
And also unto old age and grey hairs, O God, forsake me not, Till I declare Thy strength to a generation, To every one that cometh Thy might.
And Thy righteousness, O God, [is] unto the heights, Because Thou hast done great things, O God, who [is] like Thee?
Because Thou hast showed me many and sad distresses, Thou turnest back — Thou revivest me, And from the depths of the earth, Thou turnest back — Thou bringest me up.
Thou dost increase my greatness, And Thou surroundest — Thou comfortest me,
I also thank Thee with a vessel of psaltery, Thy truth, O my God, I sing to Thee with a harp, O Holy One of Israel,
My lips cry aloud when I sing praise to Thee, And my soul that Thou hast redeemed,
My tongue also all the day uttereth Thy righteousness, Because ashamed — because confounded, Have been those seeking my evil!
By Solomon. O God, Thy judgments to the king give, And Thy righteousness to the king's son.
He judgeth Thy people with righteousness, And Thy poor with judgment.
The mountains bear peace to the people, And the heights by righteousness.
He judgeth the poor of the people, Giveth deliverance to the sons of the needy, And bruiseth the oppressor.
They fear Thee with the sun, and before the moon, Generation — generations.
He cometh down as rain on mown grass, As showers — sprinkling the earth.
Flourish in his days doth the righteous, And abundance of peace till the moon is not.
And he ruleth from sea unto sea, And from the river unto the ends of earth.
Before him bow do the inhabitants of the dry places, And his enemies lick the dust.
Kings of Tarshish and of the isles send back a present. Kings of Sheba and Seba a reward bring near.
And all kings do bow themselves to him, All nations do serve him,
For he delivereth the needy who crieth, And the poor when he hath no helper,
He hath pity on the poor and needy, And the souls of the needy he saveth,
From fraud and from violence he redeemeth their soul, And precious is their blood in his eyes.
And he liveth, and giveth to him of the gold of Sheba, And prayeth for him continually, All the day he doth bless him.
There is a handful of corn in the earth, On the top of mountains, Shake like Lebanon doth its fruit, And they flourish out of the city as the herb of the earth.
His name is to the age, Before the sun is his name continued, And they bless themselves in him, All nations do pronounce him happy.
Blessed is Jehovah God, God of Israel, He alone is doing wonders,
And blessed [is] the Name of His honour to the age, And the whole earth is filled [with] His honour. Amen, and amen!
The prayers of David son of Jesse have been ended.
A Psalm of Asaph. Only — good to Israel [is] God, to the clean of heart. And I — as a little thing, My feet have been turned aside,
As nothing, have my steps slipped, For I have been envious of the boastful,
The peace of the wicked I see, That there are no bands at their death,
And their might [is] firm.
In the misery of mortals they are not, And with common men they are not plagued.
Therefore hath pride encircled them, Violence covereth them as a dress.
Their eye hath come out from fat. The imaginations of the heart transgressed;
They do corruptly, And they speak in the wickedness of oppression, From on high they speak.
They have set in the heavens their mouth, And their tongue walketh in the earth.
Therefore do His people return hither, And waters of fulness are wrung out to them.
And they have said, 'How hath God known? And is there knowledge in the Most High?'
Lo, these [are] the wicked and easy ones of the age, They have increased strength.
Only — a vain thing! I have purified my heart, And I wash in innocency my hands,
And I am plagued all the day, And my reproof [is] every morning.
If I have said, 'I recount thus,' Lo, a generation of Thy sons I have deceived.
And I think to know this, Perverseness it [is] in mine eyes,
Till I come in to the sanctuaries of God, I attend to their latter end.
Only, in slippery places Thou dost set them, Thou hast caused them to fall to desolations.
How have they become a desolation as in a moment, They have been ended — consumed from terrors.
As a dream from awakening, O Lord, In awaking, their image Thou despisest.
For my heart doth show itself violent, And my reins prick themselves,
And I am brutish, and do not know. A beast I have been with Thee.
And I [am] continually with Thee, Thou hast laid hold on my right hand.
With Thy counsel Thou dost lead me, And after honour dost receive me.
Whom have I in the heavens? And with Thee none I have desired in earth.
Consumed hath been my flesh and my heart, The rock of my heart and my portion [is] God to the age.
For, lo, those far from Thee do perish, Thou hast cut off every one, Who is going a whoring from Thee.
And I — nearness of God to me [is] good, I have placed in the Lord Jehovah my refuge, To recount all Thy works!
An Instruction of Asaph. Why, O God, hast Thou cast off for ever? Thine anger smoketh against the flock of Thy pasture.
Remember Thy company. Thou didst purchase of old, Thou didst redeem the rod of Thy inheritance, This mount Zion — Thou didst dwell in it.
Lift up Thy steps to the perpetual desolations, Everything the enemy did wickedly in the sanctuary.
Roared have thine adversaries, In the midst of Thy meeting-places, They have set their ensigns as ensigns.
He is known as one bringing in on high Against a thicket of wood — axes.
And now, its carvings together With axe and hatchet they break down,
They have sent into fire Thy sanctuary, to the earth they polluted the tabernacle of Thy name,
They said in their hearts, 'Let us oppress them together,' They did burn all the meeting-places of God in the land.
Our ensigns we have not seen, There is no more a prophet, Nor with us is one knowing how long.
Till when, O God, doth an adversary reproach? Doth an enemy despise thy name for ever?
Why dost Thou turn back Thy hand, Even Thy right hand? From the midst of Thy bosom remove [it].
And God [is] my king of old, Working salvation in the midst of the earth.
Thou hast broken by Thy strength a sea -[monster], Thou hast shivered Heads of dragons by the waters,
Thou hast broken the heads of leviathan, Thou makest him food, For the people of the dry places.
Thou hast cleaved a fountain and a stream, Thou hast dried up perennial flowings.
Thine [is] the day, also Thine [is] the night, Thou hast prepared a light giver — the sun.
Thou hast set up all the borders of earth, Summer and winter Thou hast formed them.
Remember this — an enemy reproached Jehovah, And a foolish people have despised Thy name.
Give not up to a company, The soul of Thy turtle-dove, The company of Thy poor ones forget not for ever.
Look attentively to the covenant, For the dark places of earth, Have been full of habitations of violence.
Let not the oppressed turn back ashamed, Let the poor and needy praise Thy name,
Arise, O God, plead Thy plea, Remember Thy reproach from a fool all the day.
Forget not the voice of Thine adversaries, The noise of Thy withstanders is going up continually!

To the Overseer. — 'Destroy not.' — A Psalm of Asaph. — A Song. We have given thanks to Thee, O God, We have given thanks, and near [is] Thy name, They have recounted Thy wonders.
When I receive an appointment, I — I do judge uprightly.
Melted is the earth and all its inhabitants, I — I have pondered its pillars. Selah.
I have said to the boastful, 'Be not boastful,' And to the wicked, 'Raise not up a horn.'
Raise not up on high your horn, (Ye speak with a stiff neck.)
For not from the east, or from the west, Nor from the wilderness — [is] elevation.
But God [is] judge, This He maketh low — and this He lifteth up.
For a cup [is] in the hand of Jehovah, And the wine hath foamed, It is full of mixture, and He poureth out of it, Only its dregs wring out, and drink, Do all the wicked of the earth,
And I — I declare [it] to the age, I sing praise to the God of Jacob.
And all horns of the wicked I cut off, Exalted are the horns of the righteous!

To the Overseer with stringed instruments. — A Psalm of Asaph. — A Song. In Judah [is] God known, in Israel His name [is] great.
And His tabernacle is in Salem, And His habitation in Zion.
There he hath shivered arrows of a bow, Shield, and sword, and battle. Selah.
Bright [art] Thou, honourable above hills of prey.
Spoiled themselves have the mighty of heart, They have slept their sleep, And none of the men of might found their hands.
From Thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, Both rider and horse have been fast asleep.
Thou, fearful [art] Thou, And who doth stand before Thee, Since Thou hast been angry!
From heaven Thou hast sounded judgment, Earth hath feared, and hath been still,
In the rising of God to judgment, To save all the humble of earth. Selah.
For the fierceness of man praiseth Thee, The remnant of fierceness Thou girdest on.
Vow and complete to Jehovah your God, All ye surrounding him. They bring presents to the Fearful One.
He doth gather the spirit of leaders, Fearful to the kings of earth!

To the Overseer, for Jeduthun. — A Psalm of Asaph. My voice [is] to God, and I cry, my voice [is] to God, And He hath given ear unto me.
In a day of my distress the Lord I sought, My hand by night hath been spread out, And it doth not cease, My soul hath refused to be comforted.
I remember God, and make a noise, I meditate, and feeble is my spirit. Selah.
Thou hast taken hold of the watches of mine eyes, I have been moved, and I speak not.
I have reckoned the days of old, The years of the ages.
I remember my music in the night, With my heart I meditate, and my spirit doth search diligently:
To the ages doth the Lord cast off? Doth He add to be pleased no more?
Hath His kindness ceased for ever? The saying failed to all generations?
Hath God forgotten [His] favours? Hath He shut up in anger His mercies? Selah.
And I say: 'My weakness is, The changes of the right hand of the Most High.'
I mention the doings of Jah, For I remember of old Thy wonders,
And I have meditated on all Thy working, And I talk concerning Thy doings.
O God, in holiness [is] Thy way, Who [is] a great god like God?
Thou [art] the God doing wonders. Thou hast made known among the peoples Thy strength,
Thou hast redeemed with strength Thy people, The sons of Jacob and Joseph. Selah.
The waters have seen Thee, O God, The waters have seen Thee, They are afraid — also depths are troubled.
Poured out waters have thick clouds, The skies have given forth a noise, Also — Thine arrows go up and down.
The voice of Thy thunder [is] in the spheres, Lightnings have lightened the world, The earth hath trembled, yea, it shaketh.
In the sea [is] Thy way, And Thy paths [are] in many waters, And Thy tracks have not been known.
Thou hast led as a flock Thy people, By the hand of Moses and Aaron!
An Instruction of Asaph. Give ear, O my people, to my law, Incline your ear to sayings of my mouth.
I open with a simile my mouth, I bring forth hidden things of old,
That we have heard and do know, And our fathers have recounted to us.
We do not hide from their sons, To a later generation recounting praises of Jehovah, And His strength, and His wonders that He hath done.
And He raiseth up a testimony in Jacob, And a law hath placed in Israel, That He commanded our fathers, To make them known to their sons.
So that a later generation doth know, Sons who are born, do rise and recount to their sons,
And place in God their confidence, And forget not the doings of God, But keep His commands.
And they are not like their fathers, A generation apostate and rebellious, A generation! it hath not prepared its heart, Nor stedfast with God [is] its spirit.
Sons of Ephraim — armed bearers of bow, Have turned in a day of conflict.
They have not kept the covenant of God, And in His law they have refused to walk,
And they forget His doings, And His wonders that He shewed them.
Before their fathers He hath done wonders, In the land of Egypt — the field of Zoan.
He cleft a sea, and causeth them to pass over, Yea, He causeth waters to stand as a heap.
And leadeth them with a cloud by day, And all the night with a light of fire.
He cleaveth rocks in a wilderness, And giveth drink — as the great deep.
And bringeth out streams from a rock, And causeth waters to come down as rivers.
And they add still to sin against Him, To provoke the Most High in the dry place.
And they try God in their heart, To ask food for their lust.
And they speak against God — they said: 'Is God able to array a table in a wilderness?'
Lo, He hath smitten a rock, And waters flow, yea, streams overflow. 'Also — bread [is] He able to give? Doth He prepare flesh for His people?'
Therefore hath Jehovah heard, And He sheweth Himself wroth, And fire hath been kindled against Jacob, And anger also hath gone up against Israel,
For they have not believed in God, Nor have they trusted in His salvation.
And He commandeth clouds from above, Yea, doors of the heavens He hath opened.
And He raineth on them manna to eat, Yea, corn of heaven He hath given to them.
Food of the mighty hath each eaten, Venison He sent to them to satiety.
He causeth an east wind to journey in the heavens, And leadeth by His strength a south wind,
And He raineth on them flesh as dust, And as sand of the seas — winged fowl,
And causeth [it] to fall in the midst of His camp, Round about His tabernacles.
And they eat, and are greatly satisfied, And their desire He bringeth to them.
They have not been estranged from their desire, Yet [is] their food in their mouth,
And the anger of God hath gone up against them, And He slayeth among their fat ones, And youths of Israel He caused to bend.
With all this they have sinned again, And have not believed in His wonders.
And He consumeth in vanity their days, And their years in trouble.
If He slew them, then they sought Him, And turned back, and sought God earnestly,
And they remember that God [is] their rock, And God Most High their redeemer.
And — they deceive Him with their mouth, And with their tongue do lie to Him,
And their heart hath not been right with Him, And they have not been stedfast in His covenant.
And He — the Merciful One, Pardoneth iniquity, and destroyeth not, And hath often turned back His anger, And waketh not up all His fury.
And He remembereth that they [are] flesh, A wind going on — and it returneth not.
How often do they provoke Him in the wilderness, Grieve Him in the desolate place?
Yea, they turn back, and try God, And the Holy One of Israel have limited.
They have not remembered His hand The day He ransomed them from the adversary.
When He set His signs in Egypt, And His wonders in the field of Zoan,
And He turneth to blood their streams, And their floods they drink not.
He sendeth among them the beetle, and it consumeth them, And the frog, and it destroyeth them,
And giveth to the caterpillar their increase, And their labour to the locust.
He destroyeth with hail their vine, And their sycamores with frost,
And delivereth up to the hail their beasts, And their cattle to the burning flames.
He sendeth on them the fury of His anger, Wrath, and indignation, and distress — A discharge of evil messengers.
He pondereth a path for His anger, He kept not back their soul from death, Yea, their life to the pestilence He delivered up.
And He smiteth every first-born in Egypt, The first-fruit of the strong in tents of Ham.
And causeth His people to journey as a flock, And guideth them as a drove in a wilderness,
And He leadeth them confidently, And they have not been afraid, And their enemies hath the sea covered.
And He bringeth them in unto the border of His sanctuary, This mountain His right hand had got,
And casteth out nations from before them, And causeth them to fall in the line of inheritance, And causeth the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents,
And they tempt and provoke God Most High, And His testimonies have not kept.
And they turn back, And deal treacherously like their fathers, They have been turned like a deceitful bow,
And make Him angry with their high places, And with their graven images make Him zealous,
God hath heard, and sheweth Himself wroth. And kicketh exceedingly against Israel.
And He leaveth the tabernacle of Shiloh, The tent He had placed among men,
And He giveth His strength to captivity, And His beauty into the hand of an adversary,
And delivereth up to the sword His people, And with His inheritance shewed Himself angry.
His young men hath fire consumed, And His virgins have not been praised.
His priests by the sword have fallen, And their widows weep not.
And the Lord waketh as a sleeper, As a mighty one crying aloud from wine.
And He smiteth His adversaries backward, A reproach age-during He hath put on them,
And He kicketh against the tent of Joseph, And on the tribe of Ephraim hath not fixed.
And He chooseth the tribe of Judah, With mount Zion that He loved,
And buildeth His sanctuary as a high place, Like the earth, He founded it to the age.
And He fixeth on David His servant, And taketh him from the folds of a flock,
From behind suckling ones He hath brought him in, To rule over Jacob His people, And over Israel His inheritance.
And he ruleth them according to the integrity of his heart, And by the skilfulness of his hands leadeth them!
A Psalm of Asaph. O God, nations have come into Thy inheritance, They have defiled Thy holy temple, They made Jerusalem become heaps,
They gave the dead bodies of Thy servants Food for the fowls of the heavens, The flesh of Thy saints For the wild beast of the earth.
They have shed their blood As water round about Jerusalem, And there is none burying.
We have been a reproach to our neighbours, A scorn and a derision to our surrounders.
Till when, O Jehovah? art Thou angry for ever? Thy jealousy doth burn as fire.
Pour Thy fury on the nations who have not known Thee, And on kingdoms that have not called in Thy name.
For [one] hath devoured Jacob, And his habitation they have made desolate.
Remember not for us the iniquities of forefathers, Haste, let Thy mercies go before us, For we have been very weak.
Help us, O God of our salvation, Because of the honour of Thy name, And deliver us, and cover over our sins, For Thy name's sake.
Why do the nations say, 'Where [is] their God?' Let be known among the nations before our eyes, The vengeance of the blood of Thy servants that is shed.
Let the groaning of the prisoner come in before Thee, According to the greatness of Thine arm, Leave Thou the sons of death.
And turn Thou back to our neighbours, Sevenfold unto their bosom, their reproach, Wherewith they reproached Thee, O Lord.
And we, Thy people, and the flock of Thy pasture, We give thanks to Thee to the age, To all generations we recount Thy praise!

To the Overseer. — 'On the Lilies.' A testimony of Asaph. — A Psalm. Shepherd of Israel, give ear, Leading Joseph as a flock, Inhabiting the cherubs — shine forth,
Before Ephraim, and Benjamin, and Manasseh, Wake up Thy might, and come for our salvation.
O God, cause us to turn back, And cause Thy face to shine, and we are saved.
Jehovah, God of Hosts, till when? Thou hast burned against the prayer of Thy people.
Thou hast caused them to eat bread of tears, And causest them to drink With tears a third time.
Thou makest us a strife to our neighbours, And our enemies mock at it.
God of Hosts, turn us back, And cause Thy face to shine, and we are saved.
A vine out of Egypt Thou dost bring, Thou dost cast out nations, and plantest it.
Thou hast looked before it, and dost root it, And it filleth the land,
Covered have been hills [with] its shadow, And its boughs [are] cedars of God.
It sendeth forth its branches unto the sea, And unto the river its sucklings.
Why hast Thou broken down its hedges, And all passing by the way have plucked it?
A boar out of the forest doth waste it, And a wild beast of the fields consumeth it.
God of Hosts, turn back, we beseech Thee, Look from heaven, and see, and inspect this vine,
And the root that Thy right hand planted, And the branch Thou madest strong for Thee,
Burnt with fire — cut down, From the rebuke of Thy face they perish.
Let Thy hand be on the man of Thy right hand, On the son of man Thou hast strengthened for Thyself.
And we do not go back from Thee, Thou dost revive us, and in Thy name we call.
O Jehovah, God of Hosts, turn us back, Cause Thy face to shine, and we are saved!

To the Overseer. — 'On the Gittith.' By Asaph. Cry aloud to God our strength, Shout to the God of Jacob.
Lift up a song, and give out a timbrel, A pleasant harp with psaltery.
Blow in the month a trumpet, In the new moon, at the day of our festival,
For a statute to Israel it [is], An ordinance of the God of Jacob.
A testimony on Joseph He hath placed it, In his going forth over the land of Egypt. A lip, I have not known — I hear.
From the burden his shoulder I turned aside, His hands from the basket pass over.
In distress thou hast called and I deliver thee, I answer thee in the secret place of thunder, I try thee by the waters of Meribah. Selah.
Hear, O My people, and I testify to thee, O Israel, if thou dost hearken to me:
There is not in thee a strange god, And thou bowest not thyself to a strange god.
I [am] Jehovah thy God, Who bringeth thee up out of the land of Egypt. Enlarge thy mouth, and I fill it.
But, My people hearkened not to My voice, And Israel hath not consented to Me.
And I send them away in the enmity of their heart, They walk in their own counsels.
O that My people were hearkening to Me, Israel in My ways would walk.
As a little thing their enemies I cause to bow, And against their adversaries I turn back My hand,
Those hating Jehovah feign obedience to Him, But their time is — to the age.
He causeth him to eat of the fat of wheat, And [with] honey from a rock I satisfy thee!
— A Psalm of Asaph. God hath stood in the company of God, In the midst God doth judge.
Till when do ye judge perversely? And the face of the wicked lift up? Selah.
Judge ye the weak and fatherless, The afflicted and the poor declare righteous.
Let the weak and needy escape, From the hand of the wicked deliver them.
They knew not, nor do they understand, In darkness they walk habitually, Moved are all the foundations of earth.
I — I have said, 'Gods ye [are], And sons of the Most High — all of you,
But as man ye die, and as one of the heads ye fall,
Rise, O God, judge the earth, For Thou hast inheritance among all the nations!

A Song, — A Psalm of Asaph. O God, let there be no silence to Thee, Be not silent, nor be quiet, O God.
For, lo, Thine enemies do roar, And those hating Thee have lifted up the head,
Against Thy people they take crafty counsel, And consult against Thy hidden ones.
They have said, 'Come, And we cut them off from [being] a nation, And the name of Israel is not remembered any more.'
For they consulted in heart together, Against Thee a covenant they make,
Tents of Edom, and Ishmaelites, Moab, and the Hagarenes,
Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek, Philistia with inhabitants of Tyre,
Asshur also is joined with them, They have been an arm to sons of Lot. Selah.
Do to them as [to] Midian, As [to] Sisera, as [to] Jabin, at the stream Kishon.
They were destroyed at Endor, They were dung for the ground!
Make their nobles as Oreb and as Zeeb, And as Zebah and Zalmunna all their princes,
Who have said, 'Let us occupy for ourselves The comely places of God.'
O my God, make them as a rolling thing, As stubble before wind.
As a fire doth burn a forest, And as a flame setteth hills on fire,
So dost Thou pursue them with Thy whirlwind, And with Thy hurricane troublest them.
Fill their faces [with] shame, And they seek Thy name, O Jehovah.
They are ashamed and troubled for ever, Yea, they are confounded and lost.
And they know that Thou — (Thy name [is] Jehovah — by Thyself,) [Art] the Most High over all the earth!

To the Overseer. — 'On the Gittith By sons of Korah.' — A Psalm. How beloved Thy tabernacles, Jehovah of Hosts!
My soul desired, yea, it hath also been consumed, For the courts of Jehovah, My heart and my flesh cry aloud unto the living God,
(Even a sparrow hath found a house, And a swallow a nest for herself, Where she hath placed her brood,) Thine altars, O Jehovah of Hosts, My king and my God.
O the happiness of those inhabiting Thy house, Yet do they praise Thee. Selah.
O the happiness of a man whose strength is in Thee, Highways [are] in their heart.
Those passing through a valley of weeping, A fountain do make it, Blessings also cover the director.
They go from strength unto strength, He appeareth unto God in Zion.
O Jehovah, God of Hosts, hear my prayer, Give ear, O God of Jacob. Selah.
Our shield, see, O God, And behold the face of Thine anointed,
For good [is] a day in Thy courts, O Teacher! I have chosen rather to be at the threshold, In the house of my God, Than to dwell in tents of wickedness.
For a sun and a shield [is] Jehovah God, Grace and honour doth Jehovah give. He withholdeth not good To those walking in uprightness.
Jehovah of Hosts! O the happiness of a man trusting in Thee.

To the Overseer. — By sons of Korah. A Psalm. Thou hast accepted, O Jehovah, Thy land, Thou hast turned [to] the captivity of Jacob.
Thou hast borne away the iniquity of Thy people, Thou hast covered all their sin. Selah.
Thou hast gathered up all Thy wrath, Thou hast turned back from the fierceness of Thine anger.
Turn back [to] us, O God of our salvation, And make void Thine anger with us.
To the age art Thou angry against us? Dost Thou draw out Thine anger To generation and generation?
Dost Thou not turn back? Thou revivest us, And Thy people do rejoice in Thee.
Show us, O Jehovah, thy kindness, And Thy salvation Thou dost give to us.
I hear what God Jehovah speaketh, For He speaketh peace unto His people, And unto His saints, and they turn not back to folly.
Only, near to those fearing Him [is] His salvation, That honour may dwell in our land.
Kindness and truth have met, Righteousness and peace have kissed,
Truth from the earth springeth up, And righteousness from heaven looketh out,
Jehovah also giveth that which is good, And our land doth give its increase.
Righteousness before Him goeth, And maketh His footsteps for a way!
A Prayer of David. Incline, O Jehovah, Thine ear, Answer me, for I [am] poor and needy.
Keep my soul, for I [am] pious, Save Thy servant — who is trusting to Thee, O Thou, my God.
Favour me, O Lord, for to Thee I call all the day.
Rejoice the soul of Thy servant, For unto Thee, O Lord, my soul I lift up.
For Thou, Lord, [art] good and forgiving. And abundant in kindness to all calling Thee.
Hear, O Jehovah, my prayer, And attend to the voice of my supplications.
In a day of my distress I call Thee, For Thou dost answer me.
There is none like Thee among the gods, O Lord, And like Thy works there are none.
All nations that Thou hast made Come and bow themselves before Thee, O Lord, And give honour to Thy name.
For great [art] Thou, and doing wonders, Thou [art] God Thyself alone.
Show me, O Jehovah, Thy way, I walk in Thy truth, My heart doth rejoice to fear Thy name.
I confess Thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart, And I honour Thy name to the age.
For Thy kindness [is] great toward me, And Thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest Sheol.
O God, the proud have risen up against me, And a company of the terrible sought my soul, And have not placed Thee before them,
And Thou, O Lord, [art] God, merciful and gracious, Slow to anger, and abundant in kindness and truth.
Look unto me, and favour me, Give Thy strength to Thy servant, And give salvation to a son of Thine handmaid.
Do with me a sign for good, And those hating me see and are ashamed, For Thou, O Jehovah, hast helped me, Yea, Thou hast comforted me!
By sons of Korah. — A Psalm, a song. His foundation [is] in holy mountains.
Jehovah is loving the gates of Zion Above all the tabernacles of Jacob.
Honourable things are spoken in Thee, O city of God. Selah.
I mention Rahab and Babel to those knowing Me, Lo, Philistia, and Tyre, with Cush! This [one] was born there.
And of Zion it is said: Each one was born in her, And He, the Most High, doth establish her.
Jehovah doth recount in the describing of the peoples, 'This [one] was born there.' Selah.
Singers also as players on instruments, All my fountains [are] in Thee!

A Song, a Psalm, by sons of Korah, to the Overseer, 'Concerning the Sickness of Afflictions.' — An instruction, by Heman the Ezrahite. O Jehovah, God of my salvation, Daily I have cried, nightly before Thee,
My prayer cometh in before Thee, Incline Thine ear to my loud cry,
For my soul hath been full of evils, And my life hath come to Sheol.
I have been reckoned with those going down [to] the pit, I have been as a man without strength.
Among the dead — free, As pierced ones lying in the grave, Whom Thou hast not remembered any more, Yea, they by Thy hand have been cut off.
Thou hast put me in the lowest pit, In dark places, in depths.
Upon me hath Thy fury lain, And [with] all Thy breakers Thou hast afflicted. Selah.
Thou hast put mine acquaintance far from me, Thou hast made me an abomination to them, Shut up — I go not forth.
Mine eye hath grieved because of affliction, I called Thee, O Jehovah, all the day, I have spread out unto Thee my hands.
To the dead dost Thou do wonders? Do Rephaim rise? do they thank Thee? Selah.
Is Thy kindness recounted in the grave? Thy faithfulness in destruction?
Are Thy wonders known in the darkness? And Thy righteousness in the land of forgetfulness?
And I, unto Thee, O Jehovah, I have cried, And in the morning doth my prayer come before Thee.
Why, O Jehovah, castest Thou off my soul? Thou hidest Thy face from me.
I [am] afflicted, and expiring from youth, I have borne Thy terrors — I pine away.
Over me hath Thy wrath passed, Thy terrors have cut me off,
They have surrounded me as waters all the day, They have gone round against me together,
Thou hast put far from me lover and friend, Mine acquaintance [is] the place of darkness!

An instruction, by Ethan the Ezrahite. Of the kind acts of Jehovah, to the age I sing, To all generations I make known Thy faithfulness with my mouth,
For I said, 'To the age is kindness built, The heavens! Thou dost establish Thy faithfulness in them.'
I have made a covenant for My chosen, I have sworn to David My servant:
'Even to the age do I establish thy seed, And have built to generation and generation thy throne. Selah.
and the heavens confess Thy wonders, O Jehovah, Thy faithfulness also [is] in an assembly of holy ones.
For who in the sky, Compareth himself to Jehovah? Is like to Jehovah among sons of the mighty?
God is very terrible, In the secret counsel of His holy ones, And fearful over all surrounding Him.
O Jehovah, God of Hosts, Who [is] like Thee — a strong Jah? And Thy faithfulness [is] round about Thee.
Thou [art] ruler over the pride of the sea, In the lifting up of its billows Thou dost restrain them.
Thou hast bruised Rahab, as one wounded. With the arm of Thy strength Thou hast scattered Thine enemies.
Thine [are] the heavens — the earth also [is] Thine, The habitable world and its fulness, Thou hast founded them.
North and south Thou hast appointed them, Tabor and Hermon in Thy name do sing.
Thou hast an arm with might, Strong is Thy hand — high Thy right hand.
Righteousness and judgment [Are] the fixed place of Thy throne, Kindness and truth go before Thy face.
O the happiness of the people knowing the shout, O Jehovah, in the light of Thy face they walk habitually.
In Thy name they rejoice all the day, And in Thy righteousness they are exalted,
For the beauty of their strength [art] Thou, And in Thy good will is our horn exalted,
For of Jehovah [is] our shield, And of the Holy One of Israel our king.
Then Thou hast spoken in vision, To Thy saint, yea, Thou sayest, I have placed help upon a mighty one, Exalted a chosen one out of the people,
I have found David My servant, With My holy oil I have anointed him.
With whom My hand is established, My arm also doth strengthen him.
An enemy exacteth not upon him, And a son of perverseness afflicteth him not.
And I have beaten down before him his adversaries, And those hating him I plague,
And My faithfulness and kindness [are] with him, And in My name is his horn exalted.
And I have set on the sea his hand, And on the rivers his right hand.
He proclaimeth me: 'Thou [art] my Father, My God, and the rock of my salvation.'
I also first-born do appoint him, Highest of the kings of the earth.
To the age I keep for him My kindness, And My covenant [is] stedfast with him.
And I have set his seed for ever, And his throne as the days of the heavens.
If his sons forsake My law, And in My judgments do not walk;
If My statutes they pollute, And My commands do not keep,
I have looked after with a rod their transgression, And with strokes their iniquity,
And My kindness I break not from him, Nor do I deal falsely in My faithfulness.
I profane not My covenant, And that which is going forth from My lips I change not.
Once I have sworn by My holiness, I lie not to David,
His seed is to the age, And his throne [is] as the sun before Me,
As the moon it is established — to the age, And the witness in the sky is stedfast. Selah.
And Thou, Thou hast cast off, and dost reject, Thou hast shown Thyself wroth With Thine anointed,
Hast rejected the covenant of Thy servant, Thou hast polluted to the earth his crown,
Thou hast broken down all his hedges, Thou hast made his fenced places a ruin.
Spoiled him have all passing by the way, He hath been a reproach to his neighbours,
Thou hast exalted the right hand of his adversaries, Thou hast caused all his enemies to rejoice.
Also — Thou turnest back the sharpness of his sword, And hast not established him in battle,
Hast caused [him] to cease from his brightness, And his throne to the earth hast cast down.
Thou hast shortened the days of his youth, Hast covered him over [with] shame. Selah.
Till when, O Jehovah, art Thou hidden? For ever doth Thy fury burn as fire?
Remember, I pray Thee, what [is] life-time? Wherefore in vain hast Thou created All the sons of men?
Who [is] the man that liveth, and doth not see death? He delivereth his soul from the hand of Sheol. Selah.
Where [are] Thy former kindnesses, O Lord. Thou hast sworn to David in Thy faithfulness,
Remember, O Lord, the reproach of Thy servants, I have borne in my bosom all the strivings of the peoples,
Wherewith Thine enemies reproached, O Jehovah, Wherewith they have reproached The steps of Thine anointed.
Blessed [is] Jehovah to the age. Amen, and amen!
A Prayer of Moses, the man of God. Lord, a habitation Thou — Thou hast been, To us — in generation and generation,
Before mountains were brought forth, And Thou dost form the earth and the world, Even from age unto age Thou [art] God.
Thou turnest man unto a bruised thing, And sayest, Turn back, ye sons of men.
For a thousand years in Thine eyes [are] as yesterday, For it passeth on, yea, a watch by night.
Thou hast inundated them, they are asleep, In the morning as grass he changeth.
In the morning it flourisheth, and hath changed, At evening it is cut down, and hath withered.
For we were consumed in Thine anger, And in Thy fury we have been troubled.
Thou hast set our iniquities before Thee, Our hidden things at the light of Thy face,
For all our days pined away in Thy wrath, We consumed our years as a meditation.
Days of our years, in them [are] seventy years, And if, by reason of might, eighty years, Yet [is] their enlargement labour and vanity, For it hath been cut off hastily, and we fly away.
Who knoweth the power of Thine anger? And according to Thy fear — Thy wrath?
To number our days aright let [us] know, And we bring the heart to wisdom.
Turn back, O Jehovah, till when? And repent concerning Thy servants.
Satisfy us at morn [with] Thy kindness, And we sing and rejoice all our days.
Cause us to rejoice according to the days Wherein Thou hast afflicted us, The years we have seen evil.
Let Thy work appear unto Thy servants, And Thine honour on their sons.
And let the pleasantness of Jehovah our God be upon us, And the work of our hands establish on us, Yea, the work of our hands establish it!
He who is dwelling In the secret place of the Most High, In the shade of the Mighty lodgeth habitually,
He is saying of Jehovah, 'My refuge, and my bulwark, my God, I trust in Him,'
For He delivereth thee from the snare of a fowler, From a calamitous pestilence.
With His pinion He covereth thee over, And under His wings thou dost trust, A shield and buckler [is] His truth.
Thou art not afraid of fear by night, Of arrow that flieth by day,
Of pestilence in thick darkness that walketh, Of destruction that destroyeth at noon,
There fall at thy side a thousand, And a myriad at thy right hand, Unto thee it cometh not nigh.
But with thine eyes thou lookest, And the reward of the wicked thou seest,
(For Thou, O Jehovah, [art] my refuge,) The Most High thou madest thy habitation.
Evil happeneth not unto thee, And a plague cometh not near thy tent,
For His messengers He chargeth for thee, To keep thee in all thy ways,
On the hands they bear thee up, Lest thou smite against a stone thy foot.
On lion and asp thou treadest, Thou trampest young lion and dragon.
Because in Me he hath delighted, I also deliver him — I set him on high, Because he hath known My name.
He doth call Me, and I answer him, I [am] with him in distress, I deliver him, and honour him.
With length of days I satisfy him, And I cause him to look on My salvation!

A Psalm. — A Song for the sabbath-day. Good to give thanks to Jehovah, And to sing praises to Thy name, O Most High,
To declare in the morning Thy kindness, And Thy faithfulness in the nights.
On ten strings and on psaltery, On higgaion, with harp.
For Thou hast caused me to rejoice, O Jehovah, in Thy work, Concerning the works of Thy hands I sing.
How great have been Thy works, O Jehovah, Very deep have been Thy thoughts.
A brutish man doth not know, And a fool understandeth not this; —
When the wicked flourish as a herb, And blossom do all workers of iniquity — For their being destroyed for ever and ever!
And Thou [art] high to the age, O Jehovah.
For, lo, Thine enemies, O Jehovah, For, lo, Thine enemies, do perish, Separate themselves do all workers of iniquity.
And Thou exaltest as a reem my horn, I have been anointed with fresh oil.
And mine eye looketh on mine enemies, Of those rising up against me, The evil doers, do mine ears hear.
The righteous as a palm-tree flourisheth, As a cedar in Lebanon he groweth.
Those planted in the house of Jehovah, In the courts of our God do flourish.
Still they bring forth in old age, Fat and flourishing are they,
To declare that upright [is] Jehovah my rock, And there is no perverseness in Him!
Jehovah hath reigned, Excellency He hath put on, Jehovah put on strength, He girded Himself, Also — established is the world, unmoved.
Established is Thy throne since then, From the age Thou [art].
Floods have lifted up, O Jehovah, Floods have lifted up their voice, Floods lift up their breakers.
Than the voices of many mighty waters, Breakers of a sea, mighty on high [is] Jehovah,
Thy testimonies have been very stedfast, To Thy house comely [is] holiness, O Jehovah, for length of days!
God of vengeance — Jehovah! God of vengeance, shine forth.
Be lifted up, O Judge of the earth, Send back a recompence on the proud.
Till when [do] the wicked, O Jehovah? Till when do the wicked exult?
They utter — they speak an old saw, All working iniquity do boast themselves.
Thy people, O Jehovah, they bruise, And Thine inheritance they afflict.
Widow and sojourner they slay, And fatherless ones they murder.
And they say, 'Jehovah doth not see, And the God of Jacob doth not consider.'
Consider, ye brutish among the people, And ye foolish, when do ye act wisely?
He who planteth the ear doth He not hear? He who formeth the eye doth He not see?
He who is instructing nations, Doth He not reprove? He who is teaching man knowledge [is] Jehovah.
He knoweth the thoughts of man, that they [are] vanity.
O the happiness of the man Whom Thou instructest, O Jah, And out of Thy law teachest him,
To give rest to him from days of evil, While a pit is digged for the wicked.
For Jehovah leaveth not His people, And His inheritance forsaketh not.
For to righteousness judgment turneth back, And after it all the upright of heart,
Who riseth up for me with evil doers? Who stationeth himself for me with workers of iniquity?
Unless Jehovah [were] a help to me, My soul had almost inhabited silence.
If I have said, 'My foot hath slipped,' Thy kindness, O Jehovah, supporteth me.
In the abundance of my thoughts within me, Thy comforts delight my soul.
Is a throne of mischief joined [with] Thee? A framer of perverseness by statute?
They decree against the soul of the righteous, And innocent blood declare wicked.
And Jehovah is for a high place to me, And my God [is] for a rock — my refuge,
And turneth back on them their iniquity, And in their wickedness cutteth them off; Jehovah our God doth cut them off!
Come, we sing to Jehovah, We shout to the rock of our salvation.
We come before His face with thanksgiving, With psalms we shout to Him.
For a great God [is] Jehovah, And a great king over all gods.
In whose hand [are] the deep places of earth, And the strong places of hills [are] His.
Whose is the sea, and He made it, And His hands formed the dry land.
Come in, we bow ourselves, and we bend, We kneel before Jehovah our Maker.
For He [is] our God, and we the people of His pasture, And the flock of His hand, To-day, if to His voice ye hearken,
Harden not your heart as [in] Meribah, As [in] the day of Massah in the wilderness,
Where your fathers have tried Me, Have proved Me, yea, have seen My work.
Forty years I am weary of the generation, And I say, 'A people erring in heart — they! And they have not known My ways:'
Where I sware in Mine anger, 'If they come in unto My rest — !'
Sing to Jehovah a new song, Sing to Jehovah all the earth.
Sing to Jehovah, bless His name, Proclaim from day to day His salvation.
Declare among nations His honour, Among all the peoples His wonders.
For great [is] Jehovah, and praised greatly, Fearful He [is] over all gods.
For all the gods of the peoples [are] nought, And Jehovah made the heavens.
Honour and majesty [are] before Him, Strength and beauty in His sanctuary.
Ascribe to Jehovah, O families of the peoples, Ascribe to Jehovah honour and strength.
Ascribe to Jehovah the honour of His name, Lift up a present and come in to His courts.
Bow yourselves to Jehovah, In the honour of holiness, Be afraid of His presence, all the earth.
Say among nations, 'Jehovah hath reigned, Also — established is the world, unmoved, He judgeth the peoples in uprightness.'
The heavens joy, and the earth is joyful, The sea and its fulness roar.
The field exulteth, and all that [is] in it, Then sing do all trees of the forest,
Before Jehovah, for He hath come, For He hath come to judge the earth. He judgeth the world in righteousness, And the peoples in His faithfulness!
Jehovah hath reigned, The earth is joyful, many isles rejoice.
Cloud and darkness [are] round about Him, Righteousness and judgment the basis of His throne.
Fire before Him goeth, And burneth round about His adversaries.
Lightened have His lightnings the world, The earth hath seen, and is pained.
Hills, like wax, melted before Jehovah, Before the Lord of all the earth.
The heavens declared His righteousness, And all the peoples have seen His honour.
Ashamed are all servants of a graven image, Those boasting themselves in idols, Bow yourselves to him, all ye gods.
Zion hath heard and rejoiceth, And daughters of Judah are joyful, Because of Thy judgments, O Jehovah.
For Thou, Jehovah, [art] Most High over all the earth, Greatly Thou hast been exalted over all gods.
Ye who love Jehovah, hate evil, He is keeping the souls of His saints, From the hand of the wicked he delivereth them.
Light [is] sown for the righteous, And for the upright of heart — joy.
Rejoice, ye righteous, in Jehovah, And give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness!
A Psalm. Sing ye to Jehovah a new song, For wonders He hath done, Given salvation to Him hath His right hand and His holy arm.
Jehovah hath made known His salvation, Before the eyes of the nations, He hath revealed His righteousness,
He hath remembered His kindness, And His faithfulness to the house of Israel, All ends of earth have seen the salvation of our God.
Shout to Jehovah, all the earth, Break forth, and cry aloud, and sing.
Sing to Jehovah with harp, With harp, and voice of praise,
With trumpets, and voice of a cornet, Shout ye before the king Jehovah.
Roar doth the sea and its fulness, The world and the inhabitants in it.
Floods clap hand, together hills cry aloud,
Before Jehovah, For He hath come to judge the earth, He judgeth the world in righteousness, And the people in uprightness!
Jehovah hath reigned, peoples tremble, The Inhabitant of the cherubs, the earth shaketh.
Jehovah in Zion [is] great, And high He [is] over all the peoples.
They praise Thy name, 'Great, and fearful, holy [it] is.'
And the strength of the king Hath loved judgment, Thou — Thou hast established uprightness; Judgment and righteousness in Jacob, Thou — Thou hast done.
Exalt ye Jehovah our God, And bow yourselves at His footstool, holy [is] He.
Moses and Aaron among His priests, And Samuel among those proclaiming His name. They are calling unto Jehovah, And He doth answer them.
In a pillar of cloud He speaketh unto them, They have kept His testimonies, And the statute He hath given to them.
O Jehovah, our God, Thou hast afflicted them, A God forgiving Thou hast been to them, And taking vengeance on their actions.
Exalt ye Jehovah our God, And bow yourselves at His holy hill, For holy [is] Jehovah our God!
A Psalm of Thanksgiving. Shout to Jehovah, all the earth.
Serve Jehovah with joy, come before him with singing.
Know that Jehovah He [is] God, He made us, and we are His, His people — and the flock of His pasture.
Enter ye His gates with thanksgiving, His courts with praise, Give ye thanks to Him, bless ye His Name.
For good [is] Jehovah, to the age His kindness, And to generation and generation His faithfulness!
A Psalm of David. Kindness and judgment I sing, To Thee, O Jehovah, I sing praise.
I act wisely in a perfect way, When dost Thou come in unto me? I walk habitually in the integrity of my heart, In the midst of my house.
I set not before mine eyes a worthless thing, The work of those turning aside I have hated, It adhereth not to me.
A perverse heart turneth aside from me, Wickedness I know not.
Whoso slandereth in secret his neighbour, Him I cut off, The high of eyes and proud of heart, him I endure not.
Mine eyes are on the faithful of the land, To dwell with me, Whoso is walking in a perfect way, he serveth me.
He dwelleth not in my house who is working deceit, Whoso is speaking lies Is not established before mine eyes.
At morning I cut off all the wicked of the land, To cut off from the city of Jehovah All the workers of iniquity!

A Prayer of the afflicted when he is feeble, and before Jehovah poureth out his plaint. O Jehovah, hear my prayer, yea, my cry to Thee cometh.
Hide not Thou Thy face from me, In a day of mine adversity, Incline unto me Thine ear, In the day I call, haste, answer me.
For consumed in smoke have been my days, And my bones as a fire-brand have burned.
Smitten as the herb, and withered, is my heart, For I have forgotten to eat my bread.
From the voice of my sighing Hath my bone cleaved to my flesh.
I have been like to a pelican of the wilderness, I have been as an owl of the dry places.
I have watched, and I am As a bird alone on the roof.
All the day mine enemies reproached me, Those mad at me have sworn against me.
Because ashes as bread I have eaten, And my drink with weeping have mingled,
From Thine indignation and Thy wrath, For Thou hast lifted me up, And dost cast me down.
My days as a shadow [are] stretched out, And I — as the herb I am withered.
And Thou, O Jehovah, to the age abidest, And Thy memorial to all generations.
Thou — Thou risest — Thou pitiest Zion, For the time to favour her, For the appointed time hath come.
For Thy servants have been pleased with her stones, And her dust they favour.
And nations fear the name of Jehovah, And all kings of the earth Thine honour,
For Jehovah hath builded Zion, He hath been seen in His honour,
He turned unto the prayer of the destitute, And He hath not despised their prayer.
This is written for a later generation, And the people created do praise Jah.
For He hath looked From the high place of His sanctuary. Jehovah from heaven unto earth looked attentively,
To hear the groan of the prisoner, To loose sons of death,
To declare in Zion the name of Jehovah, And His praise in Jerusalem,
In the peoples being gathered together, And the kingdoms — to serve Jehovah.
He hath humbled in the way my power, He hath shortened my days.
I say, 'My God, take me not up in the midst of my days,' Through all generations [are] Thine years.
Beforetime the earth Thou didst found, And the work of Thy hands [are] the heavens.
They — They perish, and Thou remainest, And all of them as a garment become old, As clothing Thou changest them, And they are changed.
And Thou [art] the same, and Thine years are not finished.
The sons of Thy servants do continue, And their seed before Thee is established!
By David. Bless, O my soul, Jehovah, And all my inward parts — His Holy Name.
Bless, O my soul, Jehovah, And forget not all His benefits,
Who is forgiving all thine iniquities, Who is healing all thy diseases,
Who is redeeming from destruction thy life, Who is crowning thee — kindness and mercies,
Who is satisfying with good thy desire, Renew itself as an eagle doth thy youth.
Jehovah is doing righteousness and judgments For all the oppressed.
He maketh known His ways to Moses, To the sons of Israel His acts.
Merciful and gracious [is] Jehovah, Slow to anger, and abundant in mercy.
Not for ever doth He strive, Nor to the age doth He watch.
Not according to our sins hath He done to us, Nor according to our iniquities Hath He conferred benefits upon us.
For, as the height of the heavens [is] above the earth, His kindness hath been mighty over those fearing Him.
As the distance of east from west He hath put far from us our transgressions.
As a father hath mercy on sons, Jehovah hath mercy on those fearing Him.
For He hath known our frame, Remembering that we [are] dust.
Mortal man! as grass [are] his days, As a flower of the field so he flourisheth;
For a wind hath passed over it, and it is not, And its place doth not discern it any more.
And the kindness of Jehovah [Is] from age even unto age on those fearing Him, And His righteousness to sons' sons,
To those keeping His covenant, And to those remembering His precepts to do them.
Jehovah in the heavens Hath established His throne, And His kingdom over all hath ruled.
Bless Jehovah, ye His messengers, Mighty in power — doing His word, To hearken to the voice of His Word.
Bless Jehovah, all ye His hosts, His ministers — doing His pleasure.
Bless Jehovah, all ye His works, In all places of His dominion. Bless, O my soul, Jehovah!
Bless, O my soul, Jehovah! Jehovah, my God, Thou hast been very great, Honour and majesty Thou hast put on.
Covering himself [with] light as a garment, Stretching out the heavens as a curtain,
Who is laying the beam of His upper chambers in the waters, Who is making thick clouds His chariot, Who is walking on wings of wind,
Making His messengers — the winds, His ministers — the flaming fire.
He hath founded earth on its bases, It is not moved to the age and for ever.
The abyss! as with clothing Thou hast covered it, Above hills do waters stand.
From Thy rebuke they flee, From the voice of Thy thunder haste away.
They go up hills — they go down valleys, Unto a place Thou hast founded for them.
A border Thou hast set, they pass not over, They turn not back to cover the earth.
Who is sending forth fountains in valleys, Between hills they go on.
They water every beast of the field, Wild asses break their thirst.
By them the fowl of the heavens doth dwell, From between the branches They give forth the voice.
Watering hills from His upper chambers, From the fruit of Thy works is the earth satisfied.
Causing grass to spring up for cattle, And herb for the service of man, To bring forth bread from the earth,
And wine — it rejoiceth the heart of man, To cause the face to shine from oil, And bread — the heart of man it supporteth.
Satisfied [are] the trees of Jehovah, Cedars of Lebanon that He hath planted,
Where birds do make nests, The stork — the firs [are] her house.
The high hills [are] for wild goats, Rocks [are] a refuge for conies,
He made the moon for seasons, The sun hath known his place of entrance.
Thou settest darkness, and it is night, In it doth every beast of the forest creep.
The young lions are roaring for prey, And to seek from God their food.
The sun riseth, they are gathered, And in their dens they crouch.
Man goeth forth to his work, And to his service — till evening.
How many have been Thy works, O Jehovah, All of them in wisdom Thou hast made, Full is the earth of thy possessions.
This, the sea, great and broad of sides, There [are] moving things — innumerable, Living creatures — small with great.
There do ships go: leviathan, That Thou hast formed to play in it.
All of them unto Thee do look, To give their food in its season.
Thou dost give to them — they gather, Thou dost open Thy hand — they [are] satisfied [with] good.
Thou hidest Thy face — they are troubled, Thou gatherest their spirit — they expire, And unto their dust they turn back.
Thou sendest out Thy Spirit, they are created, And Thou renewest the face of the ground.
The honour of Jehovah is to the age, Jehovah rejoiceth in His works,
Who is looking to earth, and it trembleth, He cometh against hills, and they smoke.
I sing to Jehovah during my life, I sing praise to my God while I exist.
Sweet is my meditation on Him, I — I do rejoice in Jehovah.
Consumed are sinners from the earth, And the wicked are no more. Bless, O my soul, Jehovah. Praise ye Jehovah!
Give ye thanks to Jehovah — call ye in His name, Make known among the peoples His acts.
Sing ye to Him — sing praise to Him, Meditate ye on all His wonders.
Boast yourselves in His Holy Name, The heart of those seeking Jehovah rejoiceth.
Seek ye Jehovah and His strength, Seek ye His face continually.
Remember His wonders that He did, His signs and the judgments of His mouth.
O seed of Abraham, His servant, O sons of Jacob, His chosen ones.
He [is] Jehovah our God, In all the earth [are] His judgments.
He hath remembered to the age His covenant, The word He commanded to a thousand generations,
That He hath made with Abraham, And His oath to Isaac,
And doth establish it to Jacob for a statute, To Israel — a covenant age-during,
Saying, 'To thee I give the land of Canaan, The portion of your inheritance,'
In their being few in number, But a few, and sojourners in it.
And they go up and down, from nation unto nation, From a kingdom unto another people.
He hath not suffered any to oppress them And He reproveth for their sakes kings.
'Strike not against Mine anointed, And to My prophets do not evil.'
And He calleth a famine on the land, The whole staff of bread He hath broken.
He hath sent before them a man, For a servant hath Joseph been sold.
They have afflicted with fetters his feet, Iron hath entered his soul,
Till the time of the coming of His word The saying of Jehovah hath tried him.
The king hath sent, and looseth him, The ruler of the peoples, and draweth him out.
He hath made him lord of his house, And ruler over all his possessions.
To bind his chiefs at his pleasure, And his elders he maketh wise.
And Israel cometh in to Egypt, And Jacob hath sojourned in the land of Ham.
And He maketh His people very fruitful, And maketh it mightier than its adversaries.
He turned their heart to hate His people, To conspire against His servants.
He hath sent Moses His servant, Aaron whom He had fixed on.
They have set among them the matters of His signs, And wonders in the land of Ham.
He hath sent darkness, and it is dark, And they have not provoked His word.
He hath turned their waters to blood, And putteth to death their fish.
Teemed hath their land [with] frogs, In the inner chambers of their kings.
He hath said, and the beetle cometh, Lice into all their border.
He hath made their showers hail, A flaming fire [is] in their land.
And He smiteth their vine and their fig, And shivereth the trees of their border.
He hath said, and the locust cometh, And the cankerworm — innumerable,
And it consumeth every herb in their land, And it consumeth the fruit of their ground.
And He smiteth every first-born in their land, The first-fruit of all their strength,
And bringeth them out with silver and gold, And there is not in its tribes a feeble one.
Rejoiced hath Egypt in their going forth, For their fear had fallen upon them.
He hath spread a cloud for a covering, And fire to enlighten the night.
They have asked, and He bringeth quails, And [with] bread of heaven satisfieth them.
He hath opened a rock, and waters issue, They have gone on in dry places — a river.
For He hath remembered His holy word, With Abraham His servant,
And He bringeth forth His people with joy, With singing His chosen ones.
And He giveth to them the lands of nations, And the labour of peoples they possess,
That they may observe His statutes, And His laws may keep. Praise ye Jehovah!
Praise ye Jah, give thanks to Jehovah, For good, for to the age, [is] His kindness.
Who doth utter the mighty acts of Jehovah? Soundeth all His praise?
O the happiness of those keeping judgment, Doing righteousness at all times.
Remember me, O Jehovah, With the favour of Thy people, Look after me in Thy salvation.
To look on the good of Thy chosen ones, To rejoice in the joy of Thy nation, To boast myself with Thine inheritance.
We have sinned with our fathers, We have done perversely, we have done wickedly.
Our fathers in Egypt, Have not considered wisely Thy wonders, They have not remembered The abundance of Thy kind acts, And provoke by the sea, at the sea of Suph.
And He saveth them for His name's sake, To make known His might,
And rebuketh the sea of Suph, and it is dried up, And causeth them to go Through depths as a wilderness.
And He saveth them from the hand Of him who is hating, And redeemeth them from the hand of the enemy.
And waters cover their adversaries, One of them hath not been left.
And they believe in His words, they sing His praise,
They have hasted — forgotten His works, They have not waited for His counsel.
And they lust greatly in a wilderness, And try God in a desert.
And He giveth to them their request, And sendeth leanness into their soul.
And they are envious of Moses in the camp, Of Aaron, Jehovah's holy one.
Earth openeth, and swalloweth up Dathan, And covereth over the company of Abiram.
And fire burneth among their company, A flame setteth on fire the wicked.
They make a calf in Horeb, And bow themselves to a molten image,
And change their Honour Into the form of an ox eating herbs.
They have forgotten God their saviour, The doer of great things in Egypt,
Of wonderful things in the land of Ham, Of fearful things by the sea of Suph.
And He saith to destroy them, Unless Moses, His chosen one, Had stood in the breach before Him, To turn back His wrath from destroying.
And they kick against the desirable land, They have not given credence to His word.
And they murmur in their tents, They have not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah.
And He lifteth up His hand to them, To cause them to fall in a wilderness,
And to cause their seed to fall among nations, And to scatter them through lands.
And they are coupled to Baal-Peor, And eat the sacrifices of the dead,
And they provoke to anger by their actions, And a plague breaketh forth upon them,
And Phinehas standeth, and executeth judgment, And the plague is restrained,
And it is reckoned to him to righteousness, To all generations — unto the age.
And they cause wrath by the waters of Meribah, And it is evil to Moses for their sakes,
For they have provoked his spirit, And he speaketh wrongfully with his lips.
They have not destroyed the peoples, As Jehovah had said to them,
And mix themselves among nations, and learn their works,
And serve their idols, And they are to them for a snare.
And they sacrifice their sons And their daughters to destroyers,
And they shed innocent blood — Blood of their sons and of their daughters, Whom they have sacrificed to idols of Canaan, And the land is profaned with blood.
And they are defiled with their works, And commit whoredom in their habitual doings.
And the anger of Jehovah Is kindled against His people, And He doth abominate His inheritance.
And giveth them into the hand of nations, And those hating them rule over them,
And their enemies oppress them, And they are humbled under their hand.
Many times He doth deliver them, And they rebel in their counsel, And they are brought low in their iniquity.
And He looketh on their distress When He heareth their cry,
And remembereth for them His covenant, And is comforted, According to the abundance of His kindness.
And He appointeth them for mercies Before all their captors.
Save us, O Jehovah our God, and gather us from the nations, To give thanks to Thy holy name, To glory in Thy praise.
Blessed [is] Jehovah, God of Israel, From the age even unto the age. And all the people said, 'Amen, praise Jah!'
'Give ye thanks to Jehovah, For good, for to the age [is] His kindness:'
Let the redeemed of Jehovah say, Whom He redeemed from the hand of an adversary.
And from the lands hath gathered them, From east and from west, From north, and from the sea.
They wandered in a wilderness, in a desert by the way, A city of habitation they have not found.
Hungry — yea — thirsty, Their soul in them becometh feeble,
And they cry unto Jehovah in their adversity, From their distress He delivereth them,
And causeth them to tread in a right way, To go unto a city of habitation.
They confess to Jehovah His kindness, And His wonders to the sons of men.
For He hath satisfied a longing soul, And a hungry soul hath filled [with] goodness.
Inhabitants of dark places and death-shade, Prisoners of affliction and of iron,
Because they changed the saying of God, And the counsel of the Most High despised.
And He humbleth with labour their heart, They have been feeble, and there is no helper.
And they cry unto Jehovah in their adversity, From their distresses He saveth them.
He bringeth them out from the dark place, And death-shade, And their bands He draweth away.
They confess to Jehovah His kindness, And His wonders to the sons of men.
For He hath broken doors of brass, And bars of iron He hath cut.
Fools, by means of their transgression, And by their iniquities, afflict themselves.
All food doth their soul abominate, And they come nigh unto the gates of death,
And cry unto Jehovah in their adversity, From their distresses He saveth them,
He sendeth His word and healeth them, And delivereth from their destructions.
They confess to Jehovah His kindness, And His wonders to the sons of men,
And they sacrifice sacrifices of thanksgiving, And recount His works with singing.
Those going down [to] the sea in ships, Doing business in many waters,
They have seen the works of Jehovah, And His wonders in the deep.
And He saith, and appointeth a tempest, And it lifteth up its billows,
They go up [to] the heavens, they go down [to] the depths, Their soul in evil is melted.
They reel to and fro, and move as a drunkard, And all their wisdom is swallowed up.
And they cry to Jehovah in their adversity, And from their distresses He bringeth them out.
He establisheth a whirlwind to a calm, And hushed are their billows.
And they rejoice because they are quiet, And He leadeth them to the haven of their desire.
They confess to Jehovah His kindness, And His wonders to the sons of men,
And they exalt Him in the assembly of the people, And in the seat of the elders praise Him.
He maketh rivers become a wilderness, And fountains of waters become dry land.
A fruitful land becometh a barren place, For the wickedness of its inhabitants.
He maketh a wilderness become a pool of water, And a dry land become fountains of waters.
And He causeth the hungry to dwell there, And they prepare a city of habitation.
And they sow fields, and plant vineyards, And they make fruits of increase.
And He blesseth them, and they multiply exceedingly, And their cattle He doth not diminish.
And they are diminished, and bow down, By restraint, evil, and sorrow.
He is pouring contempt upon nobles, And causeth them to wander in vacancy — no way.
And setteth on high the needy from affliction, And placeth families as a flock.
The upright do see and rejoice, And all perversity hath shut her mouth.
Who [is] wise, and observeth these? They understand the kind acts of Jehovah!

A Song, a Psalm of David. Prepared is my heart, O God, I sing, yea, I sing praise, also my honour.
Awake, psaltery and harp, I awake the dawn.
I thank Thee among peoples, O Jehovah, And I praise Thee among the nations.
For great above the heavens [is] Thy kindness, And unto the clouds Thy truth.
Be Thou exalted above the heavens, O God, And above all the earth Thy honour.
That Thy beloved ones may be delivered, Save [with] Thy right hand, and answer us.
God hath spoken in His holiness: I exult, I apportion Shechem, And the valley of Succoth I measure,
Mine [is] Gilead, mine [is] Manasseh, And Ephraim [is] the strength of my head, Judah [is] my lawgiver,
Moab [is] a pot for my washing, Upon Edom I cast my shoe, Over Philistia I shout habitually.
Who doth bring me in to the fenced city? Who hath led me unto Edom?
Hast not Thou, O God, cast us off? And Thou goest not out, O God, with our hosts!
Give to us help from adversity, And vain is the salvation of man.
In God we do mightily, And He doth tread down our adversaries!
To the Overseer. — A Psalm of David. O God of my praise, be not silent,
For the mouth of wickedness, and the mouth of deceit, Against me they have opened, They have spoken with me — A tongue of falsehood, and words of hatred!
They have compassed me about, And they fight me without cause.
For my love they oppose me, and I — prayer!
And they set against me evil for good, And hatred for my love.
Appoint Thou over him the wicked, And an adversary standeth at his right hand.
In his being judged, he goeth forth wicked, And his prayer is for sin.
His days are few, his oversight another taketh,
His sons are fatherless, and his wife a widow.
And wander continually do his sons, Yea, they have begged, And have sought out of their dry places.
An exactor layeth a snare for all that he hath, And strangers spoil his labour.
He hath none to extend kindness, Nor is there one showing favour to his orphans.
His posterity is for cutting off, In another generation is their name blotted out.
The iniquity of his fathers Is remembered unto Jehovah, And the sin of his mother is not blotted out.
They are before Jehovah continually, And He cutteth off from earth their memorial.
Because that he hath not remembered to do kindness, And pursueth the poor man and needy, And the smitten of heart — to slay,
And he loveth reviling, and it meeteth him, And he hath not delighted in blessing, And it is far from him.
And he putteth on reviling as his robe, And it cometh in as water into his midst, And as oil into his bones.
It is to him as apparel — he covereth himself, And for a continual girdle he girdeth it on.
This [is] the wage of mine accusers from Jehovah, And of those speaking evil against my soul.
And Thou, O Jehovah Lord, Deal with me for Thy name's sake, Because Thy kindness [is] good, deliver me.
For I [am] poor and needy, And my heart hath been pierced in my midst.
As a shadow when it is stretched out I have gone, I have been driven away as a locust.
My knees have been feeble from fasting, And my flesh hath failed of fatness.
And I — I have been a reproach to them, They see me, they shake their head.
Help me, O Jehovah my God, Save me, according to Thy kindness.
And they know that this [is] Thy hand, Thou, O Jehovah, Thou hast done it.
They revile, and Thou dost bless, They have risen, and are ashamed, And Thy servant doth rejoice.
Mine accusers put on blushing, and are covered, As an upper robe [is] their shame.
I thank Jehovah greatly with my mouth, And in the midst of many I praise Him,
For He standeth at the right hand of the needy, To save from those judging his soul.
A Psalm of David. The affirmation of Jehovah to my Lord: 'Sit at My right hand, Till I make thine enemies thy footstool.'
The rod of thy strength doth Jehovah send from Zion, Rule in the midst of thine enemies.
Thy people [are] free-will gifts in the day of Thy strength, in the honours of holiness, From the womb, from the morning, Thou hast the dew of thy youth.
Jehovah hath sworn, and doth not repent, 'Thou [art] a priest to the age, According to the order of Melchizedek.'
The Lord on thy right hand smote kings In the day of His anger.
He doth judge among the nations, He hath completed the carcases, Hath smitten the head over the mighty earth.
From a brook in the way he drinketh, Therefore he doth lift up the head!
Praise ye Jah! I thank Jehovah with the whole heart, In the secret meeting of the upright, And of the company.
Great [are] the works of Jehovah, Sought out by all desiring them.
Honourable and majestic is His work, And His righteousness is standing for ever.
A memorial He hath made of His wonders, Gracious and merciful [is] Jehovah.
Prey He hath given to those fearing Him, He remembereth to the age His covenant.
The power of His works He hath declared to His people, To give to them the inheritance of nations.
The works of His hands [are] true and just, Stedfast [are] all His appointments.
They are sustained for ever to the age. They are made in truth and uprightness.
Redemption He hath sent to His people, He hath appointed to the age His covenant, Holy and fearful [is] His name.
The beginning of wisdom [is] fear of Jehovah, Good understanding have all doing them, His praise [is] standing for ever!
Praise ye Jah! O the happiness of one fearing Jehovah, In His commands he hath delighted greatly.
Mighty in the earth is his seed, The generation of the upright is blessed.
Wealth and riches [are] in his house, And his righteousness is standing for ever.
Light hath risen in darkness to the upright, Gracious, and merciful, and righteous.
Good [is] the man — gracious and lending, He sustaineth his matters in judgment.
For — to the age he is not moved; For a memorial age-during is the righteous.
Of an evil report he is not afraid, Prepared is His heart, confident in Jehovah.
Sustained is his heart — he feareth not, Till that he look on his adversaries.
He hath scattered — hath given to the needy, His righteousness is standing for ever, His horn is exalted with honour.
The wicked seeth, and hath been angry, His teeth he gnasheth, and hath melted, The desire of the wicked doth perish!
Praise ye Jah! Praise, ye servants of Jehovah. Praise the name of Jehovah.
The name of Jehovah is blessed, From henceforth, and unto the age.
From the rising of the sun unto its going in, Praised [is] the name of Jehovah.
High above all nations [is] Jehovah, Above the heavens [is] his honour.
Who [is] as Jehovah our God, He is exalting [Himself] to sit?
He is humbling [Himself] to look On the heavens and on the earth.
He is raising up from the dust the poor, From a dunghill He exalteth the needy.
To cause to sit with princes, With the princes of His people.
Causing the barren one of the house to sit, A joyful mother of sons; praise ye Jah!
In the going out of Israel from Egypt, The house of Jacob from a strange people,
Judah became His sanctuary, Israel his dominion.
The sea hath seen, and fleeth, The Jordan turneth backward.
The mountains have skipped as rams, Heights as sons of a flock.
What — to thee, O sea, that thou fleest? O Jordan, thou turnest back!
O mountains, ye skip as rams! O heights, as sons of a flock!
From before the Lord be afraid, O earth, From before the God of Jacob,
He is turning the rock to a pool of waters, The flint to a fountain of waters!
Not to us, O Jehovah, not to us, But to Thy name give honour, For Thy kindness, for Thy truth.
Why do the nations say, 'Where, pray, [is] their God.
And our God [is] in the heavens, All that He hath pleased He hath done.
Their idols [are] silver and gold, work of man's hands,
A mouth they have, and they speak not, Eyes they have, and they see not,
Ears they have, and they hear not, A nose they have, and they smell not,
Their hands, but they handle not, Their feet, and they walk not;
Nor do they mutter through their throat, Like them are their makers, Every one who is trusting in them.
O Israel, trust in Jehovah, 'Their help and their shield [is] He.'
O house of Aaron, trust in Jehovah, 'Their help and their shield [is] He.'
Ye fearing Jehovah, trust in Jehovah, 'Their help and their shield [is] He.'
Jehovah hath remembered us, He blesseth, He blesseth the house of Israel, He blesseth the house of Aaron,
He blesseth those fearing Jehovah, The small with the great.
Jehovah addeth to you, to you, and to your sons.
Blessed [are] ye of Jehovah, maker of heaven and earth,
The heavens — the heavens [are] Jehovah's, And the earth He hath given to sons of men,
The dead praise not Jah, Nor any going down to silence.
And we, we bless Jah, From henceforth, and unto the age. Praise ye Jah!
I have loved, because Jehovah heareth My voice, my supplication,
Because He hath inclined His ear to me, And during my days I call.
Compassed me have cords of death, And straits of Sheol have found me, Distress and sorrow I find.
And in the name of Jehovah I call: I pray Thee, O Jehovah, deliver my soul,
Gracious [is] Jehovah, and righteous, Yea, our God [is] merciful,
A preserver of the simple [is] Jehovah, I was low, and to me He giveth salvation.
Turn back, O my soul, to thy rest, For Jehovah hath conferred benefits on thee.
For Thou hast delivered my soul from death, My eyes from tears, my feet from overthrowing.
I walk habitually before Jehovah In the lands of the living.
I have believed, for I speak, I — I have been afflicted greatly.
I said in my haste, 'Every man [is] a liar.'
What do I return to Jehovah? All His benefits [are] upon me.
The cup of salvation I lift up, And in the name of Jehovah I call.
My vows to Jehovah let me complete, I pray you, before all His people.
Precious in the eyes of Jehovah [is] the death for His saints.
Cause [it] to come, O Jehovah, for I [am] Thy servant. I [am] Thy servant, son of Thy handmaid, Thou hast opened my bonds.
To Thee I sacrifice a sacrifice of thanks, And in the name of Jehovah I call.
My vows to Jehovah let me complete, I pray you, before all His people,
In the courts of the house of Jehovah, In thy midst, O Jerusalem, praise ye Jah!
Praise Jehovah, all ye nations, Glorify Him, all ye peoples.
For mighty to us hath been His kindness, And the truth of Jehovah [is] to the age. Praise ye Jah!
Give ye thanks to Jehovah, For good, for to the age [is] His kindness.
I pray you, let Israel say, That, to the age [is] His kindness.
I pray you, let the house of Aaron say, That, to the age [is] His kindness.
I pray you, let those fearing Jehovah say, That, to the age [is] His kindness.
From the straitness I called Jah, Jah answered me in a broad place.
Jehovah [is] for me, I do not fear what man doth to me.
Jehovah [is] for me among my helpers, And I — I look on those hating me.
Better to take refuge in Jehovah than to trust in man,
Better to take refuge in Jehovah, Than to trust in princes.
All nations have compassed me about, In the name of Jehovah I surely cut them off.
They have compassed me about, Yea, they have compassed me about, In the name of Jehovah I surely cut them off.
They compassed me about as bees, They have been extinguished as a fire of thorns, In the name of Jehovah I surely cut them off.
Thou hast sorely thrust me to fall, And Jehovah hath helped me.
My strength and song [is] Jah, And He is to me for salvation.
A voice of singing and salvation, [Is] in the tents of the righteous, The right hand of Jehovah is doing valiantly.
The right hand of Jehovah is exalted, The right hand of Jehovah is doing valiantly.
I do not die, but live, And recount the works of Jah,
Jah hath sorely chastened me, And to death hath not given me up.
Open ye to me gates of righteousness, I enter into them — I thank Jah.
This [is] the gate to Jehovah, The righteous enter into it.
I thank Thee, for Thou hast answered me, And art to me for salvation.
A stone the builders refused Hath become head of a corner.
From Jehovah hath this been, It [is] wonderful in our eyes,
This [is] the day Jehovah hath made, We rejoice and are glad in it.
I beseech Thee, O Jehovah, save, I pray Thee, I beseech Thee, O Jehovah, prosper, I pray Thee.
Blessed [is] he who is coming In the name of Jehovah, We blessed you from the house of Jehovah,
God [is] Jehovah, and He giveth to us light, Direct ye the festal-sacrifice with cords, Unto the horns of the altar.
My God Thou [art], and I confess Thee, My God, I exalt Thee.
Give ye thanks to Jehovah, For good, for to the age, [is] His kindness!
[Aleph.] O the happiness of those perfect in the way, They are walking in the law of Jehovah,
O the happiness of those keeping His testimonies, With the whole heart they seek Him.
Yea, they have not done iniquity, In His ways they have walked.
Thou hast commanded us Thy precepts to keep diligently,
O that my ways were prepared to keep Thy statutes,
Then I am not ashamed In my looking unto all Thy commands.
I confess Thee with uprightness of heart, In my learning the judgments of Thy righteousness.
Thy statutes I keep, leave me not utterly!
[Beth.] With what doth a young man purify his path? To observe — according to Thy word.
With all my heart I have sought Thee, Let me not err from Thy commands.
In my heart I have hid Thy saying, That I sin not before Thee.
Blessed [art] Thou, O Jehovah, teach me Thy statutes.
With my lips I have recounted All the judgments of Thy mouth.
In the way of Thy testimonies I have joyed, As over all wealth.
In Thy precepts I meditate, And I behold attentively Thy paths.
In Thy statutes I delight myself, I do not forget Thy word.
[Gimel.] Confer benefits on Thy servant, I live, and I keep Thy word.
Uncover mine eyes, and I behold wonders out of Thy law.
A sojourner I [am] on earth, Hide not from me Thy commands.
Broken hath my soul for desire Unto Thy judgments at all times.
Thou hast rebuked the cursed proud, Who are erring from Thy commands.
Remove from me reproach and contempt, For Thy testimonies I have kept.
Princes also sat — against me they spoke, Thy servant doth meditate in Thy statutes,
Thy testimonies also [are] my delight, The men of my counsel!
[Daleth.] Cleaved to the dust hath my soul, Quicken me according to Thy word.
My ways I have recounted, And Thou answerest me, teach me Thy statutes,
The way of Thy precepts cause me to understand, And I meditate in Thy wonders.
My soul hath dropped from affliction, Establish me according to Thy word.
The way of falsehood turn aside from me And with Thy law favour me.
The way of faithfulness I have chosen, Thy judgments I have compared,
I have adhered to Thy testimonies, O Jehovah, put me not to shame.
The way of Thy commands I run, For Thou dost enlarge my heart!
[He.] Show me, O Jehovah, the way of Thy statutes, And I keep it — [to] the end.
Cause me to understand, and I keep Thy law, And observe it with the whole heart.
Cause me to tread in the path of Thy commands, For in it I have delighted.
Incline my heart unto Thy testimonies, And not unto dishonest gain.
Remove mine eyes from seeing vanity, In Thy way quicken Thou me.
Establish to Thy servant Thy saying, That [is] concerning Thy fear.
Remove my reproach that I have feared, For Thy judgments [are] good.
Lo, I have longed for Thy precepts, In Thy righteousness quicken Thou me,
[Waw.] And meet me doth Thy kindness, O Jehovah, Thy salvation according to Thy saying.
And I answer him who is reproaching me a word, For I have trusted in Thy word.
And Thou takest not utterly away From my mouth the word of truth, Because for Thy judgment I have hoped.
And I keep Thy law continually, To the age and for ever.
And I walk habitually in a broad place, For Thy precepts I have sought.
And I speak of Thy testimonies before kings, And I am not ashamed.
And I delight myself in Thy commands, That I have loved,
And I lift up my hands unto Thy commands, That I have loved, And I do meditate on Thy statutes!
[Zain.] Remember the word to Thy servant, On which Thou hast caused me to hope.
This [is] my comfort in mine affliction, That Thy saying hath quickened me.
The proud have utterly scorned me, From Thy law I have not turned aside.
I remembered Thy judgments of old, O Jehovah, And I comfort myself.
Horror hath seized me, Because of the wicked forsaking Thy law.
Songs have been to me Thy statutes, In the house of my sojournings.
I have remembered in the night Thy name, O Jehovah, And I do keep Thy law.
This hath been to me, That Thy precepts I have kept!
[Cheth.] My portion [is] Jehovah; I have said — to keep Thy words,
I appeased Thy face with the whole heart, Favour me according to Thy saying.
I have reckoned my ways, And turn back my feet unto Thy testimonies.
I have made haste, And delayed not, to keep Thy commands.
Cords of the wicked have surrounded me, Thy law I have not forgotten.
At midnight I rise to give thanks to Thee, For the judgments of Thy righteousness.
A companion I [am] to all who fear Thee, And to those keeping Thy precepts.
Of Thy kindness, O Jehovah, the earth is full, Thy statutes teach Thou me!
[Teth.] Good Thou didst with Thy servant, O Jehovah, According to Thy word.
The goodness of reason and knowledge teach me, For in Thy commands I have believed.
Before I am afflicted, I — I am erring, And now Thy saying I have kept.
Good Thou [art], and doing good, Teach me Thy statutes.
Forged against me falsehood have the proud, I with the whole heart keep Thy precepts.
Insensate as fat hath been their heart, I — in Thy law I have delighted.
Good for me that I have been afflicted, That I might learn Thy statutes.
Better to me [is] the law of Thy mouth Than thousands of gold and silver!
[Yod.] Thy hands made me and establish me, Cause me to understand, and I learn Thy commands.
Those fearing Thee see me and rejoice, Because for Thy word I have hoped.
I have known, O Jehovah, That righteous [are] Thy judgments, And [in] faithfulness Thou hast afflicted me.
Let, I pray Thee, Thy kindness be to comfort me, According to Thy saying to Thy servant.
Meet me do Thy mercies, and I live, For Thy law [is] my delight.
Ashamed are the proud, For [with] falsehood they dealt perversely with me. I meditate in Thy precepts.
Those fearing Thee turn back to me, And those knowing Thy testimonies.
My heart is perfect in Thy statutes, So that I am not ashamed.
[Kaph.] Consumed for Thy salvation hath been my soul, For Thy word I have hoped.
Consumed have been mine eyes for Thy word, Saying, 'When doth it comfort me?'
For I have been as a bottle in smoke, Thy statutes I have not forgotten.
How many [are] the days of Thy servant? When dost Thou execute Against my pursuers judgment?
The proud have digged for me pits, That [are] not according to Thy law.
All Thy commands [are] faithfulness, [With] falsehood they have pursued me, Help Thou me.
Almost consumed me on earth have they, And I — I have not forsaken Thy precepts.
According to Thy kindness quicken Thou me, And I keep the testimony of Thy mouth!
[Lamed.] To the age, O Jehovah, Thy word is set up in the heavens.
To all generations Thy faithfulness, Thou didst establish earth, and it standeth.
According to Thine ordinances They have stood this day, for the whole [are] Thy servants.
Unless Thy law [were] my delights, Then had I perished in mine affliction.
To the age I forget not Thy precepts, For by them Thou hast quickened me.
I [am] Thine, save Thou me, For Thy precepts I have sought.
Thy wicked waited for me to destroy me, Thy testimonies I understand.
Of all perfection I have seen an end, Broad [is] Thy command — exceedingly!
[Mem.] O how I have loved Thy law! All the day it [is] my meditation.
Than mine enemies Thy command maketh me wiser, For it [is] before me to the age.
Above all my teachers I have acted wisely. For Thy testimonies [are] my meditation.
Above elders I understand more, For Thy precepts I have kept.
From every evil path I restrained my feet, So that I keep Thy word.
From Thy judgments I turned not aside, For Thou — Thou hast directed me.
How sweet to my palate hath been Thy saying, Above honey to my mouth.
From Thy precepts I have understanding, Therefore I have hated every false path!
[Nun.] A lamp to my foot [is] Thy word, And a light to my path.
I have sworn, and I confirm [it], To keep the judgments of Thy righteousness.
I have been afflicted very much, O Jehovah, quicken me, according to Thy word.
Free-will-offerings of my mouth, Accept, I pray Thee, O Jehovah, And Thy judgments teach Thou me.
My soul [is] in my hand continually, And Thy law I have not forgotten.
The wicked have laid a snare for me, And from thy precepts I wandered not.
I have inherited Thy testimonies to the age, For the joy of my heart [are] they.
I have inclined my heart To do Thy statutes, to the age — [to] the end!
[Samech.] Doubting ones I have hated, And Thy law I have loved.
My hiding place and my shield [art] Thou, For Thy word I have hoped.
Turn aside from me, ye evil-doers, And I keep the commands of my God.
Sustain me according to Thy saying, And I live, and Thou puttest me not to shame Because of my hope.
Support Thou me, and I am saved, And I look on Thy statutes continually.
Thou hast trodden down All going astray from Thy statutes, For falsehood [is] their deceit.
Dross! Thou hast caused to cease All the wicked of the earth; Therefore I have loved Thy testimonies.
Trembled from Thy fear hath my flesh, And from Thy judgments I have been afraid!
[Ain.] I have done judgment and righteousness, Leave me not to mine oppressors.
Make sure Thy servant for good, Let not the proud oppress me.
Mine eyes have been consumed for Thy salvation. And for the saying of Thy righteousness.
Do with Thy servant according to Thy kindness. And Thy statutes teach Thou me.
Thy servant [am] I — cause me to understand, And I know Thy testimonies.
Time for Jehovah to work! they have made void Thy law.
Therefore I have loved Thy commands Above gold — even fine gold.
Therefore all my appointments I have declared wholly right, Every path of falsehood I have hated!
[Pe.] Wonderful [are] Thy testimonies, Therefore hath my soul kept them.
The opening of Thy words enlighteneth, Instructing the simple.
My mouth I have opened, yea, I pant, For, for Thy commands I have longed.
Look unto me, and favour me, As customary to those loving Thy name.
My steps establish by Thy saying, And any iniquity doth not rule over me.
Ransom me from the oppression of man, And I observe Thy precepts,
Thy face cause to shine on Thy servant, And teach me Thy statutes.
Rivulets of waters have come down mine eyes, Because they have not kept Thy law!
[Tzade.] Righteous [art] Thou, O Jehovah, And upright [are] Thy judgments.
Thou hast appointed Thy testimonies, Righteous and exceeding faithful,
Cut me off hath my zeal, For mine adversaries forgot Thy words.
Tried [is] thy saying exceedingly, And Thy servant hath loved it.
Small I [am], and despised, Thy precepts I have not forgotten.
Thy righteousness [is] righteousness to the age, And Thy law [is] truth.
Adversity and distress have found me, Thy commands [are] my delights.
The righteousness of Thy testimonies [is] to Cause me to understand, and I live!
[Koph.] I have called with the whole heart, Answer me, O Jehovah, Thy statutes I keep,
I have called Thee, save Thou me, And I do keep Thy testimonies.
I have gone forward in the dawn, and I cry, For Thy word I have hoped.
Mine eyes have gone before the watches, To meditate in Thy saying.
My voice hear, according to Thy kindness, Jehovah, according to Thy judgment quicken me.
Near have been my wicked pursuers, From Thy law they have been far off.
Near [art] Thou, O Jehovah, And all Thy commands [are] truth.
Of old I have known Thy testimonies, That to the age Thou hast founded them!
[Resh.] See my affliction, and deliver Thou me, For Thy law I have not forgotten.
Plead my plea, and redeem me, According to Thy saying quicken me.
Far from the wicked [is] salvation, For Thy statutes they have not sought.
Thy mercies [are] many, O Jehovah, According to Thy judgments quicken me.
Many [are] my pursuers, and adversaries, From Thy testimonies I have not turned aside.
I have seen treacherous ones, And grieve myself, Because Thy saying they have not kept.
See, for thy precepts I have loved, Jehovah, According to Thy kindness quicken me.
The sum of Thy word [is] truth, And to the age [is] every judgment of Thy righteousness!
[Shin.] Princes have pursued me without cause, And because of Thy words was my heart afraid.
I do rejoice concerning Thy saying, As one finding abundant spoil.
Falsehood I have hated, yea I abominate [it], Thy law I have loved.
Seven [times] in a day I have praised Thee, Because of the judgments of Thy righteousness.
Abundant peace have those loving Thy law, And they have no stumbling-block.
I have waited for Thy salvation, O Jehovah, And Thy commands I have done.
Kept hath my soul Thy testimonies, And I do love them exceedingly.
I have kept Thy precepts and Thy testimonies, For all my ways are before Thee!
[Taw.] My loud cry cometh near before Thee, O Jehovah; According to Thy word cause me to understand.
My supplication cometh in before Thee, According to Thy saying deliver Thou me.
My lips do utter praise, For Thou dost teach me Thy statutes.
My tongue doth sing of Thy saying, For all Thy commands [are] righteous.
Thy hand is for a help to me, For Thy commands I have chosen.
I have longed for Thy salvation, O Jehovah, And Thy law [is] my delight.
My soul liveth, and it doth praise Thee, And Thy judgments do help me.
I wandered as a lost sheep, seek Thy servant, For Thy precepts I have not forgotten!
A Song of the Ascents. Unto Jehovah in my distress I have called, And He answereth me.
O Jehovah, deliver my soul from a lying lip, From a deceitful tongue!
What doth He give to thee? And what doth He add to thee? O deceitful tongue!
Sharp arrows of a mighty one, with broom-coals.
Woe to me, for I have inhabited Mesech, I have dwelt with tents of Kedar.
Too much hath my soul dwelt with him who is hating peace.
I [am] peace, and when I speak they [are] for war!
A Song of the Ascents. I lift up mine eyes unto the hills, Whence doth my help come?
My help [is] from Jehovah, maker of heaven and earth,
He suffereth not thy foot to be moved, Thy preserver slumbereth not.
Lo, He slumbereth not, nor sleepeth, He who is preserving Israel.
Jehovah [is] thy preserver, Jehovah [is] thy shade on thy right hand,
By day the sun doth not smite thee, Nor the moon by night.
Jehovah preserveth thee from all evil, He doth preserve thy soul.
Jehovah preserveth thy going out and thy coming in, From henceforth even unto the age!
A Song of the Ascents, by David. I have rejoiced in those saying to me, 'To the house of Jehovah we go.'
Our feet have been standing in thy gates, O Jerusalem!
Jerusalem — the builded one — [Is] as a city that is joined to itself together.
For thither have tribes gone up, Tribes of Jah, companies of Israel, To give thanks to the name of Jehovah.
For there have sat thrones of judgment, Thrones of the house of David.
Ask ye the peace of Jerusalem, At rest are those loving thee.
Peace is in thy bulwark, rest in thy high places,
For the sake of my brethren and my companions, Let me speak, I pray thee, 'Peace [be] in thee.'
For the sake of the house of Jehovah our God, I seek good for thee!
A Song of the Ascents. Unto Thee I have lifted up mine eyes, O dweller in the heavens.
Lo, as eyes of men-servants [Are] unto the hand of their masters, As eyes of a maid-servant [Are] unto the hand of her mistress, So [are] our eyes unto Jehovah our God, Till that He doth favour us.
Favour us, O Jehovah, favour us, For greatly have we been filled with contempt,
Greatly hath our soul been filled With the scorning of the easy ones, With the contempt of the arrogant!
A Song of the Ascents, by David. Save [for] Jehovah — who hath been for us, (Pray, let Israel say),
Save [for] Jehovah — who hath been for us, In the rising up of man against us,
Then alive they had swallowed us up, In the burning of their anger against us,
Then the waters had overflowed us, The stream passed over our soul,
Then passed over our soul had the proud waters.
Blessed [is] Jehovah who hath not given us, A prey to their teeth.
Our soul as a bird hath escaped from a snare of fowlers, The snare was broken, and we have escaped.
Our help [is] in the name of Jehovah, Maker of the heavens and earth!
A Song of the Ascents. Those trusting in Jehovah [are] as Mount Zion, It is not moved — to the age it abideth.
Jerusalem! mountains [are] round about her, And Jehovah [is] round about His people, From henceforth even unto the age.
For the rod of wickedness resteth not On the lot of the righteous, That the righteous put not forth on iniquity their hands.
Do good, O Jehovah, to the good, And to the upright in their hearts.
As to those turning [to] their crooked ways, Jehovah causeth them to go with workers of iniquity. Peace on Israel!
A Song of the Ascents. In Jehovah's turning back [to] the captivity of Zion, We have been as dreamers.
Then filled [with] laughter is our mouth, And our tongue [with] singing, Then do they say among nations, 'Jehovah did great things with these.'
Jehovah did great things with us, We have been joyful.
Turn again, O Jehovah, [to] our captivity, As streams in the south.
Those sowing in tears, with singing do reap,
Whoso goeth on and weepeth, Bearing the basket of seed, Surely cometh in with singing, bearing his sheaves!
A Song of the Ascents, by Solomon. If Jehovah doth not build the house, In vain have its builders laboured at it, If Jehovah doth not watch a city, In vain hath a watchman waked.
Vain for you who are rising early, Who delay sitting, eating the bread of griefs, So He giveth to His beloved one sleep.
Lo, an inheritance of Jehovah [are] sons, A reward [is] the fruit of the womb.
As arrows in the hand of a mighty one, So [are] the sons of the young men.
O the happiness of the man Who hath filled his quiver with them, They are not ashamed, For they speak with enemies in the gate!
A Song of the Ascents. O the happiness of every one fearing Jehovah, Who is walking in His ways.
The labour of thy hands thou surely eatest, Happy [art] thou, and good [is] to thee.
Thy wife [is] as a fruitful vine in the sides of thy house, Thy sons as olive plants around thy table.
Lo, surely thus is the man blessed who is fearing Jehovah.
Jehovah doth bless thee out of Zion, Look, then, on the good of Jerusalem, All the days of thy life,
And see the sons of thy sons! Peace on Israel!
A Song of the Ascents. Often they distressed me from my youth, Pray, let Israel say:
Often they distressed me from my youth, Yet they have not prevailed over me.
Over my back have ploughers ploughed, They have made long their furrows.
Jehovah [is] righteous, He hath cut asunder cords of the wicked.
Confounded and turn backward do all hating Zion.
They are as grass of the roofs, That before it was drawn out withereth,
That hath not filled the hand of a reaper, And the bosom of a binder of sheaves.
And the passers by have not said, 'The blessing of Jehovah [is] on you, We blessed you in the Name of Jehovah!'
A Song of the Ascents. From depths I have called Thee, Jehovah.
Lord, hearken to my voice, Thine ears are attentive to the voice of my supplications.
If iniquities Thou dost observe, O Lord, who doth stand?
But with Thee [is] forgiveness, that Thou mayest be feared.
I hoped [for] Jehovah — hoped hath my soul, And for His word I have waited.
My soul [is] for the Lord, More than those watching for morning, Watching for morning!
Israel doth wait on Jehovah, For with Jehovah [is] kindness, And abundant with Him [is] redemption.
And He doth redeem Israel from all his iniquities!
A Song of the Ascents, by David. Jehovah, my heart hath not been haughty, Nor have mine eyes been high, Nor have I walked in great things, And in things too wonderful for me.
Have I not compared, and kept silent my soul, As a weaned one by its mother? As a weaned one by me [is] my soul.
Israel doth wait on Jehovah, From henceforth, and unto the age!
A Song of the Ascents. Remember, Jehovah, for David, all his afflictions.
Who hath sworn to Jehovah. He hath vowed to the Mighty One of Jacob:
'If I enter into the tent of my house, If I go up on the couch of my bed,
If I give sleep to mine eyes, To mine eyelids — slumber,
Till I do find a place for Jehovah, Tabernacles for the Mighty One of Jacob.
'Lo, we have heard it in Ephratah, We have found it in the fields of the forest.
We come in to His tabernacles, We bow ourselves at His footstool.
Arise, O Jehovah, to Thy rest, Thou, and the ark of Thy strength,
Thy priests do put on righteousness, And Thy pious ones cry aloud.
For the sake of David Thy servant, Turn not back the face of Thine anointed.
Jehovah hath sworn truth to David, He turneth not back from it: Of the fruit of thy body, I set on the throne for thee.
If thy sons keep My covenant, And My testimonies that I teach them, Their sons also for ever and ever, Do sit on the throne for thee.
For Jehovah hath fixed on Zion, He hath desired [it] for a seat to Himself,
This [is] My rest for ever and ever, Here do I sit, for I have desired it.
Her provision I greatly bless, Her needy ones I satisfy [with] bread,
And her priests I clothe [with] salvation, And her pious ones do sing aloud.
There I cause to spring up a horn for David, I have arranged a lamp for Mine anointed.
His enemies I do clothe [with] shame, And upon him doth his crown flourish!
A Song of the Ascents, by David. Lo, how good and how pleasant The dwelling of brethren — even together!
As the good oil on the head, Coming down on the beard, the beard of Aaron, That cometh down on the skirt of his robes,
As dew of Hermon — That cometh down on hills of Zion, For there Jehovah commanded the blessing — Life unto the age!
A Song of the Ascents. Lo, bless Jehovah, all servants of Jehovah, Who are standing in the house of Jehovah by night.
Lift up your hands [in] the sanctuary, And bless ye Jehovah.
Jehovah doth bless thee out of Zion, The maker of the heavens and earth!
Praise ye Jah! Praise ye the name of Jehovah, Praise, ye servants of Jehovah,
Who are standing in the house of Jehovah, In the courts of the house of our God.
Praise ye Jah! for Jehovah [is] good, Sing praise to His name, for [it is] pleasant.
For Jacob hath Jah chosen for Himself, Israel for His peculiar treasure.
For I have known that great [is] Jehovah, Yea, our Lord [is] above all gods.
All that Jehovah pleased He hath done, In the heavens and in earth, In the seas and all deep places,
Causing vapours to ascend from the end of the earth, Lightnings for the rain He hath made, Bringing forth wind from His treasures.
Who smote the first-born of Egypt, From man unto beast.
He sent tokens and wonders into thy midst, O Egypt, On Pharaoh and on all his servants.
Who smote many nations, and slew strong kings,
Even Sihon king of the Amorite, And Og king of Bashan, And all kingdoms of Canaan.
And He gave their land an inheritance, An inheritance to Israel His people,
O Jehovah, Thy name [is] to the age, O Jehovah, Thy memorial to all generations.
For Jehovah doth judge His people, And for His servants comforteth Himself.
The idols of the nations [are] silver and gold, Work of the hands of man.
A mouth they have, and they speak not, Eyes they have, and they see not,
Ears they have, and they give not ear, Nose — there is no breath in their mouth!
Like them are their makers, Every one who is trusting in them.
O house of Israel, bless ye Jehovah, O house of Aaron, bless ye Jehovah,
O house of Levi, bless ye Jehovah, Those fearing Jehovah, bless ye Jehovah.
Blessed [is] Jehovah from Zion, Inhabiting Jerusalem — praise ye Jah!
Give ye thanks to Jehovah, For good, for to the age [is] His kindness.
Give ye thanks to the God of gods, For to the age [is] His kindness.
Give ye thanks to the Lord of lords, For to the age [is] His kindness.
To Him doing great wonders by Himself alone, For to the age [is] His kindness.
To Him making the heavens by understanding, For to the age [is] His kindness.
To Him spreading the earth over the waters, For to the age [is] His kindness.
To Him making great lights, For to the age [is] His kindness.
The sun to rule by day, For to the age [is] His kindness.
The moon and stars to rule by night, For to the age [is] His kindness.
To Him smiting Egypt in their first-born, For to the age [is] His kindness.
And bringing forth Israel from their midst, For to the age [is] His kindness.
By a strong hand, and a stretched-out-arm, For to the age [is] His kindness.
To Him cutting the sea of Suph into parts, For to the age [is] His kindness,
And caused Israel to pass through its midst, For to the age [is] His kindness,
And shook out Pharaoh and his force in the sea of Suph, For to the age [is] His kindness.
To Him leading His people in a wilderness, For to the age [is] His kindness.
To Him smiting great kings, For to the age [is] His kindness.
Yea, He doth slay honourable kings, For to the age [is] His kindness.
Even Sihon king of the Amorite, For to the age [is] His kindness.
And Og king of Bashan, For to the age [is] His kindness.
And He gave their land for inheritance, For to the age [is] His kindness.
An inheritance to Israel His servant, For to the age [is] His kindness.
Who in our lowliness hath remembered us, For to the age [is] His kindness.
And He delivereth us from our adversaries, For to the age [is] His kindness.
Giving food to all flesh, For to the age [is] His kindness.
Give ye thanks to the God of the heavens, For to the age [is] His kindness!
By rivers of Babylon — There we did sit, Yea, we wept when we remembered Zion.
On willows in its midst we hung our harps.
For there our captors asked us the words of a song, And our spoilers — joy: 'Sing ye to us of a song of Zion.'
How do we sing the song of Jehovah, On the land of a stranger?
If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, my right hand forgetteth!
My tongue doth cleave to my palate, If I do not remember thee, If I do not exalt Jerusalem above my chief joy.
Remember, Jehovah, for the sons of Edom, The day of Jerusalem, Those saying, 'Rase, rase to its foundation!'
O daughter of Babylon, O destroyed one, O the happiness of him who repayeth to thee thy deed, That thou hast done to us.
O the happiness of him who doth seize, And hath dashed thy sucklings on the rock!
By David. I confess Thee, with all my heart, Before the gods I do praise Thee.
I bow myself toward Thy holy temple, And I confess Thy name, For Thy kindness, and for Thy truth, For Thou hast made great Thy saying above all Thy name.
In the day I called, when Thou dost answer me, Thou dost strengthen me in my soul [with] strength.
O Jehovah, all kings of earth confess Thee, When they have heard the sayings of Thy mouth.
And they sing in the ways of Jehovah, For great [is] the honour of Jehovah.
For high [is] Jehovah, and the lowly He seeth, And the haughty from afar He knoweth.
If I walk in the midst of distress Thou quickenest me, Against the anger of mine enemies Thou sendest forth Thy hand, And Thy right hand doth save me.
Jehovah doth perfect for me, O Jehovah, Thy kindness [is] to the age, The works of Thy hands let not fall!
To the Overseer. — A Psalm by David. Jehovah, Thou hast searched me, and knowest.
Thou — Thou hast known my sitting down, And my rising up, Thou hast attended to my thoughts from afar.
My path and my couch Thou hast fanned, And [with] all my ways hast been acquainted.
For there is not a word in my tongue, Lo, O Jehovah, Thou hast known it all!
Behind and before Thou hast besieged me, And Thou dost place on me Thy hand.
Knowledge too wonderful for me, It hath been set on high, I am not able for it.
Whither do I go from Thy Spirit? And whither from Thy face do I flee?
If I ascend the heavens — there Thou [art], And spread out a couch in Sheol, lo, Thee!
I take the wings of morning, I dwell in the uttermost part of the sea,
Also there Thy hand doth lead me, And Thy right hand doth hold me.
And I say, 'Surely darkness bruiseth me, Then night [is] light to me.
Also darkness hideth not from Thee, And night as day shineth, as [is] darkness so [is] light.
For Thou — Thou hast possessed my reins, Thou dost cover me in my mother's belly.
I confess Thee, because that [with] wonders I have been distinguished. Wonderful [are] Thy works, And my soul is knowing [it] well.
My substance was not hid from Thee, When I was made in secret, Curiously wrought in the lower part of earth.
Mine unformed substance Thine eyes saw, And on Thy book all of them are written, The days they were formed — And not one among them.
And to me how precious have been Thy thoughts, O God, how great hath been their sum!
I recount them! than the sand they are more, I have waked, and I am still with Thee.
Dost Thou slay, O God, the wicked? Then, men of blood, turn aside from me!
Who exchange Thee for wickedness, Lifted up to vanity [are] Thine enemies.
Do not I hate, Jehovah, those hating Thee? And with Thy withstanders grieve myself?
[With] perfect hatred I have hated them, Enemies they have become to me.
Search me, O God, and know my heart, Try me, and know my thoughts,
And see if a grievous way be in me, And lead me in a way age-during!

To the Overseer. — A Psalm of David. Deliver me, O Jehovah, from an evil man, From one of violence Thou keepest me.
Who have devised evils in the heart, All the day they assemble [for] wars.
They sharpened their tongue as a serpent, Poison of an adder [is] under their lips. Selah.
Preserve me, Jehovah, from the hands of the wicked, From one of violence Thou keepest me, Who have devised to overthrow my steps.
The proud hid a snare for me — and cords, They spread a net by the side of the path, Snares they have set for me. Selah.
I have said to Jehovah, 'My God [art] Thou, Hear, Jehovah, the voice of my supplications.'
O Jehovah, my Lord, strength of my salvation, Thou hast covered my head in the day of armour.
Grant not, O Jehovah, the desires of the wicked, His wicked device bring not forth, They are high. Selah.
The chief of my surrounders, The perverseness of their lips covereth them.
They cause to fall on themselves burning coals, Into fire He doth cast them, Into deep pits — they arise not.
A talkative man is not established in the earth, One of violence — evil hunteth to overflowing.
I have known that Jehovah doth execute The judgment of the afflicted, The judgment of the needy.
Only — the righteous give thanks to Thy name, The upright do dwell with Thy presence!
A Psalm, by David. O Jehovah, I have called Thee, haste to me, Give ear [to] my voice when I call to Thee.
My prayer is prepared — incense before Thee, The lifting up of my hands — the evening present.
Set, O Jehovah, a watch for my mouth, Watch Thou over the door of my lips.
Incline not my heart to an evil thing, To do habitually actions in wickedness, With men working iniquity, Yea, I eat not of their pleasant things.
The righteous doth beat me [in] kindness. And doth reprove me, Oil of the head my head disalloweth not, For still my prayer [is] about their vexations.
Their judges have been released by the sides of a rock, And they have heard my sayings, For they have been pleasant.
As one tilling and ripping up in the land, Have our bones been scattered at the command of Saul.
But to Thee, O Jehovah, my Lord, [are] mine eyes, In Thee I have trusted, Make not bare my soul.
Keep me from the gin they laid for me, Even snares of workers of iniquity.
The wicked fall in their nets together, till I pass over!

An Instruction of David, a Prayer when he is in the cave. My voice [is] unto Jehovah, I cry, My voice [is] unto Jehovah, I entreat grace.
I pour forth before Him my meditation, My distress before Him I declare.
When my spirit hath been feeble in me, Then Thou hast known my path; In the way [in] which I walk, They have hid a snare for me.
Looking on the right hand — and seeing, And I have none recognizing; Perished hath refuge from me, There is none inquiring for my soul.
I have cried unto thee, O Jehovah, I have said, 'Thou [art] my refuge, My portion in the land of the living.'
Attend Thou unto my loud cry, For I have become very low, Deliver Thou me from my pursuers, For they have been stronger than I.
Bring forth from prison my soul to confess Thy name, The righteous do compass me about, When Thou conferrest benefits upon me!
A Psalm of David. O Jehovah, hear my prayer, Give ear unto my supplications, In Thy faithfulness answer me — in Thy righteousness.
And enter not into judgment with Thy servant, For no one living is justified before Thee.
For an enemy hath pursued my soul, He hath bruised to the earth my life, He hath caused me to dwell in dark places, As the dead of old.
And my spirit in me is become feeble, Within me is my heart become desolate.
I have remembered days of old, I have meditated on all Thine acts, On the work of Thy hand I muse.
I have spread forth my hands unto Thee, My soul [is] as a weary land for Thee. Selah.
Haste, answer me, O Jehovah, My spirit hath been consumed, Hide not Thou Thy face from me, Or I have been compared with those going down [to] the pit.
Cause me to hear in the morning Thy kindness, For in Thee I have trusted, Cause me to know the way that I go, For unto Thee I have lifted up my soul.
Deliver me from mine enemies, O Jehovah, Near Thee I am covered.
Teach me to do Thy good pleasure, For Thou [art] my God — Thy Spirit [is] good, Lead me into a land of uprightness.
For Thy name's sake O Jehovah, Thou dost quicken me, In Thy righteousness, Thou bringest out from distress my soul,
And in Thy kindness cuttest off mine enemies, And hast destroyed all the adversaries of my soul, For I [am] Thy servant!
By David. Blessed [is] Jehovah my rock, who is teaching My hands for war, my fingers for battle.
My kind one, and my bulwark, My tower, and my deliverer, My shield, and in whom I have trusted, Who is subduing my people under me!
Jehovah, what [is] man that Thou knowest him? Son of man, that Thou esteemest him?
Man to vanity hath been like, His days [are] as a shadow passing by.
Jehovah, incline Thy heavens and come down, Strike against mountains, and they smoke.
Send forth lightning, and scatter them, Send forth Thine arrows, and trouble them,
Send forth Thy hand from on high, Free me, and deliver me from many waters, From the hand of sons of a stranger,
Because their mouth hath spoken vanity, And their right hand [is] a right hand of falsehood.
O God, a new song I sing to Thee, On a psaltery of ten strings I sing praise to Thee.
Who is giving deliverance to kings, Who is freeing David His servant from the sword of evil.
Free me, and deliver me From the hand of sons of a stranger, Because their mouth hath spoken vanity, And their right hand [is] a right hand of falsehood,
Because our sons [are] as plants, Becoming great in their youth, Our daughters as hewn stones, Polished — the likeness of a palace,
Our garners [are] full, bringing out from kind to kind, Our flocks are bringing forth thousands, Ten thousands in our out-places,
Our oxen are carrying, there is no breach, And there is no outgoing, And there is no crying in our broad places.
O the happiness of the people that is thus, O the happiness of the people whose God [is] Jehovah!
Praise by David. I exalt Thee, my God, O king, And bless Thy name to the age and for ever.
Every day do I bless Thee, And praise Thy name to the age and for ever.
Great [is] Jehovah, and praised greatly, And of His greatness there is no searching.
Generation to generation praiseth Thy works, And Thy mighty acts they declare.
The honour — the glory of Thy majesty, And the matters of Thy wonders I declare.
And the strength of Thy fearful acts they tell, And Thy greatness I recount.
The memorial of the abundance of Thy goodness they send forth. And Thy righteousness they sing.
Gracious and merciful [is] Jehovah, Slow to anger, and great in kindness.
Good [is] Jehovah to all, And His mercies [are] over all His works.
Confess Thee O Jehovah, do all Thy works, And Thy saints do bless Thee.
The honour of Thy kingdom they tell, And [of] Thy might they speak,
To make known to sons of men His mighty acts, The honour of the majesty of His kingdom.
Thy kingdom [is] a kingdom of all ages, And Thy dominion [is] in all generations.
Jehovah is supporting all who are falling, And raising up all who are bowed down.
The eyes of all unto Thee do look, And Thou art giving to them their food in its season,
Opening Thy hand, and satisfying The desire of every living thing.
Righteous [is] Jehovah in all His ways, And kind in all His works.
Near [is] Jehovah to all those calling Him, To all who call Him in truth.
The desire of those fearing Him He doth, And their cry He heareth, and saveth them.
Jehovah preserveth all those loving Him, And all the wicked He destroyeth.
The praise of Jehovah my mouth speaketh, And all flesh doth bless His holy name, To the age and for ever!
Praise ye Jah! Praise, O my soul, Jehovah.
I praise Jehovah during my life, I sing praise to my God while I exist.
Trust not in princes — in a son of man, For he hath no deliverance.
His spirit goeth forth, he returneth to his earth, In that day have his thoughts perished.
O the happiness of him Who hath the God of Jacob for his help, His hope [is] on Jehovah his God,
Making the heavens and earth, The sea and all that [is] in them, Who is keeping truth to the age,
Doing judgment for the oppressed, Giving bread to the hungry.
Jehovah is loosing the prisoners, Jehovah is opening (the eyes of) the blind, Jehovah is raising the bowed down, Jehovah is loving the righteous,
Jehovah is preserving the strangers, The fatherless and widow He causeth to stand, And the way of the wicked He turneth upside down.
Jehovah doth reign to the age, Thy God, O Zion, to generation and generation, Praise ye Jah!
Praise ye Jah! For [it is] good to praise our God, For pleasant — comely [is] praise.
Building Jerusalem [is] Jehovah, The driven away of Israel He gathereth.
Who is giving healing to the broken of heart, And is binding up their griefs.
Appointing the number of the stars, To all them He giveth names.
Great [is] our Lord, and abundant in power, Of His understanding there is no narration.
Jehovah is causing the meek to stand, Making low the wicked unto the earth.
Answer ye to Jehovah with thanksgiving, Sing ye to our God with a harp.
Who is covering the heavens with clouds, Who is preparing for the earth rain, Who is causing grass to spring up [on] mountains,
Giving to the beast its food, To the young of the ravens that call.
Not in the might of the horse doth He delight, Not in the legs of a man is He pleased.
Jehovah is pleased with those fearing Him, With those waiting for His kindness.
Glorify, O Jerusalem, Jehovah, Praise thy God, O Zion.
For He did strengthen the bars of thy gates, He hath blessed thy sons in thy midst.
Who is making thy border peace, [With] the fat of wheat He satisfieth Thee.
Who is sending forth His saying [on] earth, Very speedily doth His word run.
Who is giving snow like wool, Hoar-frost as ashes He scattereth.
Casting forth His ice like morsels, Before His cold who doth stand?
He sendeth forth His word and melteth them, He causeth His wind to blow — the waters flow.
Declaring His words to Jacob, His statutes and His judgments to Israel.
He hath not done so to any nation, As to judgments, they have not known them. Praise ye Jah!
Praise ye Jah! Praise ye Jehovah from the heavens, Praise ye Him in high places.
Praise ye Him, all His messengers, Praise ye Him, all His hosts.
Praise ye Him, sun and moon, Praise ye Him, all stars of light.
Praise ye Him, heavens of heavens, And ye waters that are above the heavens.
They do praise the name of Jehovah, For He commanded, and they were created.
And He establisheth them for ever to the age, A statute He gave, and they pass not over.
Praise ye Jehovah from the earth, Dragons and all deeps,
Fire and hail, snow and vapour, Whirlwind doing His word;
The mountains and all heights, Fruit tree, and all cedars,
The wild beast, and all cattle, Creeping thing, and winged bird,
Kings of earth, and all peoples, Chiefs, and all judges of earth,
Young men, and also maidens, Aged men, with youths,
They praise the name of Jehovah, For His name alone hath been set on high, His honour [is] above earth and heavens.
And He exalteth the horn of His people, The praise of all His saints, Of the sons of Israel, a people near Him. Praise ye Jah!
Praise ye Jah! Sing ye to Jehovah a new song, His praise in an assembly of saints.
Israel doth rejoice in his Maker, Sons of Zion do joy in their king.
They praise His name in a dance, With timbrel and harp sing praise to Him.
For Jehovah is pleased with His people, He beautifieth the humble with salvation.
Exult do saints in honour, They sing aloud on their beds.
The exaltation of God [is] in their throat, And a two-edged sword in their hand.
To do vengeance among nations, Punishments among the peoples.
To bind their kings with chains, And their honoured ones with fetters of iron,
To do among them the judgment written, An honour it [is] for all his saints. Praise ye Jah!
Praise ye Jah! Praise ye God in His holy place, Praise Him in the expanse of His strength.
Praise Him in His mighty acts, Praise Him according to the abundance of His greatness.
Praise Him with blowing of trumpet, Praise Him with psaltery and harp.
Praise Him with timbrel and dance, Praise Him with stringed instruments and organ.
Praise Him with cymbals of sounding, Praise Him with cymbals of shouting.
All that doth breathe doth praise Jah! Praise ye Jah!
Proverbs of Solomon, son of David, king of Israel:
For knowing wisdom and instruction, For understanding sayings of intelligence,
For receiving the instruction of wisdom, Righteousness, judgment, and uprightness,
For giving to simple ones — prudence, To a youth — knowledge and discretion.
(The wise doth hear and increaseth learning, And the intelligent doth obtain counsels.)
For understanding a proverb and its sweetness, Words of the wise and their acute sayings.
Fear of Jehovah [is] a beginning of knowledge, Wisdom and instruction fools have despised!
Hear, my son, the instruction of thy father, And leave not the law of thy mother,
For a graceful wreath [are] they to thy head, And chains to thy neck.
My son, if sinners entice thee be not willing.
If they say, 'Come with us, we lay wait for blood, We watch secretly for the innocent without cause,
We swallow them as Sheol — alive, And whole — as those going down [to] the pit,
Every precious substance we find, We fill our houses [with] spoil,
Thy lot thou dost cast among us, One purse is — to all of us.'
My son! go not in the way with them, Withhold thy foot from their path,
For their feet to evil do run, And they haste to shed blood.
Surely in vain is the net spread out before the eyes of any bird.
And they for their own blood lay wait, They watch secretly for their own lives.
So [are] the paths of every gainer of dishonest gain, The life of its owners it taketh.
Wisdom in an out-place crieth aloud, In broad places she giveth forth her voice,
At the head of the multitudes she calleth, In the openings of the gates, In the city her sayings she saith:
'Till when, ye simple, do ye love simplicity? And have scorners their scorning desired? And do fools hate knowledge?
Turn back at my reproof, lo, I pour forth to you my spirit, I make known my words with you.
Because I have called, and ye refuse, I stretched out my hand, and none is attending,
And ye slight all my counsel, And my reproof ye have not desired.
I also in your calamity do laugh, I deride when your fear cometh,
When your fear cometh as destruction, And your calamity as a hurricane doth come, When on you come adversity and distress.
Then they call me, and I do not answer, They seek me earnestly, and find me not.
Because that they have hated knowledge, And the fear of Jehovah have not chosen.
They have not consented to my counsel, They have despised all my reproof,
And they eat of the fruit of their way, And from their own counsels they are filled.
For the turning of the simple slayeth them, And the security of the foolish destroyeth them.
And whoso is hearkening to me dwelleth confidently, And [is] quiet from fear of evil!'
My son, if thou dost accept my sayings, And my commands dost lay up with thee,
To cause thine ear to attend to wisdom, Thou inclinest thy heart to understanding,
For, if for intelligence thou callest, For understanding givest forth thy voice,
If thou dost seek her as silver, And as hid treasures searchest for her,
Then understandest thou fear of Jehovah, And knowledge of God thou findest.
For Jehovah giveth wisdom, From His mouth knowledge and understanding.
Even to lay up for the upright substance, A shield for those walking uprightly.
To keep the paths of judgment, And the way of His saints He preserveth.
Then understandest thou righteousness, And judgment, and uprightness — every good path.
For wisdom cometh into thy heart, And knowledge to thy soul is pleasant,
Thoughtfulness doth watch over thee, Understanding doth keep thee,
To deliver thee from an evil way, From any speaking froward things,
Who are forsaking paths of uprightness, To walk in ways of darkness,
Who are rejoicing to do evil, They delight in frowardness of the wicked,
Whose paths [are] crooked, Yea, they are perverted in their ways.
To deliver thee from the strange woman, From the stranger who hath made smooth her sayings,
Who is forsaking the guide of her youth, And the covenant of her God hath forgotten.
For her house hath inclined unto death, And unto Rephaim her paths.
None going in unto her turn back, Nor do they reach the paths of life.
That thou dost go in the way of the good, And the paths of the righteous dost keep.
For the upright do inhabit the earth, And the perfect are left in it,
And the wicked from the earth are cut off, And treacherous dealers plucked out of it!
My son! my law forget not, And my commands let thy heart keep,
For length of days and years, Life and peace they do add to thee.
Let not kindness and truth forsake thee, Bind them on thy neck, Write them on the tablet of thy heart,
And find grace and good understanding In the eyes of God and man.
Trust unto Jehovah with all thy heart, And unto thine own understanding lean not.
In all thy ways know thou Him, And He doth make straight thy paths.
Be not wise in thine own eyes, Fear Jehovah, and turn aside from evil.
Healing it is to thy navel, And moistening to thy bones.
Honour Jehovah from thy substance, And from the beginning of all thine increase;
And filled are thy barns [with] plenty, And [with] new wine thy presses break forth.
Chastisement of Jehovah, my son, despise not, And be not vexed with His reproof,
For whom Jehovah loveth He reproveth, Even as a father the son He is pleased with.
O the happiness of a man [who] hath found wisdom, And of a man [who] bringeth forth understanding.
For better [is] her merchandise Than the merchandise of silver, And than gold — her increase.
Precious she [is] above rubies, And all thy pleasures are not comparable to her.
Length of days [is] in her right hand, In her left [are] wealth and honour.
Her ways [are] ways of pleasantness, And all her paths [are] peace.
A tree of life she [is] to those laying hold on her, And whoso is retaining her [is] happy.
Jehovah by wisdom did found the earth, He prepared the heavens by understanding.
By His knowledge depths have been rent, And clouds do drop dew.
My son! let them not turn from thine eyes, Keep thou wisdom and thoughtfulness,
And they are life to thy soul, and grace to thy neck.
Then thou goest thy way confidently, And thy foot doth not stumble.
If thou liest down, thou art not afraid, Yea, thou hast lain down, And sweet hath been thy sleep.
Be not afraid of sudden fear, And of the desolation of the wicked when it cometh.
For Jehovah is at thy side, And He hath kept thy foot from capture.
Withhold not good from its owners, When thy hand [is] toward God to do [it].
Say not thou to thy friend, 'Go, and return, and to-morrow I give,' And substance with thee.
Devise not against thy neighbour evil, And he sitting confidently with thee.
Strive not with a man without cause, If he have not done thee evil.
Be not envious of a man of violence, Nor fix thou on any of his ways.
For an abomination to Jehovah [is] the perverted, And with the upright [is] His secret counsel.
The curse of Jehovah [is] in the house of the wicked. And the habitation of the righteous He blesseth.
If the scorners He doth scorn, Yet to the humble He doth give grace.
Honour do the wise inherit, And fools are bearing away shame!
Hear, ye sons, the instruction of a father, And give attention to know understanding.
For good learning I have given to you, My law forsake not.
For, a son I have been to my father — tender, And an only one before my mother.
And he directeth me, and he saith to me: 'Let thy heart retain my words, Keep my commands, and live.
Get wisdom, get understanding, Do not forget, nor turn away From the sayings of my mouth.
Forsake her not, and she doth preserve thee, Love her, and she doth keep thee.
The first thing [is] wisdom — get wisdom, And with all thy getting get understanding.
Exalt her, and she doth lift thee up, She honoureth thee, when thou dost embrace her.
She giveth to thy head a wreath of grace, A crown of beauty she doth give thee freely.
Hear, my son, and receive my sayings, And years of life [are] multiplied to thee.
In a way of wisdom I have directed thee, I have caused thee to tread in paths of uprightness.
In thy walking thy step is not straitened, And if thou runnest, thou stumblest not.
Lay hold on instruction, do not desist, Keep her, for she [is] thy life.
Into the path of the wicked enter not, And be not happy in a way of evil doers.
Avoid it, pass not over into it, Turn aside from it, and pass on.
For they sleep not if they do not evil, And their sleep hath been taken violently away, If they cause not [some] to stumble.
For they have eaten bread of wickedness, And wine of violence they drink.
And the path of the righteous [is] as a shining light, Going and brightening till the day is established,
The way of the wicked [is] as darkness, They have not known at what they stumble.
My son, to my words give attention, To my sayings incline thine ear,
Let them not turn aside from thine eyes, Preserve them in the midst of thy heart.
For life they [are] to those finding them, And to all their flesh healing.
Above every charge keep thy heart, For out of it [are] the outgoings of life.
Turn aside from thee a froward mouth, And perverse lips put far from thee,
Thine eyes do look straightforward, And thine eyelids look straight before thee.
Ponder thou the path of thy feet, And all thy ways [are] established.
Incline not [to] the right or to the left, Turn aside thy foot from evil!
My son! to my wisdom give attention, To mine understanding incline thine ear,
To observe thoughtfulness, And knowledge do thy lips keep.
For the lips of a strange woman drop honey, And smoother than oil [is] her mouth,
And her latter end [is] bitter as wormwood, Sharp as a sword [with] mouths.
Her feet are going down to death, Sheol do her steps take hold of.
The path of life — lest thou ponder, Moved have her paths — thou knowest not.
And now, ye sons, hearken to me, And turn not from sayings of my mouth.
Keep far from off her thy way, And come not near unto the opening of her house,
Lest thou give to others thy honour, And thy years to the fierce,
Lest strangers be filled [with] thy power, And thy labours in the house of a stranger,
And thou hast howled in thy latter end, In the consumption of thy flesh and thy food,
And hast said, 'How have I hated instruction, And reproof hath my heart despised,
And I have not hearkened to the voice of my directors, And to my teachers have not inclined mine ear.
As a little thing I have been all evil, In the midst of an assembly and a company.
Drink waters out of thine own cistern, Even flowing ones out of thine own well.
Let thy fountains be scattered abroad, In broad places rivulets of waters.
Let them be to thee for thyself, And not to strangers with thee.
Let thy fountain be blessed, And rejoice because of the wife of thy youth,
A hind of loves, and a roe of grace! Let her loves satisfy thee at all times, In her love magnify thyself continually.
And why dost thou magnify thyself, My son, with a stranger? And embrace the bosom of a strange woman?
For over-against the eyes of Jehovah are the ways of each, And all his paths He is pondering.
His own iniquities do capture the wicked, And with the ropes of his sin he is holden.
He dieth without instruction, And in the abundance of his folly magnifieth himself!
My son! if thou hast been surety for thy friend, Hast stricken for a stranger thy hand,
Hast been snared with sayings of thy mouth, Hast been captured with sayings of thy mouth,
Do this now, my son, and be delivered, For thou hast come into the hand of thy friend. Go, trample on thyself, and strengthen thy friend,
Give not sleep to thine eyes, And slumber to thine eyelids,
Be delivered as a roe from the hand, And as a bird from the hand of a fowler.
Go unto the ant, O slothful one, See her ways and be wise;
Which hath not captain, overseer, and ruler,
She doth prepare in summer her bread, She hath gathered in harvest her food.
Till when, O slothful one, dost thou lie? When dost thou arise from thy sleep?
A little sleep, a little slumber, A little clasping of the hands to rest,
And thy poverty hath come as a traveller, And thy want as an armed man.
A man of worthlessness, a man of iniquity, Walking [with] perverseness of mouth,
Winking with his eyes, speaking with his feet, Directing with his fingers,
Frowardness [is] in his heart, devising evil at all times, Contentions he sendeth forth.
Therefore suddenly cometh his calamity, Instantly he is broken — and no healing.
These six hath Jehovah hated, Yea, seven [are] abominations to His soul.
Eyes high — tongues false — And hands shedding innocent blood —
A heart devising thoughts of vanity — Feet hasting to run to evil —
A false witness [who] doth breathe out lies — And one sending forth contentions between brethren.
Keep, my son, the command of thy father, And leave not the law of thy mother.
Bind them on thy heart continually, Tie them on thy neck.
In thy going up and down, it leadeth thee, In thy lying down, it watcheth over thee, And thou hast awaked — it talketh [with] thee.
For a lamp [is] the command, And the law a light, And a way of life [are] reproofs of instruction,
To preserve thee from an evil woman, From the flattery of the tongue of a strange woman.
Desire not her beauty in thy heart, And let her not take thee with her eyelids.
For a harlot consumeth unto a cake of bread, And an adulteress the precious soul hunteth.
Doth a man take fire into his bosom, And are his garments not burnt?
Doth a man walk on the hot coals, And are his feet not scorched?
So [is] he who hath gone in unto the wife of his neighbour, None who doth touch her is innocent.
They do not despise the thief, When he stealeth to fill his soul when he is hungry,
And being found he repayeth sevenfold, All the substance of his house he giveth.
He who committeth adultery [with] a woman lacketh heart, He is destroying his soul who doth it.
A stroke and shame he doth find, And his reproach is not wiped away,
For jealousy [is] the fury of a man, And he doth not spare in a day of vengeance.
He accepteth not the appearance of any atonement, Yea, he doth not consent, Though thou dost multiply bribes!
My son! keep my sayings, And my commands lay up with thee.
Keep my commands, and live, And my law as the pupil of thine eye.
Bind them on thy fingers, Write them on the tablet of thy heart.
Say to wisdom, 'My sister Thou [art].' And cry to understanding, 'Kinswoman!'
To preserve thee from a strange woman, From a stranger who hath made smooth her sayings.
For, at a window of my house, Through my casement I have looked out,
And I do see among the simple ones, I discern among the sons, A young man lacking understanding,
Passing on in the street, near her corner, And the way [to] her house he doth step,
In the twilight — in the evening of day, In the darkness of night and blackness.
And, lo, a woman to meet him — (A harlot's dress, and watchful of heart,
Noisy she [is], and stubborn, In her house her feet rest not.
Now in an out-place, now in broad places, And near every corner she lieth in wait) —
And she laid hold on him, and kissed him, She hath hardened her face, and saith to him,
'Sacrifices of peace-offerings [are] by me, To-day I have completed my vows.
Therefore I have come forth to meet thee, To seek earnestly thy face, and I find thee.
[With] ornamental coverings I decked my couch, Carved works — cotton of Egypt.
I sprinkled my bed — myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.
Come, we are filled [with] loves till the morning, We delight ourselves in loves.
For the man is not in his house, He hath gone on a long journey.
A bag of money he hath taken in his hand, At the day of the new moon he cometh to his house.'
She turneth him aside with the abundance of her speech, With the flattery of her lips she forceth him.
He is going after her straightway, As an ox unto the slaughter he cometh, And as a fetter unto the chastisement of a fool,
Till an arrow doth split his liver, As a bird hath hastened unto a snare, And hath not known that it [is] for its life.
And now, ye sons, hearken to me, And give attention to sayings of my mouth.
Let not thy heart turn unto her ways, Do not wander in her paths,
For many [are] the wounded she caused to fall, And mighty [are] all her slain ones.
The ways of Sheol — her house, Going down unto inner chambers of death!
Doth not wisdom call? And understanding give forth her voice?
At the head of high places by the way, Between the paths she hath stood,
At the side of the gates, at the mouth of the city, The entrance of the openings, she crieth aloud,
'Unto you, O men, I call, And my voice [is] unto the sons of men.
Understand, ye simple ones, prudence, And ye fools, understand the heart,
Hearken, for noble things I speak, And the opening of my lips [is] uprightness.
For truth doth my mouth utter, And an abomination to my lips [is] wickedness.
In righteousness [are] all the sayings of my mouth, Nothing in them is froward and perverse.
All of them [are] plain to the intelligent, And upright to those finding knowledge.
Receive my instruction, and not silver, And knowledge rather than choice gold.
For better [is] wisdom than rubies, Yea, all delights are not comparable with it.
I, wisdom, have dwelt with prudence, And a knowledge of devices I find out.
The fear of Jehovah [is] to hate evil; Pride, and arrogance, and an evil way, And a froward mouth, I have hated.
Mine [is] counsel and substance, I [am] understanding, I have might.
By me kings reign, and princes decree righteousness,
By me do chiefs rule, and nobles, All judges of the earth.
I love those loving me, And those seeking me earnestly do find me.
Wealth and honour [are] with me, Lasting substance and righteousness.
Better [is] my fruit than gold, even fine gold, And mine increase than choice silver.
In a path of righteousness I cause to walk, In midst of paths of judgment,
To cause my lovers to inherit substance, Yea, their treasures I fill.
Jehovah possessed me — the beginning of His way, Before His works since then.
From the age I was anointed, from the first, From former states of the earth.
In there being no depths, I was brought forth, In there being no fountains heavy [with] waters,
Before mountains were sunk, Before heights, I was brought forth.
While He had not made the earth, and out-places, And the top of the dusts of the world.
In His preparing the heavens I [am] there, In His decreeing a circle on the face of the deep,
In His strengthening clouds above, In His making strong fountains of the deep,
In His setting for the sea its limit, And the waters transgress not His command, In His decreeing the foundations of earth,
Then I am near Him, a workman, And I am a delight — day by day. Rejoicing before Him at all times,
Rejoicing in the habitable part of His earth, And my delights [are] with the sons of men.
And now, ye sons, hearken to me, Yea, happy are they who keep my ways.
Hear instruction, and be wise, and slight not.
O the happiness of the man hearkening to me, To watch at my doors day by day, To watch at the door-posts of my entrance.
For whoso is finding me, hath found life, And bringeth out good-will from Jehovah.
And whoso is missing me, is wronging his soul, All hating me have loved death!
Wisdom hath builded her house, She hath hewn out her pillars — seven.
She hath slaughtered her slaughter, She hath mingled her wine, Yea, she hath arranged her table.
She hath sent forth her damsels, She crieth on the tops of the high places of the city:
'Who [is] simple? let him turn aside hither.' Whoso lacketh heart: she hath said to him,
'Come, eat of my bread, And drink of the wine I have mingled.
Forsake ye, the simple, and live, And be happy in the way of understanding.
The instructor of a scorner Is receiving for it — shame, And a reprover of the wicked — his blemish.
Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee, Give reproof to the wise, and he loveth thee.
Give to the wise, and he is wiser still, Make known to the righteous, And he increaseth learning.
The commencement of wisdom [is] the fear of Jehovah, And a knowledge of the Holy Ones [is] understanding.
For by me do thy days multiply, And added to thee are years of life.
If thou hast been wise, thou hast been wise for thyself, And thou hast scorned — thyself bearest [it].
A foolish woman [is] noisy, Simple, and hath not known what.
And she hath sat at the opening of her house, On a throne — the high places of the city,
To call to those passing by the way, Who are going straight [on] their paths.
'Who [is] simple? let him turn aside hither.' And whoso lacketh heart — she said to him,
'Stolen waters are sweet, And hidden bread is pleasant.'
And he hath not known that Rephaim [are] there, In deep places of Sheol her invited ones!
Proverbs of Solomon. A wise son causeth a father to rejoice, And a foolish son [is] an affliction to his mother.
Treasures of wickedness profit not, And righteousness delivereth from death.
Jehovah causeth not the soul of the righteous to hunger, And the desire of the wicked He thrusteth away.
Poor [is] he who is working — a slothful hand, And the hand of the diligent maketh rich.
Whoso is gathering in summer [is] a wise son, Whoso is sleeping in harvest [is] a son causing shame.
Blessings [are] for the head of the righteous, And the mouth of the wicked cover doth violence.
The remembrance of the righteous [is] for a blessing, And the name of the wicked doth rot.
The wise in heart accepteth commands, And a talkative fool kicketh.
Whoso is walking in integrity walketh confidently, And whoso is perverting his ways is known.
Whoso is winking the eye giveth grief, And a talkative fool kicketh.
A fountain of life [is] the mouth of the righteous, And the mouth of the wicked cover doth violence.
Hatred awaketh contentions, And over all transgressions love covereth.
In the lips of the intelligent is wisdom found, And a rod [is] for the back of him who is lacking understanding.
The wise lay up knowledge, and the mouth of a fool [is] near ruin.
The wealth of the rich [is] his strong city, The ruin of the poor [is] their poverty.
The wage of the righteous [is] for life, The increase of the wicked for sin.
A traveller to life [is] he who is keeping instruction, And whoso is forsaking rebuke is erring.
Whoso is covering hatred with lying lips, And whoso is bringing out an evil report is a fool.
In the abundance of words transgression ceaseth not, And whoso is restraining his lips [is] wise.
The tongue of the righteous [is] chosen silver, The heart of the wicked — as a little thing.
The lips of the righteous delight many, And fools for lack of heart die.
The blessing of Jehovah — it maketh rich, And He addeth no grief with it.
To execute inventions [is] as play to a fool, And wisdom to a man of understanding.
The feared thing of the wicked it meeteth him, And the desire of the righteous is given.
As the passing by of a hurricane, So the wicked is not, And the righteous is a foundation age-during.
As vinegar to the teeth, And as smoke to the eyes, So [is] the slothful to those sending him.
The fear of Jehovah addeth days, And the years of the wicked are shortened.
The hope of the righteous [is] joyful, And the expectation of the wicked perisheth.
The way of Jehovah [is] strength to the perfect, And ruin to workers of iniquity.
The righteous to the age is not moved, And the wicked inhabit not the earth.
The mouth of the righteous uttereth wisdom, And the tongue of frowardness is cut out.
The lips of the righteous know a pleasing thing, And the mouth of the wicked perverseness!
Balances of deceit [are] an abomination to Jehovah, And a perfect weight [is] His delight.
Pride hath come, and shame cometh, And with the lowly [is] wisdom.
The integrity of the upright leadeth them, And the perverseness of the treacherous destroyeth them.
Wealth profiteth not in a day of wrath, And righteousness delivereth from death.
The righteousness of the perfect maketh right his way, And by his wickedness doth the wicked fall.
The righteousness of the upright delivereth them, And in mischief the treacherous are captured.
In the death of a wicked man, hope perisheth, And the expectation of the iniquitous hath been lost.
The righteous from distress is drawn out, And the wicked goeth in instead of him.
With the mouth a hypocrite corrupteth his friend, And by knowledge the righteous are drawn out.
In the good of the righteous a city exulteth, And in the destruction of the wicked [is] singing.
By the blessing of the upright is a city exalted, And by the mouth of the wicked thrown down.
Whoso is despising his neighbour lacketh heart, And a man of understanding keepeth silence.
A busybody is revealing secret counsel, And the faithful of spirit is covering the matter.
Without counsels do a people fall, And deliverance [is] in a multitude of counsellors.
Evil [one] suffereth when he hath been surety [for] a stranger, And whoso is hating suretyship is confident.
A gracious woman retaineth honour, And terrible [men] retain riches.
A kind man is rewarding his own soul, And the fierce is troubling his own flesh.
The wicked is getting a lying wage, And whoso is sowing righteousness — a true reward.
Rightly [is] righteousness for life, And whoso is pursuing evil — for his own death.
An abomination to Jehovah [are] the perverse of heart, And the perfect of the way [are] His delight.
Hand to hand, the wicked is not acquitted, And the seed of the righteous hath escaped.
A ring of gold in the nose of a sow — A fair woman and stubborn of behaviour.
The desire of the righteous [is] only good, The hope of the wicked [is] transgression.
There is who is scattering, and yet is increased, And who is keeping back from uprightness, only to want.
A liberal soul is made fat, And whoso is watering, he also is watered.
Whoso is withholding corn, the people execrate him, And a blessing [is] for the head of him who is selling.
Whoso is earnestly seeking good Seeketh a pleasing thing, And whoso is seeking evil — it meeteth him.
Whoso is confident in his wealth he falleth, And as a leaf, the righteous flourish.
Whoso is troubling his own house inheriteth wind, And a servant [is] the fool to the wise of heart.
The fruit of the righteous [is] a tree of life, And whoso is taking souls [is] wise.
Lo, the righteous in the earth is recompensed, Surely also the wicked and the sinner!
Whoso is loving instruction, is loving knowledge, And whoso is hating reproof [is] brutish.
The good bringeth forth favour from Jehovah, And the man of wicked devices He condemneth.
A man is not established by wickedness, And the root of the righteous is not moved.
A virtuous woman [is] a crown to her husband, And as rottenness in his bones [is] one causing shame.
The thoughts of the righteous [are] justice, The counsels of the wicked — deceit.
The words of the wicked [are]: 'Lay wait for blood,' And the mouth of the upright delivereth them.
Overthrow the wicked, and they are not, And the house of the righteous standeth.
According to his wisdom is a man praised, And the perverted of heart becometh despised.
Better [is] the lightly esteemed who hath a servant, Than the self-honoured who lacketh bread.
The righteous knoweth the life of his beast, And the mercies of the wicked [are] cruel.
Whoso is tilling the ground is satisfied [with] bread, And whoso is pursuing vanities is lacking heart,
The wicked hath desired the net of evil doers, And the root of the righteous giveth.
In transgression of the lips [is] the snare of the wicked, And the righteous goeth out from distress.
From the fruit of the mouth [is] one satisfied [with] good, And the deed of man's hands returneth to him.
The way of a fool [is] right in his own eyes, And whoso is hearkening to counsel [is] wise.
The fool — in a day is his anger known, And the prudent is covering shame.
Whoso uttereth faithfulness declareth righteousness, And a false witness — deceit.
A rash speaker is like piercings of a sword, And the tongue of the wise is healing.
The lip of truth is established for ever, And for a moment — a tongue of falsehood.
Deceit [is] in the heart of those devising evil, And to those counselling peace [is] joy.
No iniquity is desired by the righteous, And the wicked have been full of evil.
An abomination to Jehovah [are] lying lips, And stedfast doers [are] his delight.
A prudent man is concealing knowledge, And the heart of fools proclaimeth folly.
The hand of the diligent ruleth, And slothfulness becometh tributary.
Sorrow in the heart of a man boweth down, And a good word maketh him glad.
The righteous searcheth his companion, And the way of the wicked causeth them to err.
The slothful roasteth not his hunting, And the wealth of a diligent man is precious.
In the path of righteousness [is] life, And in the way of [that] path [is] no death!
A wise son — the instruction of a father, And a scorner — he hath not heard rebuke.
From the fruit of the mouth a man eateth good, And the soul of the treacherous — violence.
Whoso is keeping his mouth, is keeping his soul, Whoso is opening wide his lips — ruin to him!
The soul of the slothful is desiring, and hath not. And the soul of the diligent is made fat.
A false word the righteous hateth, And the wicked causeth abhorrence, and is confounded.
Righteousness keepeth him who is perfect in the way, And wickedness overthroweth a sin offering.
There is who is making himself rich, and hath nothing, Who is making himself poor, and wealth [is] abundant.
The ransom of a man's life [are] his riches, And the poor hath not heard rebuke.
The light of the righteous rejoiceth, And the lamp of the wicked is extinguished.
A vain man through pride causeth debate, And with the counselled [is] wisdom.
Wealth from vanity becometh little, And whoso is gathering by the hand becometh great.
Hope prolonged is making the heart sick, And a tree of life [is] the coming desire.
Whoso is despising the Word is destroyed for it, And whoso is fearing the Command is repayed.
The law of the wise [is] a fountain of life, To turn aside from snares of death.
Good understanding giveth grace, And the way of the treacherous [is] hard.
Every prudent one dealeth with knowledge, And a fool spreadeth out folly.
A wicked messenger falleth into evil, And a faithful ambassador is healing.
Whoso is refusing instruction — poverty and shame, And whoso is observing reproof is honoured.
A desire accomplished is sweet to the soul, And an abomination to fools [is]: Turn from evil.
Whoso is walking with wise men is wise, And a companion of fools suffereth evil.
Evil pursueth sinners, And good recompenseth the righteous.
A good man causeth sons' sons to inherit, And laid up for the righteous [is] the sinner's wealth.
Abundance of food — the tillage of the poor, And substance is consumed without judgment.
Whoso is sparing his rod is hating his son, And whoso is loving him hath hastened him chastisement.
The righteous is eating to the satiety of his soul, And the belly of the wicked lacketh!
Every wise woman hath builded her house, And the foolish with her hands breaketh it down.
Whoso is walking in his uprightness is fearing Jehovah, And the perverted [in] his ways is despising Him.
In the mouth of a fool [is] a rod of pride, And the lips of the wise preserve them.
Without oxen a stall [is] clean, And great [is] the increase by the power of the ox.
A faithful witness lieth not, And a false witness breatheth out lies.
A scorner hath sought wisdom, and it is not, And knowledge to the intelligent [is] easy.
Go from before a foolish man, Or thou hast not known the lips of knowledge.
The wisdom of the prudent [is] to understand his way, And the folly of fools [is] deceit.
Fools mock at a guilt-offering, And among the upright — a pleasing thing.
The heart knoweth its own bitterness, And with its joy a stranger doth not intermeddle.
The house of the wicked is destroyed, And the tent of the upright flourisheth.
There is a way — right before a man, And its latter end [are] ways of death.
Even in laughter is the heart pained, And the latter end of joy [is] affliction.
From his ways is the backslider in heart filled, And a good man — from his fruits.
The simple giveth credence to everything, And the prudent attendeth to his step.
The wise is fearing and turning from evil, And a fool is transgressing and is confident.
Whoso is short of temper doth folly, And a man of wicked devices is hated.
The simple have inherited folly, And the prudent are crowned [with] knowledge.
The evil have bowed down before the good, And the wicked at the gates of the righteous.
Even of his neighbour is the poor hated, And those loving the rich [are] many.
Whoso is despising his neighbour sinneth, Whoso is favouring the humble, O his happiness.
Do not they err who are devising evil? And kindness and truth [are] to those devising good,
In all labour there is advantage, And a thing of the lips [is] only to want.
The crown of the wise is their wealth, The folly of fools [is] folly.
A true witness is delivering souls, And a deceitful one breatheth out lies.
In the fear of Jehovah [is] strong confidence, And to His sons there is a refuge.
The fear of Jehovah [is] a fountain of life, To turn aside from snares of death.
In the multitude of a people [is] the honour of a king, And in lack of people the ruin of a prince.
Whoso is slow to anger [is] of great understanding, And whoso is short in temper is exalting folly.
A healed heart [is] life to the flesh, And rottenness to the bones [is] envy.
An oppressor of the poor reproacheth his Maker, And whoso is honouring Him Is favouring the needy.
In his wickedness is the wicked driven away, And trustful in his death [is] the righteous.
In the heart of the intelligent wisdom doth rest. And in the midst of fools it is known.
Righteousness exalteth a nation, And the goodliness of peoples [is] a sin-offering.
The favour of a king [is] to a wise servant, And an object of his wrath is one causing shame!
A soft answer turneth back fury, And a grievous word raiseth up anger.
The tongue of the wise maketh knowledge good, And the mouth of fools uttereth folly.
In every place are the eyes of Jehovah, Watching the evil and the good.
A healed tongue [is] a tree of life, And perverseness in it — a breach in the spirit.
A fool despiseth the instruction of his father, And whoso is regarding reproof is prudent.
[In] the house of the righteous [is] abundant strength, And in the increase of the wicked — trouble.
The lips of the wise scatter knowledge, And the heart of fools [is] not right.
The sacrifice of the wicked [is] an abomination to Jehovah, And the prayer of the upright [is] His delight.
An abomination to Jehovah [is] the way of the wicked, And whoso is pursuing righteousness He loveth.
Chastisement [is] grievous to him who is forsaking the path, Whoso is hating reproof dieth.
Sheol and destruction [are] before Jehovah, Surely also the hearts of the sons of men.
A scorner loveth not his reprover, Unto the wise he goeth not.
A joyful heart maketh glad the face, And by grief of heart is the spirit smitten.
The heart of the intelligent seeketh knowledge, And the mouth of fools enjoyeth folly.
All the days of the afflicted [are] evil, And gladness of heart [is] a perpetual banquet.
Better [is] a little with the fear of Jehovah, Than much treasure, and tumult with it.
Better [is] an allowance of green herbs and love there, Than a fatted ox, and hatred with it.
A man of fury stirreth up contention, And the slow to anger appeaseth strife.
The way of the slothful [is] as a hedge of briers, And the path of the upright is raised up.
A wise son rejoiceth a father. And a foolish man is despising his mother.
Folly is joy to one lacking heart, And a man of intelligence directeth [his] going.
Without counsel [is] the making void of purposes, And in a multitude of counsellors it is established.
Joy [is] to a man in the answer of his mouth, And a word in its season — how good!
A path of life [is] on high for the wise, To turn aside from Sheol beneath.
The house of the proud Jehovah pulleth down, And He setteth up the border of the widow.
An abomination to Jehovah [are] thoughts of wickedness, And pure [are] sayings of pleasantness.
A dishonest gainer is troubling his house, And whoso is hating gifts liveth.
The heart of the righteous meditateth to answer, And the mouth of the wicked uttereth evil things.
Far [is] Jehovah from the wicked, And the prayer of the righteous He heareth.
The light of the eyes rejoiceth the heart, A good report maketh fat the bone.
An ear that is hearing the reproof of life Doth lodge among the wise.
Whoso is refusing instruction is despising his soul, And whoso is hearing reproof Is getting understanding.
The fear of Jehovah [is] the instruction of wisdom, And before honour [is] humility!
Of man [are] arrangements of the heart, And from Jehovah an answer of the tongue.
All the ways of a man are pure in his own eyes, And Jehovah is pondering the spirits.
Roll unto Jehovah thy works, And established are thy purposes,
All things hath Jehovah wrought for Himself, And also the wicked [worketh] for a day of evil.
An abomination to Jehovah [is] every proud one of heart, Hand to hand he is not acquitted.
In kindness and truth pardoned is iniquity, And in the fear of Jehovah Turn thou aside from evil.
When a man's ways please Jehovah, even his enemies, He causeth to be at peace with him.
Better [is] a little with righteousness, Than abundance of increase without justice.
The heart of man deviseth his way, And Jehovah establisheth his step.
An oath [is] on the lips of a king, In judgment his mouth trespasseth not.
A just beam and balances [are] Jehovah's, His work [are] all the stones of the bag.
An abomination to kings [is] doing wickedness, For by righteousness is a throne established.
The delight of kings [are] righteous lips, And whoso is speaking uprightly he loveth,
The fury of a king [is] messengers of death, And a wise man pacifieth it.
In the light of a king's face [is] life, And his good-will [is] as a cloud of the latter rain.
To get wisdom — how much better than gold, And to get understanding to be chosen than silver!
A highway of the upright [is], 'Turn from evil,' Whoso is preserving his soul is watching his way.
Before destruction [is] pride, And before stumbling — a haughty spirit.'
Better is humility of spirit with the poor, Than to apportion spoil with the proud.
The wise in any matter findeth good, And whoso is trusting in Jehovah, O his happiness.
To the wise in heart is called, 'Intelligent,' And sweetness of lips increaseth learning.
A fountain of life [is] understanding to its possessors, The instruction of fools is folly.
The heart of the wise causeth his mouth to act wisely, And by his lips he increaseth learning,
Sayings of pleasantness [are] a honeycomb, Sweet to the soul, and healing to the bone.
There is a way right before a man, And its latter end — ways of death.
A labouring man hath laboured for himself, For his mouth hath caused [him] to bend over it.
A worthless man is preparing evil, And on his lips — as a burning fire.
A froward man sendeth forth contention, A tale-bearer is separating a familiar friend.
A violent man enticeth his neighbour, And hath causeth him to go in a way not good.
Consulting his eyes to devise froward things, Moving his lips he hath accomplished evil.
A crown of beauty [are] grey hairs, In the way of righteousness it is found.
Better [is] the slow to anger than the mighty, And the ruler over his spirit than he who is taking a city.
Into the centre is the lot cast, And from Jehovah [is] all its judgment!
Better [is] a dry morsel, and rest with it, Than a house full of the sacrifices of strife.
A wise servant ruleth over a son causing shame, And in the midst of brethren He apportioneth an inheritance.
A refining pot [is] for silver, and a furnace for gold, And the trier of hearts [is] Jehovah.
An evil doer is attentive to lips of vanity, Falsehood is giving ear to a mischievous tongue.
Whoso is mocking at the poor Hath reproached his Maker, Whoso is rejoicing at calamity is not acquitted.
Sons' sons [are] the crown of old men, And the glory of sons [are] their fathers.
Not comely for a fool is a lip of excellency, Much less for a noble a lip of falsehood.
A stone of grace [is] the bribe in the eyes of its possessors, Whithersoever it turneth, it prospereth.
Whoso is covering transgression is seeking love, And whoso is repeating a matter Is separating a familiar friend.
Rebuke cometh down on the intelligent More than a hundred stripes on a fool.
An evil man seeketh only rebellion, And a fierce messenger is sent against him.
The meeting of a bereaved bear by a man, And — not a fool in his folly.
Whoso is returning evil for good, Evil moveth not from his house.
The beginning of contention [is] a letting out of waters, And before it is meddled with leave the strife.
Whoso is justifying the wicked, And condemning the righteous, Even both of these [are] an abomination to Jehovah.
Why [is] this — a price in the hand of a fool to buy wisdom, And a heart there is none?
At all times is the friend loving, And a brother for adversity is born.
A man lacking heart is striking hands, A surety he becometh before his friend.
Whoso is loving transgression is loving debate, Whoso is making high his entrance is seeking destruction.
The perverse of heart findeth not good, And the turned in his tongue falleth into evil.
Whoso is begetting a fool hath affliction for it, Yea, the father of a fool rejoiceth not.
A rejoicing heart doth good to the body, And a smitten spirit drieth the bone.
A bribe from the bosom the wicked taketh, To turn aside the paths of judgment.
The face of the intelligent [is] to wisdom, And the eyes of a fool — at the end of the earth.
A provocation to his father [is] a foolish son, And bitterness to her that bare him.
Also, to fine the righteous is not good, To smite nobles for uprightness.
One acquainted with knowledge is sparing his words, And the cool of temper [is] a man of understanding.
Even a fool keeping silence is reckoned wise, He who is shutting his lips intelligent!
For [an object of] desire he who is separated doth seek, With all wisdom he intermeddleth.
A fool delighteth not in understanding, But — in uncovering his heart.
With the coming of the wicked come also hath contempt, And with shame — reproach.
Deep waters [are] the words of a man's mouth, The fountain of wisdom [is] a flowing brook.
Acceptance of the face of the wicked [is] not good, To turn aside the righteous in judgment.
The lips of a fool enter into strife, And his mouth for stripes calleth.
The mouth of a fool [is] ruin to him, And his lips [are] the snare of his soul.
The words of a tale-bearer [are] as self-inflicted wounds, And they have gone down [to] the inner parts of the heart.
He also that is remiss in his work, A brother he [is] to a destroyer.
A tower of strength [is] the name of Jehovah, Into it the righteous runneth, and is set on high.
The wealth of the rich [is] the city of his strength, And as a wall set on high in his own imagination.
Before destruction the heart of man is high, And before honour [is] humility.
Whoso is answering a matter before he heareth, Folly it is to him and shame.
The spirit of a man sustaineth his sickness, And a smitten spirit who doth bear?
The heart of the intelligent getteth knowledge, And the ear of the wise seeketh knowledge.
The gift of a man maketh room for him, And before the great it leadeth him.
Righteous [is] the first in his own cause, His neighbour cometh and hath searched him.
The lot causeth contentions to cease, And between the mighty it separateth.
A brother transgressed against is as a strong city, And contentions as the bar of a palace.
From the fruit of a man's mouth is his belly satisfied, [From the] increase of his lips he is satisfied.
Death and life [are] in the power of the tongue, And those loving it eat its fruit.
[Whoso] hath found a wife hath found good, And bringeth out good-will from Jehovah.
[With] supplications doth the poor speak, And the rich answereth fierce things.
A man with friends [is] to show himself friendly, And there is a lover adhering more than a brother!
Better [is] the poor walking in his integrity, Than the perverse [in] his lips, who [is] a fool.
Also, without knowledge the soul [is] not good, And the hasty in feet is sinning.
The folly of man perverteth his way, And against Jehovah is his heart wroth.
Wealth addeth many friends, And the poor from his neighbour is separated.
A false witness is not acquitted, Whoso breatheth out lies is not delivered.
Many entreat the face of the noble, And all have made friendship to a man of gifts.
All the brethren of the poor have hated him, Surely also his friends have been far from him, He is pursuing words — they are not!
Whoso is getting heart is loving his soul, He is keeping understanding to find good.
A false witness is not acquitted, And whoso breatheth out lies perisheth.
Luxury is not comely for a fool, Much less for a servant to rule among princes.
The wisdom of a man hath deferred his anger, And his glory [is] to pass over transgression.
The wrath of a king [is] a growl as of a young lion, And as dew on the herb his good-will.
A calamity to his father [is] a foolish son, And the contentions of a wife [are] a continual dropping.
House and wealth [are] the inheritance of fathers, And from Jehovah [is] an understanding wife.
Sloth causeth deep sleep to fall, And an indolent soul doth hunger.
Whoso is keeping the command is keeping his soul, Whoso is despising His ways dieth.
Whoso is lending [to] Jehovah is favouring the poor, And his deed He repayeth to him.
Chastise thy son, for there is hope, And to put him to death lift not up thy soul.
A man of great wrath is bearing punishment, For, if thou dost deliver, yet again thou dost add.
Hear counsel and receive instruction, So that thou art wise in thy latter end.
Many [are] the purposes in a man's heart, And the counsel of Jehovah it standeth.
The desirableness of a man [is] his kindness, And better [is] the poor than a liar.
The fear of Jehovah [is] to life, And satisfied he remaineth — he is not charged with evil.
The slothful hath hidden his hand in a dish, Even unto his mouth he bringeth it not back.
A scorner smite, and the simple acts prudently, And give reproof to the intelligent, He understandeth knowledge.
Whoso is spoiling a father causeth a mother to flee, A son causing shame, and bringing confusion.
Cease, my son, to hear instruction — To err from sayings of knowledge.
A worthless witness scorneth judgment, And the mouth of the wicked swalloweth iniquity.
Judgments have been prepared for scorners, And stripes for the back of fools!
Wine [is] a scorner — strong drink [is] noisy, And any going astray in it is not wise.
The fear of a king [is] a growl as of a young lion, He who is causing him to be wroth is wronging his soul.
An honour to a man is cessation from strife, And every fool intermeddleth.
Because of winter the slothful plougheth not, He asketh in harvest, and there is nothing.
Counsel in the heart of a man [is] deep water, And a man of understanding draweth it up.
A multitude of men proclaim each his kindness, And a man of stedfastness who doth find?
The righteous is walking habitually in his integrity, O the happiness of his sons after him!
A king sitting on a throne of judgment, Is scattering with his eyes all evil,
Who saith, 'I have purified my heart, I have been cleansed from my sin?'
A stone and a stone, an ephah and an ephah, Even both of them [are] an abomination to Jehovah.
Even by his actions a youth maketh himself known, Whether his work be pure or upright.
A hearing ear, and a seeing eye, Jehovah hath made even both of them.
Love not sleep, lest thou become poor, Open thine eyes — be satisfied [with] bread.
'Bad, bad,' saith the buyer, And going his way then he boasteth himself.
Substance, gold, and a multitude of rubies, Yea, a precious vessel, [are] lips of knowledge.
Take his garment when a stranger hath been surety, And for strangers pledge it.
Sweet to a man [is] the bread of falsehood, And afterwards is his mouth filled [with] gravel.
Purposes by counsel thou dost establish, And with plans make thou war.
A revealer of secret counsels is the busybody, And for a deceiver [with] his lips make not thyself surety.
Whoso is vilifying his father and his mother, Extinguished is his lamp in blackness of darkness.
An inheritance gotten wrongly at first, Even its latter end is not blessed.
Do not say, 'I recompense evil,' Wait for Jehovah, and He delivereth thee.
An abomination to Jehovah [are] a stone and a stone, And balances of deceit [are] not good.
From Jehovah [are] the steps of a man, And man — how understandeth he his way?
A snare to a man [is] he hath swallowed a holy thing, And after vows to make inquiry.
A wise king is scattering the wicked, And turneth back on them the wheel.
The breath of man [is] a lamp of Jehovah, Searching all the inner parts of the heart.
Kindness and truth keep a king, And he hath supported by kindness his throne.
The beauty of young men is their strength, And the honour of old men is grey hairs.
The bandages of a wound thou removest with the evil, Also the plagues of the inner parts of the heart!
Rivulets of waters [is] the heart of a king in the hand of Jehovah, Wherever He pleaseth He inclineth it.
Every way of a man [is] right in his own eyes, And Jehovah is pondering hearts.
To do righteousness and judgment, Is chosen of Jehovah rather than sacrifice.
Loftiness of eyes, and breadth of heart, Tillage of the wicked [is] sin.
The purposes of the diligent [are] only to advantage, And of every hasty one, only to want.
The making of treasures by a lying tongue, [Is] a vanity driven away of those seeking death.
The spoil of the wicked catcheth them, Because they have refused to do judgment.
Froward [is] the way of a man who is vile, And the pure — upright [is] his work.
Better to sit on a corner of the roof, Than [with] a woman of contentions and a house of company.
The soul of the wicked hath desired evil, Not gracious in his eyes is his neighbour.
When the scorner is punished, the simple becometh wise, And in giving understanding to the wise He receiveth knowledge.
The Righteous One is acting wisely Towards the house of the wicked, He is overthrowing the wicked for wickedness.
Whoso is shutting his ear from the cry of the poor, He also doth cry, and is not answered.
A gift in secret pacifieth anger, And a bribe in the bosom strong fury.
To do justice [is] joy to the righteous, But ruin to workers of iniquity.
A man who is wandering from the way of understanding, In an assembly of Rephaim resteth.
Whoso [is] loving mirth [is] a poor man, Whoso is loving wine and oil maketh no wealth.
The wicked [is] an atonement for the righteous, And for the upright the treacherous dealer.
Better to dwell in a wilderness land, Than [with] a woman of contentions and anger.
A treasure to be desired, and oil, [Is] in the habitation of the wise, And a foolish man swalloweth it up.
Whoso is pursuing righteousness and kindness, Findeth life, righteousness, and honour.
A city of the mighty hath the wise gone up, And bringeth down the strength of its confidence.
Whoso is keeping his mouth and his tongue, Is keeping from adversities his soul.
Proud, haughty, scorner [is] his name, Who is working in the wrath of pride.
The desire of the slothful slayeth him, For his hands have refused to work.
All the day desiring he hath desired, And the righteous giveth and withholdeth not.
The sacrifice of the wicked [is] abomination, Much more when in wickedness he bringeth it.
A false witness doth perish, And an attentive man for ever speaketh.
A wicked man hath hardened by his face, And the upright — he prepareth his way.
There is no wisdom, nor understanding, Nor counsel, over-against Jehovah.
A horse is prepared for a day of battle, And the deliverance [is] of Jehovah!
A name is chosen rather than much wealth, Than silver and than gold — good grace.
Rich and poor have met together, The Maker of them all [is] Jehovah.
The prudent hath seen the evil, and is hidden, And the simple have passed on, and are punished.
The end of humility [is] the fear of Jehovah, Riches, and honour, and life.
Thorns — snares [are] in the way of the perverse, Whoso is keeping his soul is far from them.
Give instruction to a youth about his way, Even when he is old he turneth not from it.
The rich over the poor ruleth, And a servant [is] the borrower to the lender.
Whoso is sowing perverseness reapeth sorrow, And the rod of his anger weareth out.
The good of eye — he is blessed, For he hath given of his bread to the poor.
Cast out a scorner — and contention goeth out, And strife and shame cease.
Whoso is loving cleanness of heart, Grace [are] his lips, a king [is] his friend.
The eyes of Jehovah have kept knowledge, And He overthroweth the words of the treacherous.
The slothful hath said, 'A lion [is] without, In the midst of the broad places I am slain.'
A deep pit [is] the mouth of strange women, The abhorred of Jehovah falleth there.
Folly is bound up in the heart of a youth, The rod of chastisement putteth it far from him.
He is oppressing the poor to multiply to him, He is giving to the rich — only to want.
Incline thine ear, and hear words of the wise, And thy heart set to my knowledge,
For they are pleasant when thou dost keep them in thy heart, They are prepared together for thy lips.
That thy trust may be in Jehovah, I caused thee to know to-day, even thou.
Have I not written to thee three times With counsels and knowledge?
To cause thee to know the certainty of sayings of truth, To return sayings of truth to those sending thee.
Rob not the poor because he [is] poor, And bruise not the afflicted in the gate.
For Jehovah pleadeth their cause, And hath spoiled the soul of their spoilers.
Shew not thyself friendly with an angry man, And with a man of fury go not in,
Lest thou learn his paths, And have received a snare to thy soul.
Be not thou among those striking hands, Among sureties [for] burdens.
If thou hast nothing to pay, Why doth he take thy bed from under thee?
Remove not a border of olden times, That thy fathers have made.
Hast thou seen a man speedy in his business? Before kings he doth station himself, He stations not himself before obscure men!
When thou sittest to eat with a ruler, Thou considerest diligently that which [is] before thee,
And thou hast put a knife to thy throat, If thou [art] a man of appetite.
Have no desire to his dainties, seeing it [is] lying food.
Labour not to make wealth, From thine own understanding cease, Dost thou cause thine eyes to fly upon it? Then it is not.
For wealth maketh to itself wings, As an eagle it flieth to the heavens.
Eat not the bread of an evil eye, And have no desire to his dainties,
For as he hath thought in his soul, so [is] he, 'Eat and drink,' saith he to thee, And his heart [is] not with thee.
Thy morsel thou hast eaten thou dost vomit up, And hast marred thy words that [are] sweet.
In the ears of a fool speak not, For he treadeth on the wisdom of thy words.
Remove not a border of olden times, And into fields of the fatherless enter not,
For their Redeemer [is] strong, He doth plead their cause with thee.
Bring in to instruction thy heart, And thine ear to sayings of knowledge.
Withhold not from a youth chastisement, When thou smitest him with a rod he dieth not.
Thou with a rod smitest him, And his soul from Sheol thou deliverest.
My son, if thy heart hath been wise, My heart rejoiceth, even mine,
And my reins exult when thy lips speak uprightly.
Let not thy heart be envious at sinners, But — in the fear of Jehovah all the day.
For, is there a posterity? Then thy hope is not cut off.
Hear thou, my son, and be wise, And make happy in the way thy heart,
Be not thou among quaffers of wine, Among gluttonous ones of flesh,
For the quaffer and glutton become poor, And drowsiness clotheth with rags.
Hearken to thy father, who begat thee, And despise not thy mother when she hath become old.
Truth buy, and sell not, Wisdom, and instruction, and understanding,
The father of the righteous rejoiceth greatly, The begetter of the wise rejoiceth in him.
Rejoice doth thy father and thy mother, Yea, she that bare thee is joyful.
Give, my son, thy heart to me, And let thine eyes watch my ways.
For a harlot [is] a deep ditch, And a strange woman [is] a strait pit.
She also, as catching prey, lieth in wait, And the treacherous among men she increaseth.
Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? Who hath contentions? who hath plaint? Who hath wounds without cause? Who hath redness of eyes?
Those tarrying by the wine, Those going in to search out mixed wine.
See not wine when it showeth itself red, When it giveth in the cup its colour, It goeth up and down through the upright.
Its latter end — as a serpent it biteth, And as a basilisk it stingeth.
Thine eyes see strange women, And thy heart speaketh perverse things.
And thou hast been as one lying down in the heart of the sea, And as one lying down on the top of a mast.
'They smote me, I have not been sick, They beat me, I have not known. When I awake — I seek it yet again!'
Be not envious of evil men, And desire not to be with them.
For destruction doth their heart meditate, And perverseness do their lips speak.
By wisdom is a house builded, And by understanding it establisheth itself.
And by knowledge the inner parts are filled, [With] all precious and pleasant wealth.
Mighty [is] the wise in strength, And a man of knowledge is strengthening power,
For by plans thou makest for thyself war, And deliverance [is] in a multitude of counsellors.
Wisdom [is] high for a fool, In the gate he openeth not his mouth.
Whoso is devising to do evil, Him they call a master of wicked thoughts.
The thought of folly [is] sin, And an abomination to man [is] a scorner.
Thou hast shewed thyself weak in a day of adversity, Straitened is thy power,
If [from] delivering those taken to death, And those slipping to the slaughter — thou keepest back.
When thou sayest, 'Lo, we knew not this.' Is not the Ponderer of hearts He who understandeth? And the Keeper of thy soul He who knoweth? And He hath rendered to man according to his work.
Eat my son, honey that [is] good, And the honeycomb — sweet to thy palate.
So [is] the knowledge of wisdom to thy soul, If thou hast found that there is a posterity And thy hope is not cut off.
Lay not wait, O wicked one, At the habitation of the righteous. Do not spoil his resting-place.
For seven [times] doth the righteous fall and rise, And the wicked stumble in evil.
In the falling of thine enemy rejoice not, And in his stumbling let not thy heart be joyful,
Lest Jehovah see, and [it be] evil in His eyes, And He hath turned from off him His anger.
Fret not thyself at evil doers, Be not envious at the wicked,
For there is not a posterity to the evil, The lamp of the wicked is extinguished.
Fear Jehovah, my son, and the king, With changers mix not up thyself,
For suddenly doth their calamity rise, And the ruin of them both — who knoweth!
These also are for the wise: — To discern faces in judgment is not good.
Whoso is saying to the wicked, 'Thou [art] righteous,' Peoples execrate him — nations abhor him.
And to those reproving it is pleasant, And on them cometh a good blessing.
Lips he kisseth who is returning straightforward words.
Prepare in an out-place thy work, And make it ready in the field — go afterwards, Then thou hast built thy house.
Be not a witness for nought against thy neighbour, Or thou hast enticed with thy lips.
Say not, 'As he did to me, so I do to him, I render to each according to his work.'
Near the field of a slothful man I passed by, And near the vineyard of a man lacking heart.
And lo, it hath gone up — all of it — thorns! Covered its face have nettles, And its stone wall hath been broken down.
And I see — I — I do set my heart, I have seen — I have received instruction,
A little sleep — a little slumber — A little folding of the hands to lie down.
And thy poverty hath come [as] a traveller, And thy want as an armed man!
Also these are Proverbs of Solomon, that men of Hezekiah king of Judah transcribed: —
The honour of God [is] to hide a thing, And the honour of kings to search out a matter.
The heavens for height, and the earth for depth, And the heart of kings — [are] unsearchable.
Take away dross from silver, And a vessel for the refiner goeth forth,
Take away the wicked before a king, And established in righteousness is his throne.
Honour not thyself before a king, And in the place of the great stand not.
For better [that] he hath said to thee, 'Come thou up hither,' Than [that] he humble thee before a noble, Whom thine eyes have seen.
Go not forth to strive, haste, turn, What dost thou in its latter end, When thy neighbour causeth thee to blush?
Thy cause plead with thy neighbour, And the secret counsel of another reveal not,
Lest the hearer put thee to shame, And thine evil report turn not back.
Apples of gold in imagery of silver, [Is] the word spoken at its fit times.
A ring of gold, and an ornament of pure gold, [Is] the wise reprover to an attentive ear.
As a vessel of snow in a day of harvest, [So is] a faithful ambassador to those sending him, And the soul of his masters he refresheth.
Clouds and wind, and rain there is none, [Is] a man boasting himself in a false gift.
By long-suffering is a ruler persuaded, And a soft tongue breaketh a bone.
Honey thou hast found — eat thy sufficiency, Lest thou be satiated [with] it, and hast vomited it.
Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbour's house, Lest he be satiated [with] thee, and have hated thee.
A maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow, [Is] the man testifying against his neighbour a false testimony.
A bad tooth, and a tottering foot, [Is] the confidence of the treacherous in a day of adversity.
Whoso is taking away a garment in a cold day, [Is as] vinegar on nitre, And a singer of songs on a sad heart.
If he who is hating thee doth hunger, cause him to eat bread, And if he thirst, cause him to drink water.
For coals thou art putting on his head, And Jehovah giveth recompense to thee.
A north wind bringeth forth rain, And a secret tongue — indignant faces.
Better to sit on a corner of a roof, Than [with] a woman of contentions, and a house of company.
[As] cold waters for a weary soul, So [is] a good report from a far country.
A spring troubled, and a fountain corrupt, [Is] the righteous falling before the wicked.
The eating of much honey is not good, Nor a searching out of one's own honour — honour.
A city broken down without walls, [Is] a man without restraint over his spirit!
As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, So honour [is] not comely for a fool.
As a bird by wandering, as a swallow by flying, So reviling without cause doth not come.
A whip is for a horse, a bridle for an ass, And a rod for the back of fools.
Answer not a fool according to his folly, Lest thou be like to him — even thou.
Answer a fool according to his folly, Lest he be wise in his own eyes.
He is cutting off feet, he is drinking injury, Who is sending things by the hand of a fool.
Weak have been the two legs of the lame, And a parable in the mouth of fools.
As one who is binding a stone in a sling, So [is] he who is giving honour to a fool.
A thorn hath gone up into the hand of a drunkard, And a parable in the mouth of fools.
Great [is] the Former of all, And He is rewarding a fool, And is rewarding transgressors.
As a dog hath returned to its vomit, A fool is repeating his folly.
Thou hast seen a man wise in his own eyes, More hope of a fool than of him!
The slothful hath said, 'A lion [is] in the way, A lion [is] in the broad places.'
The door turneth round on its hinge, And the slothful on his bed.
The slothful hath hid his hand in a dish, He is weary of bringing it back to his mouth.
Wiser [is] the slothful in his own eyes, Than seven [men] returning a reason.
Laying hold on the ears of a dog, [Is] a passer-by making himself wrath for strife not his own.
As [one] pretending to be feeble, Who is casting sparks, arrows, and death,
So hath a man deceived his neighbour, And hath said, 'Am not I playing?'
Without wood is fire going out, And without a tale-bearer, contention ceaseth,
Coal to burning coals, and wood to fire, And a man of contentions to kindle strife.
The words of a tale-bearer [are] as self-inflicted wounds, And they have gone down [to] the inner parts of the heart.
Silver of dross spread over potsherd, [Are] burning lips and an evil heart.
By his lips doth a hater dissemble, And in his heart he placeth deceit,
When his voice is gracious trust not in him, For seven abominations [are] in his heart.
Hatred is covered by deceit, Revealed is its wickedness in an assembly.
Whoso is digging a pit falleth into it, And the roller of a stone, to him it turneth.
A lying tongue hateth its bruised ones, And a flattering mouth worketh an overthrow!
Boast not thyself of to-morrow, For thou knowest not what a day bringeth forth.
Let another praise thee, and not thine own mouth, A stranger, and not thine own lips.
A stone [is] heavy, and the sand [is] heavy, And the anger of a fool Is heavier than they both.
Fury [is] fierce, and anger [is] overflowing, And who standeth before jealousy?
Better [is] open reproof than hidden love.
Faithful are the wounds of a lover, And abundant the kisses of an enemy.
A satiated soul treadeth down a honeycomb, And [to] a hungry soul every bitter thing [is] sweet.
As a bird wandering from her nest, So [is] a man wandering from his place.
Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart, And the sweetness of one's friend — from counsel of the soul.
Thine own friend, and the friend of thy father, forsake not, And the house of thy brother enter not In a day of thy calamity, Better [is] a near neighbour than a brother afar off.
Be wise, my son, and rejoice my heart. And I return my reproacher a word.
The prudent hath seen the evil, he is hidden, The simple have passed on, they are punished.
Take his garment, when a stranger hath been surety, And for a strange woman pledge it.
Whoso is saluting his friend with a loud voice, In the morning rising early, A light thing it is reckoned to him.
A continual dropping in a day of rain, And a woman of contentions are alike,
Whoso is hiding her hath hidden the wind, And the ointment of his right hand calleth out.
Iron by iron is sharpened, And a man sharpens the face of his friend.
The keeper of a fig-tree eateth its fruit, And the preserver of his master is honoured.
As [in] water the face [is] to face, So the heart of man to man.
Sheol and destruction are not satisfied, And the eyes of man are not satisfied.
A refining pot [is] for silver, and a furnace for gold, And a man according to his praise.
If thou dost beat the foolish in a mortar, Among washed things — with a pestle, His folly turneth not aside from off him.
Know well the face of thy flock, Set thy heart to the droves,
For riches [are] not to the age, Nor a crown to generation and generation.
Revealed was the hay, and seen the tender grass, And gathered the herbs of mountains.
Lambs [are] for thy clothing, And the price of the field [are] he-goats,
And a sufficiency of goats' milk [is] for thy bread, For bread to thy house, and life to thy damsels!
The wicked have fled and there is no pursuer. And the righteous as a young lion is confident.
By the transgression of a land many [are] its heads. And by an intelligent man, Who knoweth right — it is prolonged.
A man — poor and oppressing the weak, [Is] a sweeping rain, and there is no bread.
Those forsaking the law praise the wicked, Those keeping the law plead against them.
Evil men understand not judgment, And those seeking Jehovah understand all.
Better [is] the poor walking in his integrity, Than the perverse of ways who is rich.
Whoso is keeping the law is an intelligent son, And a friend of gluttons, Doth cause his father to blush.
Whoso is multiplying his wealth by biting and usury, For one favouring the poor doth gather it.
Whoso is turning his ear from hearing the law, Even his prayer [is] an abomination.
Whoso is causing the upright to err in an evil way, Into his own pit he doth fall, And the perfect do inherit good.
A rich man is wise in his own eyes, And the intelligent poor searcheth him.
In the exulting of the righteous the glory [is] abundant, And in the rising of the wicked man is apprehensive.
Whoso is covering his transgressions prospereth not, And he who is confessing and forsaking hath mercy.
O the happiness of a man fearing continually, And whoso is hardening his heart falleth into evil.
A growling lion, and a ranging bear, [Is] the wicked ruler over a poor people.
A leader lacking understanding multiplieth oppressions, Whoso is hating dishonest gain prolongeth days.
A man oppressed with the blood of a soul, Unto the pit fleeth, none taketh hold on him.
Whoso is walking uprightly is saved, And the perverted of ways falleth at once.
Whoso is tilling his ground is satisfied [with] bread, And whoso is pursuing vanity, Is filled [with] poverty.
A stedfast man hath multiplied blessings, And whoso is hasting to be rich is not acquitted.
To discern faces is not good, And for a piece of bread doth a man transgress.
Troubled for wealth [is] the man [with] an evil eye, And he knoweth not that want doth meet him.
Whoso is reproving a man afterwards findeth grace, More than a flatterer with the tongue.
Whoso is robbing his father, or his mother, And is saying, 'It is not transgression,' A companion he is to a destroyer.
Whoso is proud in soul stirreth up contention, And whoso is trusting on Jehovah is made fat.
Whoso is trusting in his heart is a fool, And whoso is walking in wisdom is delivered.
Whoso is giving to the poor hath no lack, And whoso is hiding his eyes multiplied curses.
In the rising of the wicked a man is hidden, And in their destruction the righteous multiply!
A man often reproved, hardening the neck, Is suddenly broken, and there is no healing.
In the multiplying of the righteous the people rejoice, And in the ruling of the wicked the people sigh.
A man loving wisdom rejoiceth his father, And a friend of harlots destroyeth wealth.
A king by judgment establisheth a land, And one receiving gifts throweth it down.
A man taking a portion above his neighbour, Spreadeth a net for his own steps.
In the transgression of the evil [is] a snare, And the righteous doth sing and rejoice.
The righteous knoweth the plea of the poor, The wicked understandeth not knowledge.
Men of scorning ensnare a city, And the wise turn back anger.
A wise man is judged by the foolish man, And he hath been angry, And he hath laughed, and there is no rest.
Men of blood hate the perfect, And the upright seek his soul.
A fool bringeth out all his mind, And the wise till afterwards restraineth it.
A ruler who is attending to lying words, All his ministers [are] wicked.
The poor and the man of frauds have met together, Jehovah is enlightening the eyes of them both.
a king that is judging truly the poor, His throne for ever is established.
A rod and reproof give wisdom, And a youth let away is shaming his mother.
In the multiplying of the wicked transgression multiplieth, And the righteous on their fall do look.
Chastise thy son, and he giveth thee comfort, Yea, he giveth delights to thy soul.
Without a Vision is a people made naked, And whoso is keeping the law, O his happiness!
By words a servant is not instructed though he understand, And there is nothing answering.
Thou hast seen a man hasty in his words! More hope of a fool than of him.
Whoso is bringing up his servant delicately, from youth, [At] his latter end also he is continuator.
An angry man stirreth up contention, And a furious man is multiplying transgression.
The pride of man humbleth him, And humility of spirit upholdeth honour.
Whoso is sharing with a thief is hating his own soul, Execration he heareth, and telleth not.
Fear of man causeth a snare, And the confident in Jehovah is set on high.
Many are seeking the face of a ruler, And from Jehovah [is] the judgment of each.
An abomination to the righteous [is] the perverse man, And an abomination to the wicked [is] the upright in the way!
Words of a Gatherer, son of an obedient one, the declaration, an affirmation of the man: — I have wearied myself [for] God, I have wearied myself [for] God, and am consumed.
For I am more brutish than any one, And have not the understanding of a man.
Nor have I learned wisdom, Yet the knowledge of Holy Ones I know.
Who went up to heaven, and cometh down? Who hath gathered the wind in his fists? Who hath bound waters in a garment? Who established all ends of the earth? What [is] His name? and what His son's name? Surely thou knowest!
Every saying of God [is] tried, A shield He [is] to those trusting in Him.
Add not to His words, lest He reason with thee, And thou hast been found false.
Two things I have asked from Thee, Withhold not from me before I die.
Vanity and a lying word put far from me, Poverty or wealth give not to me, Cause me to eat the bread of my portion,
Lest I become satiated, and have denied, And have said, 'Who [is] Jehovah?' And lest I be poor, and have stolen, And have laid hold of the name of my God.
Accuse not a servant unto his lord, Lest he disesteem thee, and thou be found guilty.
A generation [is], that lightly esteemeth their father, And their mother doth not bless.
A generation — pure in their own eyes, But from their own filth not washed.
A generation — how high are their eyes, Yea, their eyelids are lifted up.
A generation — swords [are] their teeth, And knives — their jaw-teeth, To consume the poor from earth, And the needy from [among] men.
To the leech [are] two daughters, 'Give, give, Lo, three things are not satisfied, Four have not said 'Sufficiency;'
Sheol, and a restrained womb, Earth — it [is] not satisfied [with] water, And fire — it hath not said, 'Sufficiency,'
An eye that mocketh at a father, And despiseth to obey a mother, Dig it out do ravens of the valley, And eat it do young eagles.
Three things have been too wonderful for me, Yea, four that I have not known:
The way of the eagle in the heavens, The way of a serpent on a rock, The way of a ship in the heart of the sea, And the way of a man in youth.
So — the way of an adulterous woman, She hath eaten and hath wiped her mouth, And hath said, 'I have not done iniquity.'
For three things hath earth been troubled, And for four — it is not able to bear:
For a servant when he reigneth, And a fool when he is satisfied with bread,
For a hated one when she ruleth, And a maid-servant when she succeedeth her mistress.
Four [are] little ones of earth, And they are made wiser than the wise:
The ants [are] a people not strong, And they prepare in summer their food,
Conies [are] a people not strong, And they place in a rock their house,
A king there is not to the locust, And it goeth out — each one shouting,
A spider with two hands taketh hold, And is in the palaces of a king.
Three there are going well, Yea, four are good in going:
An old lion — mighty among beasts, That turneth not back from the face of any,
A girt one of the loins, or a he-goat, And a king — no rising up with him.
If thou hast been foolish in lifting up thyself, And if thou hast devised evil — hand to mouth!
For the churning of milk bringeth out butter, And the wringing of the nose bringeth out blood, And the forcing of anger bringeth out strife!
Words of Lemuel a king, a declaration that his mother taught him:
'What, my son? and what, son of my womb? And what, son of my vows?
Give not to women thy strength, And thy ways to wiping away of kings.
Not for kings, O Lemuel, Not for kings, to drink wine, And for princes a desire of strong drink.
Lest he drink, and forget the decree, And change the judgment of any of the sons of affliction.
Give strong drink to the perishing, And wine to the bitter in soul,
He drinketh, and forgetteth his poverty, And his misery he remembereth not again.
Open thy mouth for the dumb, For the right of all sons of change.
Open thy mouth, judge righteously, Both the cause of the poor and needy!'
A woman of worth who doth find? Yea, far above rubies [is] her price.
The heart of her husband hath trusted in her, And spoil he lacketh not.
She hath done him good, and not evil, All days of her life.
She hath sought wool and flax, And with delight she worketh [with] her hands.
She hath been as ships of the merchant, From afar she bringeth in her bread.
Yea, she riseth while yet night, And giveth food to her household, And a portion to her damsels.
She hath considered a field, and taketh it, From the fruit of her hands she hath planted a vineyard.
She hath girded with might her loins, And doth strengthen her arms.
She hath perceived when her merchandise [is] good, Her lamp is not extinguished in the night.
Her hands she hath sent forth on a spindle, And her hands have held a distaff.
Her hand she hath spread forth to the poor, Yea, her hands she sent forth to the needy.
She is not afraid of her household from snow, For all her household are clothed [with] scarlet.
Ornamental coverings she hath made for herself, Silk and purple [are] her clothing.
Known in the gates is her husband, In his sitting with elders of the land.
Linen garments she hath made, and selleth, And a girdle she hath given to the merchant.
Strength and honour [are] her clothing, And she rejoiceth at a latter day.
Her mouth she hath opened in wisdom, And the law of kindness [is] on her tongue.
She [is] watching the ways of her household, And bread of sloth she eateth not.
Her sons have risen up, and pronounce her happy, Her husband, and he praiseth her,
'Many [are] the daughters who have done worthily, Thou hast gone up above them all.'
The grace [is] false, and the beauty [is] vain, A woman fearing Jehovah, she may boast herself.
Give ye to her of the fruit of her hands, And her works do praise her in the gates!
Words of a preacher, son of David, king in Jerusalem:
Vanity of vanities, said the Preacher, Vanity of vanities: the whole [is] vanity.
What advantage [is] to man by all his labour that he laboureth at under the sun?
A generation is going, and a generation is coming, and the earth to the age is standing.
Also, the sun hath risen, and the sun hath gone in, and unto its place panting it is rising there.
Going unto the south, and turning round unto the north, turning round, turning round, the wind is going, and by its circuits the wind hath returned.
All the streams are going unto the sea, and the sea is not full; unto a place whither the streams are going, thither they are turning back to go.
All these things are wearying; a man is not able to speak, the eye is not satisfied by seeing, nor filled is the ear from hearing.
What [is] that which hath been? it [is] that which is, and what [is] that which hath been done? it [is] that which is done, and there is not an entirely new thing under the sun.
There is a thing of which [one] saith: 'See this, it [is] new!' already it hath been in the ages that were before us!
There is not a remembrance of former [generations]; and also of the latter that are, there is no remembrance of them with those that are at the last.
I, a preacher, have been king over Israel in Jerusalem.
And I have given my heart to seek and to search out by wisdom concerning all that hath been done under the heavens. It [is] a sad travail God hath given to the sons of man to be humbled by it.
I have seen all the works that have been done under the sun, and lo, the whole [is] vanity and vexation of spirit!
A crooked thing [one] is not able to make straight, and a lacking thing is not able to be numbered.
I — I spake with my heart, saying, 'I, lo, I have magnified and added wisdom above every one who hath been before me at Jerusalem, and my heart hath seen abundantly wisdom and knowledge.
And I give my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and folly: I have known that even this [is] vexation of spirit;
for, in abundance of wisdom [is] abundance of sadness, and he who addeth knowledge addeth pain.'
I said in my heart, 'Pray, come, I try thee with mirth, and look thou on gladness;' and lo, even it [is] vanity.
Of laughter I said, 'Foolish!' and of mirth, 'What [is] this it is doing?'
I have sought in my heart to draw out with wine my appetite, (and my heart leading in wisdom), and to take hold on folly till that I see where [is] this — the good to the sons of man of that which they do under the heavens, the number of the days of their lives.
I made great my works, I builded for me houses, I planted for me vineyards.
I made for me gardens and paradises, and I planted in them trees of every fruit.
I made for me pools of water, to water from them a forest shooting forth trees.
I got men-servants, and maid-servants, and sons of the house were to me; also, I had much substance — herd and flock — above all who had been before me in Jerusalem.
I gathered for me also silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of kings and of the provinces. I prepared for me men-singers and women-singers, and the luxuries of the sons of man — a wife and wives.
And I became great, and increased above every one who had been before me in Jerusalem; also, my wisdom stood with me.
And all that mine eyes asked I kept not back from them; I withheld not my heart from any joy, for my heart rejoiced because of all my labour, and this hath been my portion, from all my labour,
and I have looked on all my works that my hands have done, and on the labour that I have laboured to do, and lo, the whole [is] vanity and vexation of spirit, and there is no advantage under the sun!
And I turned to see wisdom, and madness, and folly, but what [is] the man who cometh after the king? that which [is] already — they have done it!
And I saw that there is an advantage to wisdom above folly, like the advantage of the light above the darkness.
The wise! — his eyes [are] in his head, and the fool in darkness is walking, and I also knew that one event happeneth with them all;
and I said in my heart, 'As it happeneth with the fool, it happeneth also with me, and why am I then more wise?' And I spake in my heart, that also this [is] vanity:
That there is no remembrance to the wise — with the fool — to the age, for that which [is] already, [in] the days that are coming is all forgotten, and how dieth the wise? with the fool!
And I have hated life, for sad to me [is] the work that hath been done under the sun, for the whole [is] vanity and vexation of spirit.
And I have hated all my labour that I labour at under the sun, because I leave it to a man who is after me.
And who knoweth whether he is wise or foolish? yet he doth rule over all my labour that I have laboured at, and that I have done wisely under the sun! this also [is] vanity.
And I turned round to cause my heart to despair concerning all the labour that I laboured at under the sun.
For there is a man whose labour [is] in wisdom, and in knowledge, and in equity, and to a man who hath not laboured therein he giveth it — his portion! Even this [is] vanity and a great evil.
For what hath been to a man by all his labour, and by the thought of his heart that he laboured at under the sun?
For all his days are sorrows, and his travail sadness; even at night his heart hath not lain down; this also [is] vanity.
There is nothing good in a man who eateth, and hath drunk, and hath shewn his soul good in his labour. This also I have seen that it [is] from the hand of God.
For who eateth and who hasteth out more than I?
For to a man who [is] good before Him, He hath given wisdom, and knowledge, and joy; and to a sinner He hath given travail, to gather and to heap up, to give to the good before God. Even this [is] vanity and vexation of spirit.
To everything — a season, and a time to every delight under the heavens:
A time to bring forth, And a time to die. A time to plant, And a time to eradicate the planted.
A time to slay, And a time to heal, A time to break down, And a time to build up.
A time to weep, And a time to laugh. A time to mourn, And a time to skip.
A time to cast away stones, And a time to heap up stones. A time to embrace, And a time to be far from embracing.
A time to seek, And a time to destroy. A time to keep, And a time to cast away.
A time to rend, And a time to sew. A time to be silent, And a time to speak.
A time to love, And a time to hate. A time of war, And a time of peace.
What advantage hath the doer in that which he is labouring at?
I have seen the travail that God hath given to the sons of man to be humbled by it.
The whole He hath made beautiful in its season; also, that knowledge He hath put in their heart without which man findeth not out the work that God hath done from the beginning even unto the end.
I have known that there is no good for them except to rejoice and to do good during their life,
yea, even every man who eateth and hath drunk and seen good by all his labour, it [is] a gift of God.
I have known that all that God doth is to the age, to it nothing is to be added, and from it nothing is to be withdrawn; and God hath wrought that they do fear before Him.
What is that which hath been? already it is, and that which [is] to be hath already been, and God requireth that which is pursued.
And again, I have seen under the sun the place of judgment — there [is] the wicked; and the place of righteousness — there [is] the wicked.
I said in my heart, 'The righteous and the wicked doth God judge, for a time [is] to every matter and for every work there.'
I said in my heart concerning the matter of the sons of man that God might cleanse them, so as to see that they themselves [are] beasts.
For an event [is to] the sons of man, and an event [is to] the beasts, even one event [is] to them; as the death of this, so [is] the death of that; and one spirit [is] to all, and the advantage of man above the beast is nothing, for the whole [is] vanity.
The whole are going unto one place, the whole have been from the dust, and the whole are turning back unto the dust.
Who knoweth the spirit of the sons of man that is going up on high, and the spirit of the beast that is going down below to the earth?
And I have seen that there is nothing better than that man rejoice in his works, for it [is] his portion; for who doth bring him in to look on that which is after him?
And I have turned, and I see all the oppressions that are done under the sun, and lo, the tear of the oppressed, and they have no comforter; and at the hand of their oppressors [is] power, and they have no comforter.
And I am praising the dead who have already died above the living who are yet alive.
And better than both of them [is] he who hath not yet been, in that he hath not seen the evil work that hath been done under the sun.
And I have seen all the labour, and all the benefit of the work, because for it a man is the envy of his neighbour. Even this [is] vanity and vexation of spirit.
The fool is clasping his hands, and eating his own flesh:
'Better [is] a handful [with] quietness, than two handfuls [with] labour and vexation of spirit.'
And I have turned, and I see a vain thing under the sun:
There is one, and there is not a second; even son or brother he hath not, and there is no end to all his labour! His eye also is not satisfied with riches, and [he saith not], 'For whom am I labouring and bereaving my soul of good?' This also is vanity, it is a sad travail.
The two [are] better than the one, in that they have a good reward by their labour.
For if they fall, the one raiseth up his companion, but woe to the one who falleth and there is not a second to raise him up!
Also, if two lie down, then they have heat, but how hath one heat?
And if the one strengthen himself, the two stand against him; and the threefold cord is not hastily broken.
Better is a poor and wise youth than an old and foolish king, who hath not known to be warned any more.
For from a house of prisoners he hath come out to reign, for even in his own kingdom he hath been poor.
I have seen all the living, who are walking under the sun, with the second youth who doth stand in his place;
there is no end to all the people, to all who were before them; also, the latter rejoice not in him. Surely this also is vanity and vexation of spirit.
Keep thy feet when thou goest unto a house of God, and draw near to hear rather than to give of fools the sacrifice, for they do not know they do evil.
Cause not thy mouth to hasten, and let not thy heart hasten to bring out a word before God, for God is in the heavens, and thou on the earth, therefore let thy words be few.
For the dream hath come by abundance of business, and the voice of a fool by abundance of words.
When thou vowest a vow to God, delay not to complete it, for there is no pleasure in fools; that which thou vowest — complete.
Better that thou do not vow, than that thou dost vow and dost not complete.
Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, nor say before the messenger, that 'it [is] an error,' why is God wroth because of thy voice, and hath destroyed the work of thy hands?
For, in the abundance of dreams both vanities and words abound; but fear thou God.
If oppression of the poor, and violent taking away of judgment and righteousness thou seest in a province, do not marvel at the matter, for a higher than the high is observing, and high ones [are] over them.
And the abundance of a land is for all. A king for a field is served.
Whoso is loving silver is not satisfied [with] silver, nor he who is in love with stores [with] increase. Even this [is] vanity.
In the multiplying of good have its consumers been multiplied, and what benefit [is] to its possessor except the sight of his eyes?
Sweet [is] the sleep of the labourer whether he eat little or much; and the sufficiency of the wealthy is not suffering him to sleep.
There is a painful evil I have seen under the sun: wealth kept for its possessor, for his evil.
And that wealth hath been lost in an evil business, and he hath begotten a son and there is nothing in his hand!
As he came out from the belly of his mother, naked he turneth back to go as he came, and he taketh not away anything of his labour, that doth go in his hand.
And this also [is] a painful evil, just as he came, so he goeth, and what advantage [is] to him who laboureth for wind?
Also all his days in darkness he consumeth, and sadness, and wrath, and sickness abound.
Lo, that which I have seen: [It is] good, because beautiful, to eat, and to drink, and to see good in all one's labour that he laboureth at under the sun, the number of the days of his life that God hath given to him, for it [is] his portion.
Every man also to whom God hath given wealth and riches, and hath given him power to eat of it, and to accept his portion, and to rejoice in his labour, this is a gift of God.
For he doth not much remember the days of his life, for God is answering through the joy of his heart.
There is an evil that I have seen under the sun, and it [is] great on man:
A man to whom God giveth wealth, and riches, and honour, and there is no lack to his soul of all that he desireth, and God giveth him not power to eat of it, but a stranger eateth it; this [is] vanity, and it [is] an evil disease.
If a man doth beget a hundred, and live many years, and is great, because they are the days of his years, and his soul is not satisfied from the goodness, and also he hath not had a grave, I have said, 'Better than he [is] the untimely birth.'
For in vanity he came in, and in darkness he goeth, and in darkness his name is covered,
Even the sun he hath not seen nor known, more rest hath this than that.
And though he had lived a thousand years twice over, yet good he hath not seen; to the same place doth not every one go?
All the labour of man [is] for his mouth, and yet the soul is not filled.
For what advantage [is] to the wise above the fool? What to the poor who knoweth to walk before the living?
Better [is] the sight of the eyes than the going of the soul. This also [is] vanity and vexation of spirit.
What [is] that which hath been? already is its name called, and it is known that it [is] man, and he is not able to contend with him who is stronger than he.
For there are many things multiplying vanity; what advantage [is] to man?
For who knoweth what [is] good for a man in life, the number of the days of the life of his vanity, and he maketh them as a shadow? for who declareth to man what is after him under the sun?
Better [is] a name than good perfume, And the day of death than the day of birth.
Better to go unto a house of mourning, Than to go unto a house of banqueting, For that is the end of all men, And the living layeth [it] unto his heart.
Better [is] sorrow than laughter, For by the sadness of the face the heart becometh better.
The heart of the wise [is] in a house of mourning, And the heart of fools in a house of mirth.
Better to hear a rebuke of a wise man, Than [for] a man to hear a song of fools,
For as the noise of thorns under the pot, So [is] the laughter of a fool, even this [is] vanity.
Surely oppression maketh the wise mad, And a gift destroyeth the heart.
Better [is] the latter end of a thing than its beginning, Better [is] the patient of spirit, than the haughty of spirit.
Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry, For anger in the bosom of fools resteth.
Say not thou, 'What was it, That the former days were better than these?' For thou hast not asked wisely of this.
Wisdom [is] good with an inheritance, And an advantage [it is] to those beholding the sun.
For wisdom [is] a defense, money [is] a defence, And the advantage of the knowledge of wisdom [is], She reviveth her possessors.
See the work of God, For who is able to make straight that which He made crooked?
In a day of prosperity be in gladness, And in a day of evil consider. Also this over-against that hath God made, To the intent that man doth not find anything after him.
The whole I have considered in the days of my vanity. There is a righteous one perishing in his righteousness, and there is a wrong-doer prolonging [himself] in his wrong.
Be not over-righteous, nor show thyself too wise, why art thou desolate?
Do not much wrong, neither be thou a fool, why dost thou die within thy time?
[It is] good that thou dost lay hold on this, and also, from that withdrawest not thy hand, for whoso is fearing God goeth out with them all.
The wisdom giveth strength to a wise man, more than wealth the rulers who have been in a city.
Because there is not a righteous man on earth that doth good and sinneth not.
Also to all the words that they speak give not thy heart, that thou hear not thy servant reviling thee.
For many times also hath thy heart known that thou thyself also hast reviled others.
All this I have tried by wisdom; I have said, 'I am wise,' and it [is] far from me.
Far off [is] that which hath been, and deep, deep, who doth find it?
I have turned round, also my heart, to know and to search, and to seek out wisdom, and reason, and to know the wrong of folly, and of foolishness the madness.
And I am finding more bitter than death, the woman whose heart [is] nets and snares, her hands [are] bands; the good before God escapeth from her, but the sinner is captured by her.
See, this I have found, said the Preacher, one to one, to find out the reason
(that still my soul had sought, and I had not found), One man, a teacher, I have found, and a woman among all these I have not found.
See, this alone I have found, that God made man upright, and they — they have sought out many devices.
Who [is] as the wise? and who knoweth the interpretation of a thing? The wisdom of man causeth his face to shine, and the hardness of his face is changed.
I pray thee, the commandment of a king keep, even for the sake of the oath of God.
Be not troubled at his presence, thou mayest go, stand not in an evil thing, for all that he pleaseth he doth.
Where the word of a king [is] power [is], and who saith to him, 'What dost thou?'
Whoso is keeping a command knoweth no evil thing, and time and judgment the heart of the wise knoweth.
For to every delight there is a time and a judgment, for the misfortune of man is great upon him.
For he knoweth not that which shall be, for when it shall be who declareth to him?
There is no man ruling over the spirit to restrain the spirit, and there is no authority over the day of death, and there is no discharge in battle, and wickedness delivereth not its possessors.
All this I have seen so as to give my heart to every work that hath been done under the sun; a time that man hath ruled over man to his own evil.
And so I have seen the wicked buried, and they went in, even from the Holy Place they go, and they are forgotten in the city whether they had so done. This also [is] vanity.
Because sentence hath not been done [on] an evil work speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of man is full within them to do evil.
Though a sinner is doing evil a hundred [times], and prolonging [himself] for it, surely also I know that there is good to those fearing God, who fear before Him.
And good is not to the wicked, and he doth not prolong days as a shadow, because he is not fearing before God.
There is a vanity that hath been done upon the earth, that there are righteous ones unto whom it is coming according to the work of the wicked, and there are wicked ones unto whom it is coming according to the work of the righteous. I have said that this also [is] vanity.
And I have praised mirth because there is no good to man under the sun except to eat and to drink, and to rejoice, and it remaineth with him of his labour the days of his life that God hath given to him under the sun.
When I gave my heart to know wisdom and to see the business that hath been done on the earth, (for there is also a spectator in whose eyes sleep is not by day and by night),
then I considered all the work of God, that man is not able to find out the work that hath been done under the sun, because though man labour to seek, yet he doth not find; and even though the wise man speak of knowing he is not able to find.
But all this I have laid unto my heart, so as to clear up the whole of this, that the righteous and the wise, and their works, [are] in the hand of God, neither love nor hatred doth man know, the whole [is] before them.
The whole [is] as to the whole; one event is to the righteous and to the wicked, to the good, and to the clean, and to the unclean, and to him who is sacrificing, and to him who is not sacrificing; as [is] the good, so [is] the sinner, he who is swearing as he who is fearing an oath.
This [is] an evil among all that hath been done under the sun, that one event [is] to all, and also the heart of the sons of man is full of evil, and madness [is] in their heart during their life, and after it — unto the dead.
But [to] him who is joined unto all the living there is confidence, for to a living dog it [is] better than to the dead lion.
For the living know that they die, and the dead know not anything, and there is no more to them a reward, for their remembrance hath been forgotten.
Their love also, their hatred also, their envy also, hath already perished, and they have no more a portion to the age in all that hath been done under the sun.
Go, eat with joy thy bread, and drink with a glad heart thy wine, for already hath God been pleased with thy works.
At all times let thy garments be white, and let not perfume be lacking on thy head.
See life with the wife whom thou hast loved, all the days of the life of thy vanity, that He hath given to thee under the sun, all the days of thy vanity, for it [is] thy portion in life, even of thy labour that thou art labouring at under the sun.
All that thy hand findeth to do, with thy power do, for there is no work, and device, and knowledge, and wisdom in Sheol whither thou art going.
I have turned so as to see under the sun, that not to the swift [is] the race, nor to the mighty the battle, nor even to the wise bread, nor even to the intelligent wealth, nor even to the skilful grace, for time and chance happen with them all.
For even man knoweth not his time; as fish that are taken hold of by an evil net, and as birds that are taken hold of by a snare, like these [are] the sons of man snared at an evil time, when it falleth upon them suddenly.
This also I have seen: wisdom under the sun, and it is great to me.
A little city, and few men in it, and a great king hath come unto it, and hath surrounded it, and hath built against it great bulwarks;
and there hath been found in it a poor wise man, and he hath delivered the city by his wisdom, and men have not remembered that poor man!
And I said, 'Better [is] wisdom than might, and the wisdom of the poor is despised, and his words are not heard.' —
The words of the wise in quiet are heard, More than the cry of a ruler over fools.
Better [is] wisdom than weapons of conflict, And one sinner destroyeth much good!
Dead flies cause a perfumer's perfume To send forth a stink; The precious by reason of wisdom — By reason of honour — a little folly!
The heart of the wise [is] at his right hand, And the heart of a fool at his left.
And also, when he that is a fool Is walking in the way, his heart is lacking, And he hath said to every one, 'He [is] a fool.'
If the spirit of the ruler go up against thee, Thy place leave not, For yielding quieteth great sinners.
There is an evil I have seen under the sun, As an error that goeth out from the ruler,
He hath set the fool in many high places, And the rich in a low place do sit.
I have seen servants on horses, And princes walking as servants on the earth.
Whoso is digging a pit falleth into it, And whoso is breaking a hedge, a serpent biteth him.
Whoso is removing stones is grieved by them, Whoso is cleaving trees endangered by them.
If the iron hath been blunt, And he the face hath not sharpened, Then doth he increase strength, And wisdom [is] advantageous to make right.
If the serpent biteth without enchantment, Then there is no advantage to a master of the tongue.
Words of the mouth of the wise [are] gracious, And the lips of a fool swallow him up.
The beginning of the words of his mouth [is] folly, And the latter end of his mouth [Is] mischievous madness.
And the fool multiplieth words: 'Man knoweth not that which is, And that which is after him, who doth declare to him?'
The labour of the foolish wearieth him, In that he hath not known to go unto the city.
Woe to thee, O land, when thy king [is] a youth, And thy princes do eat in the morning.
Happy art thou, O land, When thy king [is] a son of freemen, And thy princes do eat in due season, For might, and not for drunkenness.
By slothfulness is the wall brought low, And by idleness of the hands doth the house drop.
For mirth they are making a feast, And wine maketh life joyful, And the silver answereth with all.
Even in thy mind a king revile not, And in the inner parts of thy bed-chamber Revile not the rich: For a fowl of the heavens causeth the voice to go, And a possessor of wings declareth the word.
Send forth thy bread on the face of the waters, For in the multitude of the days thou dost find it.
Give a portion to seven, and even to eight, For thou knowest not what evil is on the earth.
If the thick clouds are full of rain, On the earth they empty [themselves]; And if a tree doth fall in the south or to the north, The place where the tree falleth, there it is.
Whoso is observing the wind soweth not, And whoso is looking on the thick clouds reapeth not.
As thou knowest not what [is] the way of the spirit, How — bones in the womb of the full one, So thou knowest not the work of God who maketh the whole.
In the morning sow thy seed, And at even withdraw not thy hand, For thou knowest not which is right, this or that, Or whether both of them alike [are] good.
Sweet also [is] the light, And good for the eyes to see the sun.
But, if man liveth many years, In all of them let him rejoice, And remember the days of darkness, For they are many! all that is coming [is] vanity.
Rejoice, O young man, in thy childhood, And let thy heart gladden thee in days of thy youth, And walk in the ways of thy heart, And in the sight of thine eyes, And know thou that for all these, Doth God bring thee into judgment.
And turn aside anger from thy heart, And cause evil to pass from thy flesh, For the childhood and the age [are] vanity!
Remember also thy Creators in days of thy youth, While that the evil days come not, Nor the years have arrived, that thou sayest, 'I have no pleasure in them.'
While that the sun is not darkened, and the light, And the moon, and the stars, And the thick clouds returned after the rain.
In the day that keepers of the house tremble, And men of strength have bowed themselves, And grinders have ceased, because they have become few. And those looking out at the windows have become dim,
And doors have been shut in the street. When the noise of the grinding is low, And [one] riseth at the voice of the bird, And all daughters of song are bowed down.
Also of that which is high they are afraid, And of the low places in the way, And the almond-tree is despised, And the grasshopper is become a burden, And want is increased, For man is going unto his home age-during, And the mourners have gone round through the street.
While that the silver cord is not removed, And the golden bowl broken, And the pitcher broken by the fountain, And the wheel broken at the well.
And the dust returneth to the earth as it was, And the spirit returneth to God who gave it.
Vanity of vanities, said the preacher, the whole [is] vanity.
And further, because the preacher was wise, he still taught the people knowledge, and gave ear, and sought out — he made right many similes.
The preacher sought to find out pleasing words, and, written [by] the upright, words of truth.
Words of the wise [are] as goads, and as fences planted [by] the masters of collections, they have been given by one shepherd.
And further, from these, my son, be warned; the making of many books hath no end, and much study [is] a weariness of the flesh.
The end of the whole matter let us hear: — 'Fear God, and keep His commands, for this [is] the whole of man.
For every work doth God bring into judgment, with every hidden thing, whether good or bad.'
The Song of Songs, that [is] Solomon's.
Let him kiss me with kisses of his mouth, For better [are] thy loves than wine.
For fragrance [are] thy perfumes good. Perfume emptied out — thy name, Therefore have virgins loved thee!
Draw me: after thee we run, The king hath brought me into his inner chambers, We do joy and rejoice in thee, We mention thy loves more than wine, Uprightly they have loved thee!
Dark [am] I, and comely, daughters of Jerusalem, As tents of Kedar, as curtains of Solomon.
Fear me not, because I [am] very dark, Because the sun hath scorched me, The sons of my mother were angry with me, They made me keeper of the vineyards, My vineyard — my own — I have not kept.
Declare to me, thou whom my soul hath loved, Where thou delightest, Where thou liest down at noon, For why am I as one veiled, By the ranks of thy companions?
If thou knowest not, O fair among women, Get thee forth by the traces of the flock, And feed thy kids by the shepherds' dwellings!
To my joyous one in chariots of Pharaoh, I have compared thee, my friend,
Comely have been thy cheeks with garlands, Thy neck with chains.
Garlands of gold we do make for thee, With studs of silver!
While the king [is] in his circle, My spikenard hath given its fragrance.
A bundle of myrrh [is] my beloved to me, Between my breasts it lodgeth.
A cluster of cypress [is] my beloved to me, In the vineyards of En-Gedi!
Lo, thou [art] fair, my friend, Lo, thou [art] fair, thine eyes [are] doves!
Lo, thou [art] fair, my love, yea, pleasant, Yea, our couch [is] green,
The beams of our houses [are] cedars, Our rafters [are] firs, I [am] a rose of Sharon, a lily of the valleys!
As a lily among the thorns,
So [is] my friend among the daughters!
As a citron among trees of the forest, So [is] my beloved among the sons, In his shade I delighted, and sat down, And his fruit [is] sweet to my palate.
He hath brought me in unto a house of wine, And his banner over me [is] love,
Sustain me with grape-cakes, Support me with citrons, for I [am] sick with love.
His left hand [is] under my head, And his right doth embrace me.
I have adjured you, daughters of Jerusalem, By the roes or by the hinds of the field, Stir not up nor wake the love till she please!
The voice of my beloved! lo, this — he is coming, Leaping on the mountains, skipping on the hills.
My beloved [is] like to a roe, Or to a young one of the harts. Lo, this — he is standing behind our wall, Looking from the windows, Blooming from the lattice.
My beloved hath answered and said to me, 'Rise up, my friend, my fair one, and come away,
For lo, the winter hath passed by, The rain hath passed away — it hath gone.
The flowers have appeared in the earth, The time of the singing hath come, And the voice of the turtle was heard in our land,
The fig-tree hath ripened her green figs, And the sweet-smelling vines have given forth fragrance, Rise, come, my friend, my fair one, yea, come away.
My dove, in clefts of the rock, In a secret place of the ascent, Cause me to see thine appearance, Cause me to hear thy voice, For thy voice [is] sweet, and thy appearance comely.
Seize ye for us foxes, Little foxes — destroyers of vineyards, Even our sweet-smelling vineyards.
My beloved [is] mine, and I [am] his, Who is delighting among the lilies,
Till the day doth break forth, And the shadows have fled away, Turn, be like, my beloved, To a roe, or to a young one of the harts, On the mountains of separation!
On my couch by night, I sought him whom my soul hath loved; I sought him, and I found him not!
— Pray, let me rise, and go round the city, In the streets and in the broad places, I seek him whom my soul hath loved! — I sought him, and I found him not.
The watchmen have found me, (Who are going round about the city), 'Him whom my soul have loved saw ye?'
But a little I passed on from them, Till I found him whom my soul hath loved! I seized him, and let him not go, Till I brought him in unto the house of my mother — And the chamber of her that conceived me.
I have adjured you, daughters of Jerusalem, By the roes or by the hinds of the field, Stir not up nor wake the love till she please!
Who [is] this coming up from the wilderness, Like palm-trees of smoke, Perfumed [with] myrrh and frankincense, From every powder of the merchant?
Lo, his couch, that [is] Solomon's, Sixty mighty ones [are] around it, Of the mighty of Israel,
All of them holding sword, taught of battle, Each his sword by his thigh, for fear at night.
A palanquin king Solomon made for himself, Of the wood of Lebanon,
Its pillars he made of silver, Its bottom of gold, its seat of purple, Its midst lined [with] love, By the daughters of Jerusalem.
Go forth, and look, ye daughters of Zion, On king Solomon, with the crown, With which his mother crowned him, In the day of his espousals, And in the day of the joy of his heart!
Lo, thou [art] fair, my friend, lo, thou [art] fair, Thine eyes [are] doves behind thy veil, Thy hair as a row of the goats That have shone from mount Gilead,
Thy teeth as a row of the shorn ones That have come up from the washing, For all of them are forming twins, And a bereaved one is not among them.
As a thread of scarlet [are] thy lips, And thy speech [is] comely, As the work of the pomegranate [is] thy temple behind thy veil,
As the tower of David [is] thy neck, built for an armoury, The chief of the shields are hung on it, All shields of the mighty.
Thy two breasts [are] as two fawns, Twins of a roe, that are feeding among lilies.
Till the day doth break forth, And the shadows have fled away, I will get me unto the mountain of myrrh, And unto the hill of frankincense.
Thou [art] all fair, my friend, And a blemish there is not in thee. Come from Lebanon, O spouse,
Come from Lebanon, come thou in. Look from the top of Amana, From the top of Shenir and Hermon, From the habitations of lions, From the mountains of leopards.
Thou hast emboldened me, my sister-spouse, Emboldened me with one of thine eyes, With one chain of thy neck.
How wonderful have been thy loves, my sister-spouse, How much better have been thy loves than wine, And the fragrance of thy perfumes than all spices.
Thy lips drop honey, O spouse, Honey and milk [are] under thy tongue, And the fragrance of thy garments [Is] as the fragrance of Lebanon.
A garden shut up [is] my sister-spouse, A spring shut up — a fountain sealed.
Thy shoots a paradise of pomegranates, With precious fruits,
Cypresses with nard — nard and saffron, Cane and cinnamon, With all trees of frankincense, Myrrh and aloes, with all chief spices.
A fount of gardens, a well of living waters, And flowings from Lebanon!
Awake, O north wind, and come, O south, Cause my garden to breathe forth, its spices let flow, Let my beloved come to his garden, And eat its pleasant fruits!
I have come in to my garden, my sister-spouse, I have plucked my myrrh with my spice, I have eaten my comb with my honey, I have drunk my wine with my milk. Eat, O friends, drink, Yea, drink abundantly, O beloved ones!
I am sleeping, but my heart waketh: The sound of my beloved knocking! 'Open to me, my sister, my friend, My dove, my perfect one, For my head is filled [with] dew, My locks [with] drops of the night.'
I have put off my coat, how do I put it on? I have washed my feet, how do I defile them?
My beloved sent his hand from the net-work, And my bowels were moved for him.
I rose to open to my beloved, And my hands dropped myrrh, Yea, my fingers flowing myrrh, On the handles of the lock.
I opened to my beloved, But my beloved withdrew — he passed on, My soul went forth when he spake, I sought him, and found him not. I called him, and he answered me not.
The watchmen who go round about the city, Found me, smote me, wounded me, Keepers of the walls lifted up my veil from off me.
I have adjured you, daughters of Jerusalem, If ye find my beloved — What do ye tell him? that I [am] sick with love!
What [is] thy beloved above [any] beloved, O fair among women? What [is] thy beloved above [any] beloved, That thus thou hast adjured us?
My beloved [is] clear and ruddy, Conspicuous above a myriad!
His head [is] pure gold — fine gold, His locks flowing, dark as a raven,
His eyes as doves by streams of water, Washing in milk, sitting in fulness.
His cheeks as a bed of the spice, towers of perfumes, His lips [are] lilies, dropping flowing myrrh,
His hands rings of gold, set with beryl, His heart bright ivory, covered with sapphires,
His limbs pillars of marble, Founded on sockets of fine gold, His appearance as Lebanon, choice as the cedars.
His mouth is sweetness — and all of him desirable, This [is] my beloved, and this my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem!
Whither hath thy beloved gone, O fair among women? Whither hath thy beloved turned, And we seek him with thee?
My beloved went down to his garden, To the beds of the spice, To delight himself in the gardens, and to gather lilies.
I [am] my beloved's, and my beloved [is] mine, Who is delighting himself among the lilies.
Fair [art] thou, my friend, as Tirzah, Comely as Jerusalem, Awe-inspiring as bannered hosts.
Turn round thine eyes from before me, Because they have made me proud. Thy hair [is] as a row of the goats, That have shone from Gilead,
Thy teeth as a row of the lambs, That have come up from the washing, Because all of them are forming twins, And a bereaved one is not among them.
As the work of the pomegranate [is] thy temple behind thy veil.
Sixty are queens, and eighty concubines, And virgins without number.
One is my dove, my perfect one, One she [is] of her mother, The choice one she [is] of her that bare her, Daughters saw, and pronounce her happy, Queens and concubines, and they praise her.
'Who [is] this that is looking forth as morning, Fair as the moon — clear as the sun, Awe-inspiring as bannered hosts?'
Unto a garden of nuts I went down, To look on the buds of the valley, To see whither the vine had flourished, The pomegranates had blossomed —
I knew not my soul, It made me — chariots of my people Nadib.
Return, return, O Shulammith! Return, return, and we look upon thee. What do ye see in Shulammith?
As the chorus of 'Mahanaim.' How beautiful were thy feet with sandals, O daughter of Nadib. The turnings of thy sides [are] as ornaments, Work of the hands of an artificer.
Thy waist [is] a basin of roundness, It lacketh not the mixture, Thy body a heap of wheat, fenced with lilies,
Thy two breasts as two young ones, twins of a roe,
Thy neck as a tower of the ivory, Thine eyes pools in Heshbon, near the gate of Bath-Rabbim, Thy face as a tower of Lebanon looking to Damascus,
Thy head upon thee as Carmel, And the locks of thy head as purple, The king is bound with the flowings!
How fair and how pleasant hast thou been, O love, in delights.
This thy stature hath been like to a palm, And thy breasts to clusters.
I said, 'Let me go up on the palm, Let me lay hold on its boughs, Yea, let thy breasts be, I pray thee, as clusters of the vine, And the fragrance of thy face as citrons,
And thy palate as the good wine — 'Flowing to my beloved in uprightness, Strengthening the lips of the aged!
I [am] my beloved's, and on me [is] his desire.
Come, my beloved, we go forth to the field,
We lodge in the villages, we go early to the vineyards, We see if the vine hath flourished, The sweet smelling-flower hath opened. The pomegranates have blossomed, There do I give to thee my loves;
The mandrakes have given fragrance, And at our openings all pleasant things, New, yea, old, my beloved, I laid up for thee!
Who doth make thee as a brother to me, Sucking the breasts of my mother? I find thee without, I kiss thee, Yea, they do not despise me,
I lead thee, I bring thee in unto my mother's house, She doth teach me, I cause thee to drink of the perfumed wine, Of the juice of my pomegranate,
His left hand [is] under my head, And his right doth embrace me.
I have adjured you, daughters of Jerusalem, How ye stir up, And how ye wake the love till she please!
Who [is] this coming from the wilderness, Hasting herself for her beloved? Under the citron-tree I have waked thee, There did thy mother pledge thee, There she gave a pledge [that] bare thee.
Set me as a seal on thy heart, as a seal on thine arm, For strong as death is love, Sharp as Sheol is jealousy, Its burnings [are] burnings of fire, a flame of Jah!
Many waters are not able to quench the love, And floods do not wash it away. If one give all the wealth of his house for love, Treading down — they tread upon it.
We have a little sister, and breasts she hath not, What do we do for our sister, In the day that it is told of her?
If she is a wall, we build by her a palace of silver. And if she is a door, We fashion by her board-work of cedar.
I [am] a wall, and my breasts as towers, Then I have been in his eyes as one finding peace.
Solomon hath a vineyard in Baal-Hamon, He hath given the vineyard to keepers, Each bringeth for its fruit a thousand silverlings;
My vineyard — my own — is before me, The thousand [is] for thee, O Solomon. And the two hundred for those keeping its fruit. O dweller in gardens!
The companions are attending to thy voice, Cause me to hear. Flee, my beloved, and be like to a roe,
Or to a young one of the harts on mountains of spices!
The Visions of Isaiah son of Amoz, that he hath seen concerning Judah and Jerusalem, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah, kings of Judah.
Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth, For Jehovah hath spoken: Sons I have nourished and brought up, And they — they transgressed against Me.
An ox hath known its owner, And an ass the crib of its master, Israel hath not known, My people hath not understood.
Ah, sinning nation, a people heavy [with] iniquity, A seed of evil doers, sons — corrupters! They have forsaken Jehovah, They have despised the Holy One of Israel, They have gone away backward.
Wherefore are ye stricken any more? Ye do add apostasy! Every head is become diseased, and every heart [is] sick.
From the sole of the foot — unto the head, There is no soundness in it, Wound, and bruise, and fresh smiting! They have not been closed nor bound, Nor have they softened with ointment.
Your land [is] a desolation, your cities burnt with fire, Your ground, before you strangers are consuming it, And a desolation as overthrown by strangers!
And left hath been the daughter of Zion, As a booth in a vineyard, As a lodge in a place of cucumbers — as a city besieged.
Unless Jehovah of Hosts had left to us a remnant, Shortly — as Sodom we had been, To Gomorrah we had been like!
Hear the word of Jehovah, ye rulers of Sodom, Give ear to the law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah,
'Why to Me the abundance of your sacrifices? saith Jehovah, I have been satiated [with] burnt-offerings of rams, And fat of fatlings; And blood of bullocks, and lambs, And he-goats I have not desired.
When ye come in to appear before Me, Who hath required this of your hand, To trample My courts?
Add not to bring in a vain present, Incense — an abomination it [is] to Me, New moon, and sabbath, calling of convocation! Rendure not iniquity — and a restraint!
Your new moons and your set seasons hath My soul hated, They have been upon me for a burden, I have been weary of bearing.
And in your spreading forth your hands, I hide mine eyes from you, Also when ye increase prayer, I do not hear, Your hands of blood have been full.
Wash ye, make ye pure, Turn aside the evil of your doings, from before Mine eyes, Cease to do evil, learn to do good.
Seek judgment, make happy the oppressed, Judge the fatherless, strive [for] the widow.
Come, I pray you, and we reason, saith Jehovah, If your sins are as scarlet, as snow they shall be white, If they are red as crimson, as wool they shall be!
If ye are willing, and have hearkened, The good of the land ye consume,
And if ye refuse, and have rebelled, [By] the sword ye are consumed, For the mouth of Jehovah hath spoken.
How hath a faithful city become a harlot? I have filled it [with] judgment, Righteousness lodgeth in it — now murderers.
Thy silver hath become dross, Thy drink polluted with water.
Thy princes [are] apostates, and companions of thieves, Every one loving a bribe, and pursuing rewards, The fatherless they judge not, And the plea of the widow cometh not to them.
Therefore — the affirmation of the Lord — Jehovah of Hosts, the Mighty One of Israel: Ah, I am eased of Mine adversaries, And I am avenged of Mine enemies,
And I turn back My hand upon thee, And I refine as purity thy dross, And I turn aside all thy tin,
And I give back thy judges as at the first, And thy counsellors as in the beginning, After this thou art called, 'A city of righteousness — a faithful city.'
Zion in judgment is redeemed, And her captivity in righteousness.
And the destruction of transgressors and sinners [is] together, And those forsaking Jehovah are consumed.
For [men] are ashamed because of the oaks That ye have desired, And ye are confounded because of the gardens That ye have chosen.
For ye are as an oak whose leaf is fading, And as a garden that hath no water.
And the strong hath been for tow, And his work for a spark, And burned have both of them together, And there is none quenching!
The thing that Isaiah son of Amoz hath seen concerning Judah and Jerusalem:
And it hath come to pass, In the latter end of the days, Established is the mount of Jehovah's house, Above the top of the mounts, And it hath been lifted up above the heights, And flowed unto it have all the nations.
And gone have many peoples and said, 'Come, and we go up unto the mount of Jehovah, Unto the house of the God of Jacob, And He doth teach us of His ways, And we walk in His paths, For from Zion goeth forth a law, And a word of Jehovah from Jerusalem.
And He hath judged between the nations, And hath given a decision to many peoples, And they have beat their swords to ploughshares, And their spears to pruning-hooks, Nation doth not lift up sword unto nation, Nor do they learn any more — war.
O house of Jacob, come, And we walk in the light of Jehovah.'
For Thou hast left Thy people, the house of Jacob. For they have been filled from the east, And [are] sorcerers like the Philistines, And with the children of strangers strike hands.
And its land is full of silver and gold, And there is no end to its treasures, And its land is full of horses, And there is no end to its chariots,
And its land is full of idols, To the work of its hands it boweth itself, To that which its fingers have made,
And the low boweth down, and the high is humbled, And Thou acceptest them not.
Enter into a rock, and be hidden in dust, Because of the fear of Jehovah, And because of the honour of His excellency.
The haughty eyes of man have been humbled, And bowed down hath been the loftiness of men, And set on high hath Jehovah alone been in that day.
For a day [is] to Jehovah of Hosts, For every proud and high one, And for every lifted up and low one,
And for all cedars of Lebanon, The high and the exalted ones, And for all oaks of Bashan,
And for all the high mountains, And for all the exalted heights,
And for every high tower, And for every fenced wall,
And for all ships of Tarshish, And for all desirable pictures.
And bowed down hath been the haughtiness of man, And humbled the loftiness of men, And set on high hath Jehovah alone been in that day.
And the idols — they completely pass away.
And [men] have entered into caverns of rocks, And into caves of dust, Because of the fear of Jehovah, And because of the honour of His excellency, In His rising to terrify the earth.
In that day doth man cast his idols of silver, And his idols of gold, That they have made for him to worship, To moles, and to bats,
To enter into cavities of the rocks, And into clefts of the high places, Because of the fear of Jehovah, And because of the honour of His excellency, In His rising to terrify the earth.
Cease for you from man, Whose breath [is] in his nostrils, For — in what is he esteemed?
For, lo, the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts, Is turning aside from Jerusalem, And from Judah, stay and staff, Every stay of bread, and every stay of water.
Hero and man of war, judge and prophet, And diviner and elder,
Head of fifty, and accepted of faces, And counsellor, and the wise of artificers, And the intelligent of charmers.
And I have made youths their heads, And sucklings rule over them.
And the people hath exacted — man upon man, Even a man on his neighbour, Enlarge themselves do the youths against the aged, And the lightly esteemed against the honoured.
When one layeth hold on his brother, [Of] the house of his father, [by] the garment, 'Come, a ruler thou art to us, And this ruin [is] under thy hand.'
He lifteth up, in that day, saying: 'I am not a binder up, And in my house is neither bread nor garment, Ye do not make me a ruler of the people.'
For stumbled hath Jerusalem, and Judah hath fallen, For their tongue and their doings [are] against Jehovah, To provoke the eyes of His glory.
The appearance of their faces witnessed against them, And their sin, as Sodom, they declared, They have not hidden! Woe to their soul, For they have done to themselves evil.
Say ye to the righteous, that [it is] good, Because the fruit of their doings they eat.
Woe to the wicked — evil, Because the deed of his hand is done to him.
My people — its exactors [are] sucklings, And women have ruled over it. My people — thy eulogists are causing to err, And the way of thy paths swallowed up.
Jehovah hath stood up to plead, And He is standing to judge the peoples.
Jehovah into judgment doth enter With elders of His people, and its heads: 'And ye, ye have consumed the vineyard, Plunder of the poor [is] in your houses.
What — to you? ye bruise My people, And the faces of the poor ye grind.' An affirmation of the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts, And Jehovah saith:
'Because that daughters of Zion have been haughty, And they walk stretching out the neck, And deceiving [with] the eyes, Walking and mincing they go, And with their feet they make a tinkling,
The Lord also hath scabbed The crown of the head of daughters of Zion, And Jehovah their simplicity exposeth.
In that day doth the Lord turn aside The beauty of the tinkling ornaments, And of the embroidered works, And of the round tires like moons,
Of the drops, and the bracelets, and the mufflers,
Of the bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, And of the bands, And of the perfume boxes, and the amulets,
Of the seals, and of the nose-rings,
Of the costly apparel, and of the mantles, And of the coverings, and of the purses,
Of the mirrors, and of the linen garments, And of the hoods, and of the vails,
And it hath been, instead of spice is muck, And instead of a girdle, a rope, And instead of curled work, baldness, And instead of a stomacher a girdle of sackcloth.
For instead of glory, thy men by sword do fall, And thy might in battle.
And lamented and mourned have her openings, Yea, she hath been emptied, on the earth she sitteth!
And taken hold have seven women on one man, In that day, saying, 'Our own bread we do eat, And our own raiment we put on, Only, let thy name be called over us, Remove thou our reproach.'
In that day is the Shoot of Jehovah for desire and for honour, And the fruit of the earth For excellence and for beauty to the escaped of Israel.
And it hath been, he who is left in Zion, And he who is remaining in Jerusalem, 'Holy' is said of him, Of every one who is written for life in Jerusalem.
If the Lord hath washed away The filth of daughters of Zion, And the blood of Jerusalem purgeth from her midst, By the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning.
Then hath Jehovah prepared Over every fixed place of Mount Zion, And over her convocations, A cloud by day, and smoke, And the shining of a flaming fire by night, That, over all honour a safe-guard,
And a covering may be, For a shadow by day from drought, And for a refuge, and for a hiding place, From inundation and from rain!
Let me sing, I pray you, for my beloved, A song of my beloved as to his vineyard: My beloved hath a vineyard in a fruitful hill,
And he fenceth it, and casteth out its stones, And planteth it [with] a choice vine, And buildeth a tower in its midst, And also a wine press hath hewn out in it, And he waiteth for the yielding of grapes, And it yieldeth bad ones!
And now, O inhabitant of Jerusalem, and man of Judah, Judge, I pray you, between me and my vineyard.
What — to do still to my vineyard, That I have not done in it! Wherefore, I waited to the yielding of grapes, And it yieldeth bad ones!
And now, pray, let me cause you to know, That which I am doing to my vineyard, To turn aside its hedge, And it hath been for consumption, To break down its wall, And it hath been for a treading-place.
And I make it a waste, It is not pruned, nor arranged, And gone up have brier and thorn, And on the thick clouds I lay a charge, From raining upon it rain.
Because the vineyard of Jehovah of Hosts [Is] the house of Israel, And the man of Judah His pleasant plant, And He waiteth for judgment, and lo, oppression, For righteousness, and lo, a cry.
Woe [to] those joining house to house, Field to field they bring near, till there is no place, And ye have been settled by yourselves In the midst of the land!
By the weapons of Jehovah of Hosts Do not many houses a desolation become? Great and good without inhabitant!
For ten acres of vineyard do yield one bath, And an homer of seed yieldeth an ephah.
Woe [to] those rising early in the morning, Strong drink they pursue! Tarrying in twilight, wine inflameth them!
And harp, and psaltery, tabret, and pipe, And wine, have been their banquets, And the work of Jehovah they behold not, Yea, the work of His hands they have not seen.
Therefore my people removed without knowledge, And its honourable ones are famished, And its multitude dried up of thirst.
Therefore hath Sheol enlarged herself, And hath opened her mouth without limit. And gone down hath its honour, and its multitude, And its noise, and its exulting one — into her.
And bowed down is the low, and humbled the high, And the eyes of the haughty become low,
And Jehovah of Hosts is high in judgment, And the Holy God sanctified in righteousness,
And fed have lambs according to their leading, And waste places of the fat ones Do sojourners consume.
Woe [to] those drawing out iniquity with cords of vanity, And as [with] thick ropes of the cart — sin.
Who are saying, 'Let Him hurry, Let Him hasten His work, that we may see, And let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel Draw near and come, and we know.'
Woe [to] those saying to evil 'good,' And to good 'evil,' Putting darkness for light, and light for darkness, Putting bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter.
Woe [to] the wise in their own eyes, And — before their own faces — intelligent!
Woe [to] the mighty to drink wine, And men of strength to mingle strong drink.
Declaring righteous the wicked for a bribe, And the righteousness of the righteous They turn aside from him.
Therefore, as a tongue of fire devoureth stubble, And flaming hay falleth, Their root is as muck, And their flower as dust goeth up. Because they have rejected the law of Jehovah of Hosts, And the saying of the Holy One of Israel despised.
Therefore hath the anger of Jehovah burned among His people, And He stretcheth out His hand against it, And smiteth it, and the mountains tremble, And their carcase is as filth in the midst of the out-places. With all this His anger did not turn back, And still His hand is stretched out!
And He lifted up an ensign to nations afar off, And hissed to it from the end of the earth, And lo, with haste, swift it cometh.
There is none weary, nor stumbling in it, It doth not slumber, nor sleep, Nor opened hath been the girdle of its loins, Nor drawn away the latchet of its sandals.
Whose arrows [are] sharp, and all its bows bent, Hoofs of its horses as flint have been reckoned, And its wheels as a hurricane!
Its roaring [is] like a lioness, It roareth like young lions, And it howleth, and seizeth prey, And carrieth away safely, and there is none delivering.
And it howleth against it in that day as the howling of a sea, And it hath looked attentively to the land, And lo, darkness — distress, And light hath been darkened by its abundance!
In the year of the death of king Uzziah — I see the Lord, sitting on a throne, high and lifted up, and His train is filling the temple.
Seraphs are standing above it: six wings hath each one; with two [each] covereth its face, and with two [each] covereth its feet, and with two [each] flieth.
And this one hath called unto that, and hath said: 'Holy, Holy, Holy, [is] Jehovah of Hosts, The fulness of all the earth [is] His glory.'
And the posts of the thresholds are moved by the voice of him who is calling, and the house is full of smoke.
And I say, 'Woe to me, for I have been silent, For a man — unclean of lips [am] I, And in midst of a people unclean of lips I am dwelling, Because the King, Jehovah of Hosts, have my eyes seen.'
And flee unto me doth one of the seraphs, and in his hand a burning coal, (with tongs he hath taken [it] from off the altar,)
and he striketh against my mouth, and saith: 'Lo, this hath stricken against thy lips, And turned aside is thine iniquity, And thy sin is covered.'
And I hear the voice of the Lord, saying: 'Whom do I send? and who doth go for Us?' And I say, 'Here [am] I, send me.'
And He saith, 'Go, and thou hast said to this people, Hear ye — to hear, and ye do not understand, And see ye — to see, and ye do not know.
Declare fat the heart of this people, And its ears declare heavy, And its eyes declare dazzled, Lest it see with its eyes, And with its ears hear, and its heart consider, And it hath turned back, and hath health.'
And I say, 'Till when, O Lord?' And He saith, 'Surely till cities have been wasted without inhabitant, And houses without man, And the ground be wasted — a desolation,
And Jehovah hath put man far off, And great [is] the forsaken part in the heart of the land.
And yet in it a tenth, and it hath turned, And hath been for a burning, As a teil-tree, and as an oak, that in falling, Have substance in them, The holy seed [is] its substance!'
And it cometh to pass in the days of Ahaz, son of Jotham, son of Uzziah, king of Judah, gone up hath Rezin king of Aram, and Pekah, son of Remaliah, king of Israel, to Jerusalem, to battle against it, and he is not able to fight against it.
And it is declared to the house of David, saying, 'Aram hath been led towards Ephraim,' And his heart and the heart of his people is moved, like the moving of trees of a forest by the presence of wind.
And Jehovah saith unto Isaiah, 'Go forth, I pray thee, to meet Ahaz, thou, and Shear-Jashub thy son, unto the end of the conduit of the upper pool, unto the highway of the fuller's field,
and thou hast said unto him: 'Take heed, and be quiet, fear not, And let not thy heart be timid, Because of these two tails of smoking brands, For the fierceness of the anger of Rezin and Aram, And the son of Remaliah.
Because that Aram counselled against thee evil, Ephraim and the son of Remaliah, saying:
We go up into Judah, and we vex it, And we rend it unto ourselves, And we cause a king to reign in its midst — The son of Tabeal.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: It doth not stand, nor shall it be!
For the head of Aram [is] Damascus, And the head of Damascus [is] Rezin, And within sixty and five years Is Ephraim broken from [being] a people.
And the head of Ephraim [is] Samaria, And the head of Samaria [is] the son of Remaliah. If ye do not give credence, Surely ye are not stedfast.'
And Jehovah addeth to speak unto Ahaz, saying:
'Ask for thee a sign from Jehovah thy God, Make deep the request, or make [it] high upwards.'
And Ahaz saith, 'I do not ask nor try Jehovah.'
And he saith, 'Hear, I pray you, O house of David, Is it a little thing for you to weary men, That ye weary also my God?
Therefore the Lord Himself giveth to you a sign, Lo, the Virgin is conceiving, And is bringing forth a son, And hath called his name Immanuel,
Butter and honey he doth eat, When he knoweth to refuse evil, and to fix on good.
For before the youth doth know To refuse evil, and to fix on good, Forsaken is the land thou art vexed with, because of her two kings.
Jehovah bringeth on thee, and on thy people, And on the house of thy father, Days that have not come, Even from the day of the turning aside of Ephraim from Judah, By the king of Asshur.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, Jehovah doth hiss for a fly that [is] in the extremity of the brooks of Egypt, And for a bee that [is] in the land of Asshur.
And they have come, and rested all of them in the desolate valleys, And in holes of the rocks, and on all the thorns, And on all the commendable things.
In that day doth the Lord shave, By a razor that is hired beyond the river, By the king of Asshur, The head, and the hair of the feet, Yea, also the beard it consumeth.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, A man keepeth alive a heifer of the herd, And two of the flock,
And it hath come to pass, From the abundance of the yielding of milk he eateth butter, For butter and honey doth every one eat Who is left in the heart of the land.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, Every place where there are a thousand vines, At a thousand silverlings, Is for briers and for thorns.
With arrows and with bow he cometh thither, Because all the land is brier and thorn.
And all the hills that with a mattock are kept in order, Thither cometh not the fear of brier and thorn, And it hath been for the sending forth of ox, And for the treading of sheep!'
And Jehovah saith unto me, 'Take to thee a great tablet, and write upon it with a graving tool of man, To haste spoil, enjoy prey.'
And I cause faithful witnesses to testify to me, Uriah the priest, and Zechariah son of Jeberechiah.
And I draw near unto the prophetess, and she conceiveth, and beareth a son; and Jehovah saith unto me, 'Call his name Maher-shalal-hash-baz,
for before the youth doth know to cry, My father, and My mother, one taketh away the wealth of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria, before the king of Asshur.'
And Jehovah addeth to speak unto me again, saying:
'Because that this people hath refused The waters of Shiloah that go softly, And is rejoicing with Rezin and the son of Remaliah,
Therefore, lo, the Lord is bringing up on them, The waters of the river, the mighty and the great, (The king of Asshur, and all his glory,) And it hath gone up over all its streams, And hath gone on over all its banks.
And it hath passed on into Judah, It hath overflown and passed over, Unto the neck it cometh, And the stretching out of its wings Hath been the fulness of the breadth of thy land, O Emmanu-El!
Be friends, O nations, and be broken, And give ear, all ye far off ones of earth, Gird yourselves, and be broken, Gird yourselves, and be broken.
Take counsel, and it is broken, Speak a word, and it doth not stand, Because of Emmanu-El!'
For thus hath Jehovah spoken unto me with strength of hand, and instructeth me against walking in the way of this people, saying,
'Ye do not say, A confederacy, To all to whom this people saith, A confederacy, And its fear ye do not fear, Nor declare fearful.
Jehovah of Hosts — Him ye do sanctify, And He [is] your Fear, and He your Dread,
And He hath been for a sanctuary, And for a stone of stumbling, and for a rock of falling, To the two houses of Israel, For a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
And many among them have stumbled and fallen, And been broken, and snared, and captured.
Bind up the testimony, Seal the law among My disciples.
And I have waited for Jehovah, Who is hiding His face from the house of Jacob, And I have looked for Him.
Lo, I, and the children whom Jehovah hath given to me, [Are] for signs and for wonders in Israel, From Jehovah of Hosts, who is dwelling in Mount Zion.
And when they say unto you, 'Seek unto those having familiar spirits, And unto wizards, who chatter and mutter, Doth not a people seek unto its God? — For the living unto the dead!
To the law and to the testimony! If not, let them say after this manner, 'That there is no dawn to it.'
— And it hath passed over into it, hardened and hungry, And it hath come to pass, That it is hungry, and hath been wroth, And made light of its king, and of its God, And hath looked upwards.
And unto the land it looketh attentively, And lo, adversity and darkness! — Dimness, distress, and thick darkness is driven away, But not the dimness for which she is in distress!
As the former time made light The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, So the latter hath honoured the way of the sea, Beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the nations.
The people who are walking in darkness Have seen a great light, Dwellers in a land of death-shade, Light hath shone upon them.
Thou hast multiplied the nation, Thou hast made great its joy, They have joyed before Thee as the joy in harvest, As [men] rejoice in their apportioning spoil.
Because the yoke of its burden, And the staff of its shoulder, the rod of its exactor, Thou hast broken as [in] the day of Midian.
For every battle of a warrior [is] with rushing, and raiment rolled in blood, And it hath been for burning — fuel of fire.
For a Child hath been born to us, A Son hath been given to us, And the princely power is on his shoulder, And He doth call his name Wonderful, Counsellor, Mighty God, Father of Eternity, Prince of Peace.
To the increase of the princely power, And of peace, there is no end, On the throne of David, and on his kingdom, To establish it, and to support it, In judgment and in righteousness, Henceforth, even unto the age, The zeal of Jehovah of Hosts doth this.
A word hath the Lord sent into Jacob, And it hath fallen in Israel.
And the people have known — all of it, Ephraim, and the inhabitant of Samaria, In pride and in greatness of heart, saying,
'Bricks have fallen, and hewn work we build, Sycamores have been cut down, and cedars we renew.'
And Jehovah setteth the adversaries of Rezin on high above him, And his enemies he joineth together,
Aram from before, and Philistia from behind, And they devour Israel with the whole mouth. With all this not turned back hath His anger, And still His hand is stretched out.
And the people hath not turned back unto Him who is smiting it, And Jehovah of Hosts they have not sought.
And Jehovah cutteth off from Israel head and tail, Branch and reed — the same day,
Elder, and accepted of face, he [is] the head, Prophet, teacher of falsehood, he [is] the tail.
And the eulogists of this people are causing to err, And its eulogised ones are consumed.
Therefore, over its young men the Lord rejoiceth not, And its orphans, and its widows He pitieth not, For every one [is] profane, and an evil doer, And every mouth is speaking folly. With all this not turned back hath His anger, And still His hand is stretched out.
For burned as a fire hath wickedness, Brier and thorn it devoureth, And it kindleth in thickets of the forest, And they lift themselves up, an exaltation of smoke!
In the wrath of Jehovah of Hosts Hath the land been consumed, And the people is as fuel of fire; A man on his brother hath no pity,
And cutteth down on the right, and hath been hungry, And he devoureth on the left, And they have not been satisfied, Each the flesh of his own arm they devour.
Manasseh — Ephraim, and Ephraim — Manasseh, Together they [are] against Judah, With all this not turned back hath His anger. And still His hand is stretched out!
Woe [to] those decreeing decrees of iniquity, And writers who have prescribed perverseness.
To turn aside from judgment the poor, And to take violently away the judgment Of the afflicted of My people, That widows may be their prey, That the fatherless they may spoil.
And what do ye at a day of inspection? And at desolation? — from afar it cometh. Near whom do ye flee for help? And where do ye leave your honour?
Without Me it hath bowed down In the place of a bound one, And in the place of the slain they fall. With all this not turned back hath His anger, And still His hand is stretched out.
Woe [to] Asshur, a rod of Mine anger, And a staff in their hand [is] Mine indignation.
Against a profane nation I send him, And concerning a people of My wrath I charge him, To spoil spoil, and to seize prey, And to make it a treading-place as the clay of out places.
And he — he thinketh not so, And his heart reckoneth not so, For — to destroy [is] in his heart, And to cut off nations not a few.
For he saith, 'Are not my princes altogether kings?
Is not Calno as Carchemish? Is not Hamath as Arpad? Is not Samaria as Damascus?
As my hand hath got to the kingdoms of a worthless thing, and their graven images, [Greater] than Jerusalem and than Samaria,
Do I not — as I have done to Samaria, And to her worthless things, So do to Jerusalem and to her grievous things?
And it hath come to pass, When the Lord doth fulfil all His work In mount Zion and in Jerusalem, I see concerning the fruit of the greatness Of the heart of the king of Asshur. And concerning the glory of the height of his eyes.
For he hath said, 'By the power of my hand I have wrought, And by my wisdom, for I have been intelligent, And I remove borders of the peoples, And their chief ones I have spoiled, And I put down as a mighty one the inhabitants,
And my hand as to a nest Getteth to the wealth of the peoples, And as a gathering of forsaken eggs All the earth I — I have gathered, And there hath not been one moving wing, Or opening mouth, or whispering.'
— Doth the axe glorify itself Against him who is hewing with it? Doth the saw magnify itself Against him who is shaking it? As a rod waving those lifting it up! As a staff lifting up that which is not wood!
Therefore doth the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, Send among his fat ones leanness, And under his honour He kindleth a burning As the burning of a fire.
And the light of Israel hath been for a fire, And his Holy One for a flame, And it hath burned, and devoured his thorn And his brier in one day.
And the honour of his forest, and his fruitful field, From soul even unto flesh He doth consume, And it hath been as the fainting of a standard-bearer.
And the rest of the trees of his forest [are] few, And a youth doth write them.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, The remnant of Israel, And the escaped of the house of Jacob, Do not add any more to lean on its smiter, And have leant on Jehovah, The Holy One of Israel, in truth.
A remnant returneth — a remnant of Jacob, Unto the Mighty God.
For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea, A remnant doth return of it, A consumption determined, Overflowing [with] righteousness.
For a consumption that is determined, The Lord, Jehovah of Hosts, Is making in the midst of all the land.
Therefore, thus said the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts, 'Be not afraid, my people, inhabiting Zion, because of Asshur, With a rod he doth smite thee, And his staff lifteth up against thee, in the way of Egypt.
For yet a very little, And the indignation hath been completed, And Mine anger by their wearing out.
And awaking for him is Jehovah of Hosts, A scourge like the smiting of Midian at the rock Oreb, And his rod [is] over the sea, And he hath lifted it in the way of Egypt.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, Turned is his burden from off thy shoulder, And his yoke from off thy neck, And destroyed hath been the yoke, because of prosperity.
He hath come in against Aiath, He hath passed over into Migron, At Michmash he looketh after his vessels.
They have gone over the passage, Geba they have made a lodging place, Trembled hath Rama, Gibeah of Saul fled.
Cry aloud [with] thy voice, daughter of Gallim, Give attention, Laish! answer her, Anathoth.
Fled away hath Madmenah, The inhabitants of the high places have hardened themselves.
Yet to-day in Nob to remain, Wave its hand doth the mount of the daughter of Zion, The hill of Jerusalem.
Lo, the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts, Is lopping a branch with violence, And the high of stature are cut down, And the lofty are become low,
And He hath gone round the thickets of the forest with iron, And Lebanon by a mighty one falleth!
And a rod hath come out from the stock of Jesse, And a branch from his roots is fruitful.
Rested on him hath the Spirit of Jehovah, The spirit of wisdom and understanding, The spirit of counsel and might, The spirit of knowledge and fear of Jehovah.
To refresh him in the fear of Jehovah, And by the sight of his eyes he judgeth not, Nor by the hearing of his ears decideth.
And he hath judged in righteousness the poor, And decided in uprightness for the humble of earth, And hath smitten earth with the rod of his mouth, And with the breath of his lips he putteth the wicked to death.
And righteousness hath been the girdle of his loins, And faithfulness — the girdle of his reins.
And a wolf hath sojourned with a lamb, And a leopard with a kid doth lie down, And calf, and young lion, and fatling [are] together, And a little youth is leader over them.
And cow and bear do feed, Together lie down their young ones, And a lion as an ox eateth straw.
And played hath a suckling by the hole of an asp, And on the den of a cockatrice Hath the weaned one put his hand.
Evil they do not, nor destroy in all My holy mountain, For full hath been the earth with the knowledge of Jehovah, As the waters are covering the sea.
And there hath been, in that day, A root of Jesse that is standing for an ensign of peoples, Unto him do nations seek, And his rest hath been — honour!
And it hath come to pass, in that day, The Lord addeth a second time his power, To get the remnant of His people that is left, From Asshur, and from Egypt, And from Pathros, and from Cush, And from Elam, and from Shinar, And from Hamath, and from isles of the sea,
And He hath lifted up an ensign to nations, And gathereth the driven away of Israel, And the scattered of Judah He assembleth, From the four wings of the earth.
And turned aside hath the envy of Ephraim, And the adversaries of Judah are cut off, Ephraim doth not envy Judah, And Judah doth not distress Ephraim.
And they have flown on the shoulder of the Philistines westward, Together they spoil the sons of the east, Edom and Moab sending forth their hand, And sons of Ammon obeying them.
And Jehovah hath devoted to destruction The tongue of the sea of Egypt, And hath waved His hand over the river, In the terror of his wind, And hath smitten it at the seven streams, And hath caused [men] to tread [it] with shoes.
And there hath been a highway, For the remnant of His people that is left, from Asshur, As there was for Israel in the day of his coming up out of the land of Egypt!
And thou hast said in that day: 'I thank thee, O Jehovah, Though Thou hast been angry with me, Turn back doth Thine anger, And Thou dost comfort me.
Lo, God [is] my salvation, I trust, and fear not, For my strength and song [is] Jah Jehovah, And He is to me for salvation.
And ye have drawn waters with joy Out of the fountains of salvation,
And ye have said in that day, Give ye praise to Jehovah, call in His name. Make known among the peoples His acts. Make mention that set on high is His name.
Praise ye Jehovah, for excellence He hath done, Known is this in all the earth.
Cry aloud, and sing, O inhabitant of Zion, For great in thy midst [is] the Holy One of Israel!'
The burden of Babylon that Isaiah son of Amoz hath seen:
'On a high mountain lift ye up an ensign, Raise the voice to them, wave the hand, And they go in to the openings of nobles.
I have given charge to My sanctified ones, Also I have called My mighty ones for Mine anger, Those rejoicing at Mine excellency.'
A voice of a multitude in the mountains, A likeness of a numerous people, A voice of noise from the kingdoms of nations who are gathered, Jehovah of Hosts inspecting a host of battle!
They are coming in from a land afar off, From the end of the heavens, Jehovah and the instruments of His indignation, To destroy all the land.
Howl ye, for near [is] the day of Jehovah, As destruction from the Mighty it cometh.
Therefore, all hands do fail, And every heart of man doth melt.
And they have been troubled, Pains and pangs they take, As a travailing woman they are pained, A man at his friend they marvel, The appearance of flames — their faces!
Lo, the day of Jehovah doth come, Fierce, with wrath, and heat of anger, To make the land become a desolation, Yea, its sinning ones He destroyeth from it.
For the stars of the heavens, and their constellations, Cause not their light to shine, Darkened hath been the sun in its going out, And the moon causeth not its light to come forth.
And I have appointed on the world evil, And on the wicked their iniquity, And have caused to cease the excellency of the proud, And the excellency of the terrible I make low.
I make man more rare than fine gold, And a common man than pure gold of Ophir.
Therefore the heavens I cause to tremble, And the earth doth shake from its place, In the wrath of Jehovah of Hosts, And in a day of the heat of his anger.
And it hath been, as a roe driven away, And as a flock that hath no gatherer, Each unto his people — they turn, And each unto his land — they flee.
Every one who is found is thrust through, And every one who is added falleth by sword.
And their sucklings are dashed to pieces before their eyes, Spoiled are their houses, and their wives lain with.
Lo, I am stirring up against them the Medes, Who silver esteem not, And gold — they delight not in it.
And bows dash young men to pieces, And the fruit of the womb they pity not, On sons their eye hath no pity.
And Babylon, the beauty of kingdoms, The glory, the excellency of the Chaldeans, Hath been as overthrown by God, With Sodom and with Gomorrah.
She doth not sit for ever, Nor continueth unto many generations, Nor doth Arab pitch tent there, And shepherds lie not down there.
And Ziim have lain down there, And full have been their houses of howlings, And dwelt there have daughters of an ostrich, And goats do skip there.
And Aiim have responded in his forsaken habitations, And dragons in palaces of delight, And near to come [is] her time, And her days are not drawn out!
Because Jehovah loveth Jacob, And hath fixed again on Israel, And given them rest on their own land, And joined hath been the sojourner to them, And they have been admitted to the house of Jacob.
And peoples have taken them, And have brought them in unto their place, And the house of Israel have inherited them, On the land of Jehovah, For men-servants and for maid-servants, And they have been captors of their captors, And have ruled over their exactors.
And it hath come to pass, In the day of Jehovah's giving rest to thee, From thy grief, and from thy trouble, And from the sharp bondage, That hath been served upon thee,
That thou hast taken up this simile Concerning the king of Babylon, and said, How hath the exactor ceased,
Ceased hath the golden one. Broken hath Jehovah the staff of the wicked, The sceptre of rulers.
He who is smiting peoples in wrath, A smiting without intermission, He who is ruling in anger nations, Pursuing without restraint!
At rest — quiet hath been all the earth, They have broken forth [into] singing.
Even firs have rejoiced over thee, Cedars of Lebanon — [saying]: Since thou hast lain down, The hewer cometh not up against us.
Sheol beneath hath been troubled at thee, To meet thy coming in, It is waking up for thee Rephaim, All chiefs ones of earth, It hath raised up from their thrones All kings of nations.
All of them answer and say unto thee, Even thou hast become weak like us! Unto us thou hast become like!
Brought down to Sheol hath been thine excellency, The noise of thy psaltery, Under thee spread out hath been the worm, Yea, covering thee is the worm.
How hast thou fallen from the heavens, O shining one, son of the dawn! Thou hast been cut down to earth, O weakener of nations.
And thou saidst in thy heart: the heavens I go up, Above stars of God I raise my throne, And I sit in the mount of meeting in the sides of the north.
I go up above the heights of a thick cloud, I am like to the Most High.
Only — unto Sheol thou art brought down, Unto the sides of the pit.
Thy beholders look to thee, to thee they attend, Is this the man causing the earth to tremble, Shaking kingdoms?
He hath made the world as a wilderness, And his cities he hath broken down, Of his bound ones he opened not the house.
All kings of nations — all of them, Have lain down in honour, each in his house,
And — thou hast been cast out of thy grave, As an abominable branch, raiment of the slain, Thrust through ones of the sword, Going down unto the sons of the pit, As a carcase trodden down.
Thou art not united with them in burial, For thy land thou hast destroyed, Thy people thou hast slain, Not named to the age is the seed of evil doers.
Prepare ye for his sons slaughter; Because of the iniquity of their fathers, They rise not, nor have possessed the land, Nor filled the face of the world [with] cities.
And I have risen up against them, (The affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts,) And have cut off, in reference to Babylon, Name and remnant, and continuator and successor, The affirmation of Jehovah.
And have made it for a possession of a bittern, And ponds of waters, And daubed it with the mire of destruction, The affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts!
Sworn hath Jehovah of Hosts, saying, 'As I thought — so hath it not been? And as I counselled — it standeth;
To break Asshur in My land, And on My mountains I tread him down, And turned from off them hath his yoke, Yea, his burden from off their shoulder turneth aside.
This [is] the counsel that is counselled for all the earth, And this [is] the hand that is stretched out for all the nations.
For Jehovah of Hosts hath purposed, And who doth make void? And His hand that is stretched out, Who doth turn it back?'
In the year of the death of king Ahaz was this burden:
Rejoice not thou, Philistia, all of thee, That broken hath been the rod of thy smiter, For from the root of a serpent cometh out a viper, And its fruit [is] a flying saraph.
And delighted have the first-born of the poor, And the needy in confidence lie down, And I have put to death with famine thy root, And thy remnant it slayeth.
Howl, O gate; cry, O city, Melted art thou, Philistia, all of thee, For from the north smoke hath come, And there is none alone in his set places.
And what doth one answer the messengers of a nation? 'That Jehovah hath founded Zion, And in it do the poor of His people trust!'
The burden of Moab. Because in a night destroyed was Ar of Moab — It hath been cut off, Because in a night destroyed was Kir of Moab — It hath been cut off.
He hath gone up to Bajith and Dibon, The high places — to weep, On Nebo and on Medeba Moab howleth, On all its heads [is] baldness, every beard cut off.
In its out-places they girded on sackcloth, On its pinnacles, and in its broad places, Every one howleth — going down with weeping.
And cry doth Heshbon and Elealeh, Unto Jahaz heard hath been their voice, Therefore the armed ones of Moab do shout, His life hath been grievous to him.
My heart [is] toward Moab, Cry do her fugitives unto Zoar, a heifer of the third [year], For — the ascent of Luhith — With weeping he goeth up in it, For, in the way of Horonaim, A cry of destruction they wake up.
For, the waters of Nimrim are desolations, For, withered hath been the hay, Finished hath been the tender grass, A green thing there hath not been.
Therefore the abundance he made, and their store, Unto the brook of the willows they carry.
For gone round hath the cry the border of Moab, Unto Eglaim [is] its howling, And to Beer-Elim [is] its howling.
For the waters of Dimon have been full of blood, For I set on Dimon additions, For the escaped of Moab a lion, And for the remnant of Adamah!
Send ye a lamb [to] the ruler of the land, From Selah in the wilderness, Unto the mount of the daughter of Zion.
And it hath come to pass, As a wandering bird, a nest cast out, Are daughters of Moab, [at] fords of Arnon.
Bring ye in counsel, do judgment, Make as night thy shadow in the midst of noon, Hide outcasts, the wanderer reveal not.
Sojourn in thee do My outcasts, O Moab, Be a secret hiding-place to them, From the face of a destroyer, For ceased hath the extortioner, Finished hath been a destroyer, Consumed the treaders down out of the land.
And established in kindness is the throne, And [one] hath sat on it in truth, in the tent of David, Judging and seeking judgment, and hasting righteousness.
We have heard of the pride of Moab — very proud, His pride, and his arrogance, and his wrath, Not right [are] his devices.
Therefore howl doth Moab for Moab, all of it doth howl, For the grape-cakes of Kir-Hareseth it meditateth, Surely they are smitten.
Because fields of Heshbon languish, The vine of Sibmah, Lords of nations did beat her choice vines, Unto Jazer they have come, They have wandered in a wilderness, Her plants have spread themselves, They have passed over a sea.
Therefore I weep with the weeping of Jazer, The vine of Sibmah, I water thee [with] my tear, O Heshbon and Elealeh, For — for thy summer fruits, and for thy harvest, The shouting hath fallen.
And removed have been gladness and joy from the fruitful field, And in vineyards they sing not, nor shout, Wine in the presses treadeth not the treader, Shouting I have caused to cease.
Therefore my bowels for Moab as a harp do sound, And mine inward parts for Kir-Haresh.
And it hath come to pass, when it hath been seen, That weary hath been Moab on the high place, And he hath come unto his sanctuary to pray, And is not able.
This [is] the word that Jehovah hath spoken unto Moab from that time,
And now hath Jehovah spoken, saying, 'In three years, as years of an hireling, Lightly esteemed is the honour of Moab, With all the great multitude, And the remnant [is] little, small, not mighty!'
The burden of Damascus. Lo, Damascus is taken away from [being] a city, And it hath been a heap — a ruin.
Forsaken are the cities of Aroer, For droves they are, and they have lain down, And there is none troubling.
And ceased hath the fortress from Ephraim, And the kingdom from Damascus, And the remnant of Aram are as the honour of the sons of Israel, The affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts!
And it hath come to pass, in that day, Wax poor doth the honour of Jacob, And the fatness of his flesh doth wax lean.
And it hath come to pass, As the gathering by the reaper of the standing corn, And his arm the ears reapeth, And it hath come to pass, As the gathering of the ears in the valley of Rephaim,
And left in him have been gleanings, As the compassing of an olive, Two — three berries on the top of a branch, Four — five on the fruitful boughs, The affirmation of Jehovah, God of Israel!
In that day doth man look to His Maker, Yea, his eyes to the Holy One of Israel look,
And he looketh not unto the altars. The work of his own hands, And that which his own fingers made He seeth not — the shrines and the images.
In that day are the cities of his strength As the forsaken thing of the forest, And the branch that they have left, Because of the sons of Israel, It also hath been a desolation.
Because thou hast forgotten the God of thy salvation, And the rock of thy strength hast not remembered, Therefore thou plantest plants of pleasantness, And with a strange slip sowest it,
In the day thy plant thou causest to become great, And in the morning thy seed makest to flourish, A heap [is] the harvest in a day of overflowing, And of mortal pain.
Woe [to] the multitude of many peoples, As the sounding of seas they sound; And [to] the wasting of nations, As the wasting of mighty waters they are wasted.
Nations as the wasting of many waters are wasted, And He hath pushed against it, And it hath fled afar off, And been pursued as chaff of hills before wind, And as a rolling thing before a hurricane.
At even-time, lo, terror, before morning it is not, This [is] the portion of our spoilers, And the lot of our plunderers!
Ho, land shadowed [with] wings, That [is] beyond the rivers of Cush,
That is sending by sea ambassadors, Even with implements of reed on the face of the waters, — Go, ye light messengers, Unto a nation drawn out and peeled, Unto a people fearful from its beginning and onwards, A nation meeting out by line, and treading down, Whose land floods have spoiled.
All ye inhabitants of the world, And ye dwellers of earth, At the lifting up of an ensign on hills ye look, And at the blowing of a trumpet ye hear.
For thus said Jehovah unto me, 'I rest, and I look on My settled place, As a clear heat on an herb. As a thick cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.
For before harvest, when the flower is perfect, And the blossom is producing unripe fruit, Then hath [one] cut the sprigs with pruning hooks, And the branches he hath turned aside, cut down.
They are left together to the ravenous fowl of the mountains, And to the beast of the earth, And summered on them hath the ravenous fowl, And every beast of the earth wintereth on them.
At that time brought is a present to Jehovah of Hosts, A nation drawn out and peeled. Even of a people fearful from the beginning hitherto, A nation meting out by line, and treading down, Whose land floods have spoiled, Unto the place of the name of Jehovah of Hosts — mount Zion!'
The burden of Egypt. Lo, Jehovah is riding on a swift thick cloud, And He hath entered Egypt, And moved have been the idols of Egypt at His presence, And the heart of Egypt melteth in its midst.
And I armed Egyptians against Egyptians, And they fought, each against his brother, And each against his neighbour, City against city, kingdom against kingdom.
And emptied out hath been in its midst the spirit of Egypt. And its counsel I swallow up, And they have sought unto the idols, And unto the charmers, And unto those having familiar spirits, And unto the wizards.
And I have delivered the Egyptians Into the hand of a hard lord, And a strong king doth rule over them, An affirmation of the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts.
And failed have waters from the sea, And a river is wasted and dried up.
And they have turned away the flowings, Weak and dried up have been brooks of the bulwark, Reed and flag have withered.
Exposed things by the brook, by the edge of the brook, And every sown thing of the brook, hath withered, It hath been driven away, and is not.
And lamented have the fishers, And mourned have all casting angle into a brook, And those spreading nets on the face of the waters have languished.
And ashamed have been makers of fine flax, And weavers of net-works.
And its foundations have been smitten, All making wages [are] afflicted in soul.
Only, fools [are] the princes of Zoan, The counsel of the wise ones of the counsellors of Pharaoh hath become brutish. How say ye unto Pharaoh, 'A son of the wise am I, a son of kings of antiquity?'
Where [are] they now, thy wise ones? Yea, let them tell to thee, I pray thee, And they know what Jehovah of Hosts hath counselled against Egypt!
Foolish have been princes of Zoan, Lifted up have been princes of Noph, And they have caused Egypt to err, The chief of her tribes.
Jehovah hath mingled in her midst A spirit of perverseness, And they have caused Egypt to err in all its work, As a drunkard erreth in his vomit.
And there is no work to Egypt, That head or tail, branch or reed, may do.
In that day is Egypt like women, And it hath mourned, and been afraid, Because of the waving of the hand of Jehovah of Hosts, That He is waving over it.
And the land of Judah hath been to Egypt for a cause of staggering, Every one who doth mention it, for himself feareth, Because of the counsel of Jehovah of Hosts, That He is counselling against it.
In that day there are five cities in the land of Egypt, Speaking the lip of Canaan, And swearing to Jehovah of Hosts, 'The city of destruction,' is said of one.
In that day there is an altar to Jehovah In the midst of the land of Egypt, And a standing pillar near its border to Jehovah,
And it hath been for a sign and for a testimony, To Jehovah of Hosts in the land of Egypt, For they cry unto Jehovah from the face of oppressors, And He sendeth to them a saviour, Even a great one, and hath delivered them.
And known hath been Jehovah to Egypt, And the Egyptians have known Jehovah in that day, And done sacrifice and present, And vowed a vow to Jehovah, and completed [it].
And Jehovah hath smitten Egypt, smiting and healing, And they have turned back unto Jehovah, And He hath been entreated of them, And hath healed them.
In that day is a highway out of Egypt to Asshur, And come in have the Assyrians to Egypt, And the Egyptians into Asshur, And the Egyptians have served with the Assyrians.
In that day is Israel third, After Egypt, and after Asshur, A blessing in the heart of the earth.
In that Jehovah of Hosts did bless it, saying, 'Blessed [is] My people — Egypt, And the work of My hands — Asshur, And Mine inheritance — Israel!'
In the year of the coming in of Tartan to Ashdod, when Sargon king of Asshur sendeth him, and he fighteth against Ashdod, and captureth it,
at that time spake Jehovah by the hand of Isaiah son of Amoz, saying, 'Go, and thou hast loosed the sackcloth from off thy loins, and thy sandal thou dost draw from off thy foot,' and he doth so, going naked and barefoot.
And Jehovah saith, 'As My servant Isaiah hath gone naked and barefoot three years, a sign and a wonder for Egypt and for Cush,
so doth the king of Asshur lead the captivity of Egypt, and the removal of Cush, young and old, naked and barefoot, with seat uncovered — the nakedness of Egypt;
and they have been affrighted and ashamed of Cush their confidence, and of Egypt their beauty,
and the inhabitant of this isle hath said in that day — Lo, thus [is] our trust, Whither we have fled for help, To be delivered from the king of Asshur, And how do we escape — we?'
The burden of the wilderness of the sea. 'Like hurricanes in the south for passing through, From the wilderness it hath come, From a fearful land.
A hard vision hath been declared to me, The treacherous dealer is dealing treacherously, And the destroyer is destroying. Go up, O Elam, besiege, O Media, All its sighing I have caused to cease.
Therefore filled have been my loins [with] great pain, Pangs have seized me as pangs of a travailing woman, I have been bent down by hearing, I have been troubled by seeing.
Wandered hath my heart, trembling hath terrified me, The twilight of my desire He hath made a fear to me,
Arrange the table, watch in the watch-tower, Eat, drink, rise, ye heads, anoint the shield,
For thus said the Lord unto me: 'Go, station the watchman, That which he seeth let him declare.'
And he hath seen a chariot — a couple of horsemen, The rider of an ass, the rider of a camel, And he hath given attention — He hath increased attention!
And he crieth — a lion, 'On a watch-tower my lord, I am standing continually by day, And on my ward I am stationed whole nights.
And lo, this, the chariot of a man is coming, A couple of horsemen.' And he answereth and saith: 'Fallen, fallen hath Babylon, And all the graven images of her gods He hath broken to the earth.
O my threshing, and the son of my floor, That which I heard from Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, I have declared to you!'
The burden of Dumah. Unto me is [one] calling from Seir 'Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night?'
The watchman hath said, 'Come hath morning, and also night, If ye inquire, inquire ye, turn back, come.'
The burden on Arabia. In a forest in Arabia ye lodge, O travellers of Dedanim.
To meet the thirsty brought water have Inhabitants of the land of Tema, With his bread they came before a fugitive.
For from the face of destructions they fled, From the face of a stretched-out sword, And from the face of a trodden bow, And from the face of the grievousness of battle.
For thus said the Lord unto me: 'Within a year, as years of a hireling, Consumed hath been all the honour of Kedar.
And the remnant of the number of bow-men, The mighty of the sons of Kedar are few, For Jehovah, God of Israel, hath spoken!'
The burden of the Valley of Vision. What — to thee, now, that thou hast gone up, All of thee — to the roofs?
Full of stirs — a noisy city — an exulting city, Thy pierced are not pierced of the sword, Nor dead in battle.
All thy rulers fled together from the bow, Bound have been all found of thee, They have been kept bound together, Afar off they have fled.
Therefore I said, 'Look ye from me, I am bitter in my weeping, Haste not to comfort me, For the destruction of the daughter of my people.'
For a day of noise, and of treading down, And of perplexity, [is] to the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts, In the valley of vision, digging down a wall, And crying unto the mountain.
And Elam hath borne a quiver, In a chariot of men — horsemen, And Kir hath exposed a shield.
And it cometh to pass, The choice of thy valleys have been full of chariots, And the horsemen place themselves diligently at the gate.
And one removeth the covering of Judah, And thou lookest in that day Unto the armour of the house of the forest,
And the breaches of the city of David ye have seen, For they have become many, And ye gather the waters of the lower pool,
And the houses of Jerusalem ye did number, And ye break down the houses to fence the wall.
And a ditch ye made between the two walls, For the waters of the old pool, And ye have not looked unto its Maker, And its Framer of old ye have not seen.
And call doth the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts, In that day, to weeping and to lamentation, And to baldness and to girding on of sackcloth,
And lo, joy and gladness, slaying of oxen, And slaughtering of sheep, Eating of flesh, and drinking of wine, Eat and drink, for to-morrow we die.
And revealed it hath been in mine ears, [By] Jehovah of Hosts: Not pardoned is this iniquity to you, Till ye die, said the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts.
Thus said the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts: 'Go, enter in unto this steward, Unto Shebna, who [is] over the house:
What — to thee here? And who — to thee here? That thou hast hewn out to thee here — a sepulchre? Hewing on high his sepulchre, Graving in a rock a dwelling for himself.
Lo, Jehovah is casting thee up and down, A casting up and down, O mighty one,
And thy coverer covering, wrapping round, Wrappeth thee round, O babbler, On a land broad of sides — there thou diest, And there the chariots of thine honour [Are] the shame of the house of thy lord.
And I have thrust thee from thy station, And from thine office he throweth thee down.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, That I have called to my servant, To Eliakim son of Hilkiah.
And I have clothed him with thy coat, And with thy girdle I strengthen him, And thy garment I give into his hand, And he hath been for a father to the inhabitant of Jerusalem, And to the house of Judah.
And I have placed the key Of the house of David on his shoulder, And he hath opened, and none is shutting, And hath shut, and none is opening.
And I have fixed him a nail in a stedfast place, And he hath been for a throne of honour To the house of his father.
And they have hanged on him All the honour of the house of his father, The offspring and the issue, All vessels of small quality, From vessels of basins to all vessels of flagons.
In that day — an affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts, Moved is the nail that is fixed In a stedfast place, Yea, it hath been cut down, and hath fallen, And cut off hath been the burden that [is] on it, For Jehovah hath spoken!'
The Burden of Tyre. Howl, ye ships of Tarshish, For it hath been destroyed, Without house, without entrance, From the land of Chittim it was revealed to them.
Be silent, ye inhabitants of the isle, Trader of Zidon, passing the sea, they filled thee.
And in many waters [is] the seed of Sihor, The harvest of the brook [is] her increase, And she is a mart of nations.
Be ashamed, O Zidon; for the sea spake, The strength of the sea, saying: 'I have not been pained, nor have I brought forth, Nor have I nourished young men, [nor] brought up virgins.'
As [at] the report of Egypt they are pained, So [at] the report of Tyre.
Pass over to Tarshish, howl, ye inhabitants of the isle,
Is this your exulting one? From the days of old [is] her antiquity, Carry her do her own feet afar off to sojourn.
Who hath counselled this against Tyre, The crowning one, whose traders [are] princes, Her merchants the honoured of earth?'
Jehovah of Hosts hath counselled it, To pollute the excellency of all beauty, To make light all the honoured of earth.
Pass through thy land as a brook, Daughter of Tarshish, there is no more a girdle.
His hand He hath stretched out over the sea, He hath caused kingdoms to tremble, Jehovah hath charged concerning the merchant one, To destroy her strong places.
And He saith, 'Thou dost not add any more to exult, O oppressed one, virgin daughter of Zidon, To Chittim arise, pass over, Even there — there is no rest for thee.'
Lo, the land of the Chaldeans — this people was not, Asshur founded it for the Ziim, They raised its watch-towers, They lifted up her palaces, — He hath appointed her for a ruin!
Howl, ye ships of Tarshish, For your strength hath been destroyed.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, That forgotten is Tyre seventy years, According to the days of one king. At the end of seventy years there is to Tyre as the song of the harlot.
Take a harp, go round the city, O forgotten harlot, play well, Multiply song that thou mayest be remembered.
And it hath come to pass, At the end of seventy years Jehovah inspecteth Tyre, And she hath repented of her gift, That she committed fornication With all kingdoms of the earth on the face of the ground.
And her merchandise and her gift have been holy to Jehovah, Not treasured up nor stored, For to those sitting before Jehovah is her merchandise, To eat to satiety, and for a lasting covering!
Lo, Jehovah is emptying the land, And is making it waste, And hath overturned [it on] its face, And hath scattered its inhabitants.
And it hath been — as a people so a priest, As the servant so his master, As the maid-servant so her mistress, As the buyer so the seller, As the lender so the borrower, As the usurer so he who is lifting [it] on himself.
Utterly emptied is the land, and utterly spoiled, For Jehovah hath spoken this word:
Mourned, faded hath the land, Languished, faded hath the world, Languished have they — the high place of the people of the land.
And the land hath been defiled under its inhabitants, Because they have transgressed laws, They have changed a statute, They have made void a covenant age-during.
Therefore a curse hath consumed the land, And the inhabitants in it are become desolate, Therefore consumed have been inhabitants of the land, And few men have been left.
Mourned hath the new wine, languished the vine, Sighed have all the joyful of heart.
Ceased hath the joy of tabrets, Ceased hath the noise of exulting ones, Ceased hath the joy of a harp.
With a song they drink not wine, Bitter is strong drink to those drinking it.
It was broken down — a city of emptiness, Shut hath been every house from entrance.
A cry over the wine [is] in out-places, Darkened hath been all joy, Removed hath been the joy of the land.
Left in the city [is] desolation, And [with] wasting is the gate smitten.
When thus it is in the heart of the land, In the midst of the peoples, As the compassing of the olive, As gleanings when harvest hath been finished,
They — they lift up their voice, They sing of the excellency of Jehovah, They have cried aloud from the sea.
Therefore in prosperity honour ye Jehovah, In isles of the sea, the name of Jehovah, God of Israel.
From the skirt of the earth we heard songs, The desire of the righteous. And I say, 'Leanness [is] to me, Leanness [is] to me, woe [is] to me.' Treacherous dealers dealt treacherously, Yea, treachery, treacherous dealers dealt treacherously.
Fear, and a snare, and a gin, [Are] on thee, O inhabitant of the land.
And it hath come to pass, He who is fleeing from the noise of the fear Doth fall into the snare, And he who is coming up from the midst of the snare, Is captured by the gin, For windows on high have been opened, And shaken are foundations of the land.
Utterly broken down hath been the land, Utterly broken hath been the land, Utterly moved hath been the land.
Stagger greatly doth the land as a drunkard, And it hath been moved as a lodge, And heavy on it hath been its transgression, And it hath fallen, and addeth not to rise.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, Jehovah layeth a charge on the host of the high place in the high place, And on the kings of the land on the land.
And they have been gathered — A gathering of bound ones in a pit, And shut up they have been in a prison, And after a multitude of days are inspected.
And confounded hath been the moon, And ashamed hath been the sun, For reigned hath Jehovah of Hosts In mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, And over-against His elders — honour!
O Jehovah, my God [art] Thou, I exalt Thee, I confess Thy name, For Thou hast done a wonderful thing, Counsels of old, stedfastness, O stedfast One.
For Thou didst make of a city a heap, Of a fenced city a ruin, A high place of strangers from [being] a city, To the age it is not built.
Therefore honour Thee do a strong people, A city of the terrible nations feareth Thee.
For Thou hast been a stronghold for the poor, A stronghold for the needy in his distress, A refuge from storm, a shadow from heat, When the spirit of the terrible [is] as a storm — a wall.
As heat in a dry place, The noise of strangers Thou humblest, Heat with the shadow of a thick cloud, The singing of the terrible is humbled.
And made hath Jehovah of Hosts, For all the peoples in this mount, A banquet of fat things, a banquet of preserved things, Fat things full of marrow, preserved things refined.
And swallowed up hath He in this mountain The face of the wrapping that is wrapped over all the peoples, And of the covering that is spread over all the nations.
He hath swallowed up death in victory, And wiped hath the Lord Jehovah, The tear from off all faces, And the reproach of His people He turneth aside from off all the earth, For Jehovah hath spoken.
And [one] hath said in that day, 'Lo, this [is] our God, We waited for Him, and He saveth us, This [is] Jehovah, we have waited for Him, We joy and rejoice in His salvation.'
For rest doth the hand of Jehovah on this mountain, And trodden down is Moab under Him, As trodden down is straw on a dunghill.
And he spread out his hands in its midst, As spread out doth the swimmer to swim; And He hath humbled his excellency With the machinations of his hands.
And the fortress of the high place of thy walls He hath bowed down — He hath made low, He hath caused [it] to come to the earth, — unto dust.
In that day sung is this song in the land of Judah: 'We have a strong city, Salvation He doth make walls and bulwark.
Open ye the gates, that enter may a righteous nation, Preserving stedfastness.
An imagination supported Thou fortifiest peace — peace! For in Thee it is confident.
Trust ye in Jehovah for ever, For in Jah Jehovah [is] a rock of ages,
For He bowed down the dwellers on high, A city set on high He maketh low, He maketh it low unto the earth, He causeth it to come unto the dust,
Tread it down doth a foot, Feet of the poor — steps of the weak.
The path for the righteous [is] uprightness, O upright One, The path of the righteous Thou dost ponder.
Also, [in] the path of Thy judgments, O Jehovah, we have waited [for] Thee, To Thy name and to Thy remembrance [Is] the desire of the soul.
[With] my soul I desired Thee in the night, Also, [with] my spirit within me I seek Thee earnestly, For when Thy judgments [are] on the earth, The inhabitants of the world have learned righteousness.
The wicked findeth favour, He hath not learned righteousness, In a land of straightforwardness he dealeth perversely, And seeth not the excellency of Jehovah.
O Jehovah, high [is] Thy hand — they see not, They see the zeal of the people, and are ashamed, Also, the fire — Thine adversaries, consumeth them.
O Jehovah, Thou appointest peace to us, For, all our works also Thou hast wrought for us.
O Jehovah our God, lords have ruled us besides Thee, Only, by Thee we make mention of Thy name.
Dead — they live not, Rephaim, they rise not, Therefore Thou hast inspected and dost destroy them, Yea, thou destroyest all their memory.
Thou hast added to the nation, O Jehovah, Thou hast added to the nation, Thou hast been honoured, Thou hast put far off all the ends of earth.
O Jehovah, in distress they missed Thee, They have poured out a whisper, Thy chastisement [is] on them.
When a pregnant woman cometh near to the birth, She is pained — she crieth in her pangs, So we have been from Thy face, O Jehovah.
We have conceived, we have been pained. We have brought forth as it were wind, Salvation we do not work in the earth, Nor do the inhabitants of the world fall.
'Thy dead live — My dead body they rise. Awake and sing, ye dwellers in the dust, For the dew of herbs [is] thy dew, And the land of Rephaim thou causest to fall.
Come, My people, enter into thy inner chambers, And shut thy doors behind thee, Hide thyself shortly a moment till the indignation pass over.
For, lo, Jehovah is coming out of His place, To charge the iniquity of the inhabitant of the earth upon him, And revealed hath the earth her blood, Nor doth she cover any more her slain!'
In that day lay a charge doth Jehovah, With his sword — the sharp, and the great, and the strong, On leviathan — a fleeing serpent, And on leviathan — a crooked serpent, And He hath slain the dragon that [is] in the sea.
In that day, 'A desirable vineyard,' respond ye to her,
I, Jehovah, am its keeper, every moment I water it, Lest any lay a charge against it, Night and day I keep it!
Fury is not in Me; Who giveth Me a brier — a thorn in battle? I step into it, I burn it at once.
Or — he doth take hold on My strength, He doth make peace with Me, Peace he doth make with Me.
Those coming in He causeth to take root, Jacob doth blossom, and flourished hath Israel, And they have filled the face of the world [with] increase.
As the smiting of his smiter hath He smitten him? As the slaying of his slain doth He slay?
In measure, in sending it forth, thou strivest with it, He hath taken away by His sharp wind, In the day of an east wind,
Therefore by this is the iniquity of Jacob covered, And this [is] all the fruit — To take away his sin, in His setting all the stones of an altar, As chalkstones beaten in pieces, They rise not — shrines and images.
For the fenced city [is] alone, A habitation cast out and forsaken as a wilderness, There doth the calf delight, And there it lieth down, And hath consumed its branches.
In the withering of its branch it is broken off, Women are coming in setting it on fire, For it [is] not a people of understanding, Therefore pity it not doth its Maker, And its Former doth not favour it.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, Beat out doth Jehovah from the branch of the river, Unto the stream of Egypt, And ye are gathered one by one, O sons of Israel.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, It is blown with a great trumpet, And come in have those perishing in the land of Asshur, And those cast out in the land of Egypt, And have bowed themselves to Jehovah, In the holy mount — in Jerusalem!
Woe [to] the proud crown of the drunkards of Ephraim. And the fading flower of the beauty of his glory, That [is] on the head of the fat valley of the broken down of wine.
Lo, a mighty and strong one [is] to the Lord, As a storm of hail — a destructive shower, As an inundation of mighty waters overflowing, He cast down to the earth with the hand.
By feet trodden down is the proud crown of the drunkards of Ephraim,
And the fading flower of the beauty of his glory That [is] on the head of the fat valley, Hath been as its first-fruit before summer, That its beholder seeth, While it [is] yet in his hand he swalloweth it.
In that day is Jehovah of Hosts For a crown of beauty, and for a diadem of glory, To the remnant of His people.
And for a spirit of judgment To him who is sitting in the judgment, And for might [to] those turning back the battle to the gate.
And even these through wine have erred, And through strong drink have wandered, Priest and prophet erred through strong drink, They have been swallowed up of the wine, They wandered because of the strong drink, They have erred in seeing, They have stumbled judicially.
For all tables have been full of vomit, Filth — without place!
By whom doth He teach knowledge? And by whom doth He cause to understand the report? The weaned from milk, the removed from breasts,
For rule [is] on rule, rule on rule, line on line, line on line, A little here, a little there,
For by scorned lip, and by another tongue, Doth He speak unto this people.
Unto whom He hath said, 'This [is] the rest, give ye rest to the weary, And this — the refreshing:' And they have not been willing to hear,
And to whom a word of Jehovah hath been, Rule on rule, rule on rule, line on line, line on line, A little here, a little there, So that they go and have stumbled backward, And been broken, and snared, and captured.
Therefore, hear a word of Jehovah, ye men of scorning, Ruling this people that [is] in Jerusalem.
Because ye have said: 'We have made a covenant with death, And with Sheol we have made a provision, An overflowing scourge, when it passeth over, Doth not meet us, Though we have made a lie our refuge, And in falsehood have been hidden.'
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: 'Lo, I am laying a foundation in Zion, A stone — a tried stone, a corner stone precious, a settled foundation, He who is believing doth not make haste.
And I have put judgment for a line, And righteousness for a plummet, And sweep away doth hail the refuge of lies, And the secret hiding-place do waters overflow.
And disannulled hath been your covenant with death, And your provision with Sheol doth not stand, An overflowing scourge, when it passeth over, Then ye have been to it for a treading-place.
From the fulness of its passing over it taketh you, For morning by morning it passeth over, By day and by night, And it hath been only a trembling to consider the report.
For shorter hath been the bed Than to stretch one's self out in, And the covering hath been narrower Than to wrap one's self up in.
For as [at] mount Perazim rise doth Jehovah, As [at] the valley in Gibeon He is troubled, To do His work — strange [is] His work, And to do His deed — strange [is] His deed.'
And now, show not yourselves scorners, Lest strong be your bands, For a consumption, that is determined, I have heard, by the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts, [Is] for all the land.
Give ear, and hear my voice, Attend, and hear my saying:
The whole day plougheth the ploughman to sow? He openeth and harroweth his ground!
Hath he not, if he have made level its face, Then scattered fitches, and cummin sprinkle, And hath placed the principal wheat, And the appointed barley, And the rie [in] its own border?
And instruct him for judgment doth his God, He doth direct him.
For not with a sharp-pointed thing threshed are fitches, And the wheel of a cart on cummin turned round, For with a staff beaten out are fitches, And cummin with a rod.
Bread -[corn] is beaten small, For not for ever doth he sorely thresh it, Nor crushed [it] hath a wheel of his cart, Nor do his hoofs beat it small.
Even this from Jehovah of Hosts hath gone out, He hath made counsel wonderful, He hath made wisdom great!
Woe [to] Ariel, Ariel, The city of the encampment of David! Add year to year, let festivals go round.
And I have sent distress to Ariel, And it hath been lamentation and mourning, And it hath been to me as Ariel.
And I encamped, O babbler, against thee, And I laid siege against thee — a camp. And I raised up against thee bulwarks.
And thou hast been low, From the earth thou speakest, And from the dust makest thy saying low, And thy voice hath been from the earth, As one having a familiar spirit, And from the dust thy saying whisperest,
And as small dust hath been The multitude of those scattering thee, And as chaff passing on the multitude of the terrible, And it hath been at an instant — suddenly.
By Jehovah of Hosts thou art inspected, With thunder, and with an earthquake, And great noise, hurricane, and whirlwind, And flame of devouring fire.
And as a dream, a vision of night, hath been The multitude of all the nations Who are warring against Ariel, And all its warriors, and its bulwark, Even of those distressing her.
And it hath been, as when the hungry dreameth, And lo, he is eating, And he hath waked, and empty [is] his soul, And as when the thirsty dreameth, And lo, he is drinking, and he hath waked, And lo, he is weary, and his soul is longing, So is the multitude of all the nations Who are warring against mount Zion.
Tarry and wonder, look ye, yea, look, Be drunk, and not with wine, Stagger, and not with strong drink.
For poured out on you hath Jehovah a spirit of deep sleep, And He closeth your eyes — the prophets, And your heads — the seers — He covered.
And the vision of the whole is to you, As words of the sealed book, That they give unto one knowing books, Saying, 'Read this, we pray thee,' And he hath said, 'I am not able, for it [is] sealed;'
And the book is given to him who hath not known books, Saying, 'Read this, we pray thee,' And he hath said, 'I have not known books.'
And the Lord saith: Because drawn near hath this people, with its mouth, And with its lips they have honoured Me, And its heart it hath put far off from Me, And their fear of Me is — A precept of men is taught!
Therefore, lo, I am adding to do wonderfully with this people, A wonder, and a marvel, And perished hath the wisdom of its wise ones, And the understanding of its intelligent ones hideth itself.'
Woe [to] those going deep from Jehovah to hide counsel, And whose works have been in darkness. And they say, 'Who is seeing us? And who is knowing us?'
Your perversion! as clay is the potter esteemed? That the work saith of its maker, 'He hath not made me?' And the framed thing said of its framer, 'He did not understand?'
Is it not yet a very little, And turned hath Lebanon to a fruitful field, And the fruitful field for a forest is reckoned?
And heard in that day have the deaf the words of a book, And out of thick darkness, and out of darkness, The eyes of the blind do see.
And the humble have added joy in Jehovah, And the poor among men In the Holy One of Israel rejoice.
For ceased hath the terrible one, And consumed hath been the scorner, And cut off have been all watching for iniquity,
Causing men to sin in word, And for a reprover in the gate lay a snare, And turn aside into emptiness the righteous.
Therefore, thus said Jehovah, Who ransomed Abraham, Concerning the house of Jacob: 'Not now ashamed is Jacob, Nor now doth his face become pale,
For in his seeing his children, The work of My hand, in his midst, They sanctify My name, And have sanctified the Holy One of Jacob, And the God of Israel they declare fearful.
And the erring in spirit have known understanding, And murmurers learn doctrine!'
Woe [to] apostate sons, The affirmation of Jehovah! To do counsel, and not from Me, And to spread out a covering, and not of My spirit, So as to add sin to sin.
Who are walking to go down to Egypt, And My mouth have not asked, To be strong in the strength of Pharaoh, And to trust in the shadow of Egypt.
And the strength of Pharaoh Hath been to you for shame, And the trust in the shadow of Egypt confusion,
For in Zoan were his princes, And his messengers reach Hanes.
All he made ashamed of a people that profit not, Neither for help, not for profit, But for shame, and also for reproach!
The burden of the beasts of the south. Into a land of adversity and distress, Of young lion and of old lion, Whence [are] viper and flying saraph, They carry on the shoulder of asses their wealth, And on the hump of camels their treasures, Unto a people not profitable.
Yea, Egyptians [are] vanity, and in vain do help, Therefore I have cried concerning this: 'Their strength [is] to sit still.'
No, go in, write it on a tablet with them, And on a book engrave it, And it is for a latter day, for a witness unto the age,
That a rebellious people [is] this, sons — liars, Sons not willing to hear the law of Jehovah.
Who have said to seers, 'Ye do not see,' And to prophets, 'Ye do not prophesy to us Straightforward things, Speak to us smooth things, prophesy deceits,
Turn aside from the way, decline from the path, Cause to cease from before us the Holy One of Israel.'
Therefore, thus said the Holy One of Israel, Because of your kicking against this word, And ye trust in oppression, And perverseness, and rely on it,
Therefore is this iniquity to you as a breach falling, Swelled out in a wall set on high, Whose destruction suddenly, at an instant cometh.
And He hath broken it As the breaking of the potters' bottle, Beaten down — He doth not spare, Nor is there found, in its beating down, A potsherd to take fire from the burning, And to draw out waters from a ditch.
For thus said the Lord Jehovah, The Holy One of Israel: 'In returning and rest ye are saved, In keeping quiet and in confidence is your might, And ye have not been willing.
And ye say, No, for on a horse we flee? Therefore ye flee, And on the swift we ride! Therefore swift are your pursuers.
One thousand because of the rebuke of one, Because of the rebuke of five ye flee, Till ye have been surely left as a pole On the top of the mountain, And as an ensign on the height.
And therefore doth wait Jehovah to favour you, And therefore He is exalted to pity you, For a God of judgment [is] Jehovah, O the blessedness of all waiting for Him.
For the people in Zion dwell in Jerusalem, Weep thou not, weeping, Pitying, He pitieth thee at the voice of thy cry, When He heareth He answereth thee.
And the Lord hath given to you bread of adversity, And water of oppression. And thy directors remove no more, And thine eyes have seen thy directors,
And thine ear heareth a word behind thee, Saying, 'This [is] the way, go ye in it,' When ye turn to the right, And when ye turn to the left.
And ye have defiled the covering of Thy graven images of silver, And the ephod of thy molten image of gold, Thou scatterest them as a sickening thing, 'Go out,' thou sayest to it.
And He hath given rain [for] thy seed, With which thou dost sow the ground, And bread, the increase of the ground, And it hath been fat and plenteous, Enjoy do thy cattle in that day an enlarged pasture.
And the oxen and the young asses serving the ground, Fermented provender do eat, That one is winnowing with shovel and fan.
And there hath been on every high mount, And on every exalted hill, Rivulets — streams of waters, In a day of much slaughter, in the falling of towers.
And the light of the moon hath been as the light of the sun, And the light of the sun is sevenfold, As the light of seven days, In the day of Jehovah's binding up the breach of His people, When the stroke of its wound He healeth.
Lo, the name of Jehovah is coming from far, Burning is His anger, and great the flame, His lips have been full of indignation, And His tongue [is] as a devouring fire.
And His breath [is] as an overflowing stream, Unto the neck it divideth, To sift nations with a sieve of vanity, And a bridle causing to err, [Is] on the jaws of the peoples.
Singing is to you as in a night sanctified for a festival, And joy of heart as he who is going with a pipe, To go in to the mountain of Jehovah, Unto the rock of Israel.
And caused to be heard hath Jehovah The honour of His voice, And the coming down of His arm He doth shew with the raging of anger, And the flame of a consuming fire, Scattering, and inundation, and hailstone.
For from the voice of Jehovah broken down [is] Asshur, With a rod He smiteth.
And every passage of the settled staff, That Jehovah causeth to rest on him, Hath been with tabrets, and with harps, And in battles of shaking he hath fought with it.
For, arranged from former time is Tophet, Even it for the king is prepared, He hath made deep, He hath made large, Its pile [is] fire and much wood, The breath of Jehovah, As a stream of brim stone, is burning in it!
Woe [to] those going down to Egypt for help, And on horses lean, And trust on chariots, because many, And on horsemen, because very strong, And have not looked on the Holy One of Israel, And Jehovah have not sought.
And He also [is] wise, and bringeth in evil, And His words He hath not turned aside, And He hath risen against a house of evil doers, And against the help of workers of iniquity.
And the Egyptians [are men], and not God, And their horses [are] flesh, and not spirit, And Jehovah stretcheth out His hand, And stumbled hath the helper, And fallen hath the helped one, And together all of them are consumed.
For thus said Jehovah unto me: 'As growl doth the lion and the young lion over his prey, Called against whom is a multitude of shepherds, From their voice he is not affrighted, And from their noise he is not humbled; So come down doth Jehovah of Hosts To war on mount Zion, and on her height.
As birds flying, so doth Jehovah of Hosts Cover over Jerusalem, covering and delivering, Passing over, and causing to escape.'
Turn back to Him from whom sons of Israel Have deepened apostasy.
For in that day despise doth each His idols of silver, and his idols of gold, That your hands made to you — a sin.
And fallen hath Asshur by sword, not of the high, Yea, a sword — not of the low, doth consume him, And he hath fled for himself from the face of a sword, And his young men become tributary.
And [to] his rock from fear he passeth on, And affrighted by the ensign have been his princes — an affirmation of Jehovah, Who hath a light in Zion, And who hath a furnace in Jerusalem!
Lo, for righteousness doth a king reign, As to princes, for judgment they rule.
And each hath been as a hiding-place [from] wind, And as a secret hiding-place [from] inundation, As rivulets of waters in a dry place, As a shadow of a heavy rock in a weary land.
And not dazzled are the eyes of beholders, And the ears of hearers do attend.
And the heart of those hastened Understandeth to know, And the tongue of stammerers hasteth to speak clearly.
A fool is no more called 'noble,' And to a miser it is not said, 'rich;'
For a fool speaketh folly, And his heart doth iniquity, to do profanity, And to speak concerning Jehovah error, To empty the soul of the hungry, Yea, drink of the thirsty he causeth to lack.
And the miser — his instruments [are] evil, He hath counselled wicked devices, To corrupt the poor with lying sayings, Even when the needy speaketh justly.
And the noble counselled noble things, And he for noble things riseth up.
Women, easy ones, rise, hear my voice, Daughters, confident ones, give ear [to] my saying,
Days and a year ye are troubled, O confident ones, For consumed hath been harvest, The gathering cometh not.
Tremble ye women, ye easy ones, Be troubled, ye confident ones, Strip and make bare, with a girdle on the loins,
For breasts they are lamenting, For fields of desire, for the fruitful vine.
Over the ground of my people thorn — brier goeth up, Surely over all houses of joy of the exulting city,
Surely the palace hath been left, The multitude of the city forsaken, Fort and watch-tower hath been for dens unto the age, A joy of wild asses — a pasture of herds;
Till emptied out on us is the Spirit from on high, And a wilderness hath become a fruitful field, And the fruitful field for a forest is reckoned.
And dwelt in the wilderness hath judgment, And righteousness in the fruitful field remaineth.
And a work of the righteousness hath been peace, And a service of the righteousness — Keeping quiet and confidence unto the age.
And dwelt hath My people in a peaceful habitation, And in stedfast tabernacles, And in quiet resting-places.
And it hath hailed in the going down of the forest, And in the valley is the city low.
Happy [are] ye sowing by all waters, Sending forth the foot of the ox and the ass!
Woe, spoiler! and thou not spoiled, And treacherous! and they dealt not treacherously with thee, When thou dost finish, O spoiler, thou art spoiled, When thou dost finish dealing treacherously, They deal treacherously with thee.
O Jehovah, favour us, for thee we have waited, Be their arm, in the mornings, Yea, our salvation in time of adversity.
From the voice of a multitude fled have peoples, From thine exaltation scattered have been nations.
And gathered hath been your spoil, A gathering of the caterpillar, As a running to and fro of locusts is he running on it.
Set on high is Jehovah, for He is dwelling on high, He filled Zion [with] judgment and righteousness,
And hath been the stedfastness of thy times, The strength of salvation, wisdom, and knowledge, Fear of Jehovah — it [is] His treasure.
Lo, 'Their Ariel,' they have cried without, Messengers of peace do weep bitterly.
Desolated have been highways, Ceased hath he who passeth along the path, He hath broken covenant, He hath despised enemies, He hath not esteemed a man.
Mourned, languished hath the land, Confounded hath been Lebanon, Withered hath been Sharon as a wilderness, And shaking are Bashan and Carmel.
Now, do I arise, saith Jehovah, Now I am exalted, now I am lifted up.
Ye conceive chaff, ye bear stubble, Your spirit! — fire devoureth you.
And peoples have been [as] burnings of lime, Thorns, as sweepings, with fire they burn.
Hear, ye far off, that which I have done, And know, ye near ones, My might.
Afraid in Zion have been sinners, Seized hath trembling the profane: Who doth dwell for us — consuming fire, Who doth dwell for us — burnings of the age?
Whoso is walking righteously, And is speaking uprightly, Kicking against gain of oppressions, Shaking his hands from taking hold on a bribe, Stopping his ear from hearing of blood, And shutting his eyes from looking on evil,
He high places doth inhabit, Strongholds of rock [are] his high tower, His bread hath been given, his waters stedfast.
A king in his beauty, see do thine eyes, They see a land afar off.
Thy heart doth meditate terror, Where [is] he who is counting? Where [is] he who is weighing? Where [is] he who is counting the towers?
The strong people thou seest not, A people deeper of lip than to be understood, Of a scorned tongue, there is no understanding.
See Zion, the city of our meetings, Thine eyes see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, A tent not taken down, Not removed are its pins for ever, And none of its cords are broken.
But there mighty [is] Jehovah for us, A place of rivers — streams broad of sides, No ship with oars doth go into it, And a mighty ship doth not pass over it.
For Jehovah our judge, Jehovah our lawgiver, Jehovah our king — He doth save us.
Left have been thy ropes, They strengthen not rightly their mast, They have not spread out a sail, Then apportioned hath been a prey of much spoil, The lame have taken spoil.
Nor doth an inhabitant say, 'I was sick,' The people that is dwelling in it, is forgiven of iniquity!
Come near, ye nations, to hear, And ye peoples, give attention, Hear doth the earth and its fulness, The world, and all its productions.
For wrath [is] to Jehovah against all the nations, And fury against all their host, He hath devoted them to destruction, He hath given them to slaughter.
And their wounded are cast out, And their carcases cause their stench to ascend, And melted have been mountains from their blood.
And consumed have been all the host of the heavens, And rolled together as a book have been the heavens, And all their hosts do fade, As the fading of a leaf of a vine, And as the fading one of a fig-tree.
For soaked in the heavens was My sword, Lo, on Edom it cometh down, On the people of My curse for judgment.
A sword [is] to Jehovah — it hath been full of blood, It hath been made fat with fatness, With blood of lambs and he-goats. With fat of kidneys of rams, For a sacrifice [is] to Jehovah in Bozrah, And a great slaughter in the land of Edom.
And come down have reems with them, And bullocks with bulls, And soaked hath been their land from blood, And their dust from fatness is made fat.
(For a day of vengeance [is] to Jehovah, A year of recompences for Zion's strife,)
And turned have been her streams to pitch, And her dust to brimstone, And her land hath become burning pitch.
By night and by day she is not quenched, To the age go up doth her smoke, From generation to generation she is waste, For ever and ever, none is passing into her.
And possess her do pelican and hedge-hog, And owl and raven dwell in her, And He hath stretched out over her A line of vacancy, and stones of emptiness.
[To] the kingdom her freemen they call, But there are none there, And all her princes are at an end.
And gone up her palaces have thorns, Nettle and bramble [are] in her fortresses, And it hath been a habitation of dragons, A court for daughters of an ostrich.
And met have Ziim with Aiim, And the goat for its companion calleth, Only there rested hath the night-owl, And hath found for herself a place of rest.
There made her nest hath the bittern, Yea, she layeth, and hath hatched, And hath gathered under her shadow, Only there gathered have been vultures, Each with its companion.
Seek out of the book of Jehovah, and read, One of these hath not been lacking, None hath missed its companion, For My mouth — it hath commanded, And His spirit — He hath gathered them.
And He hath cast for them a lot, And His hand hath apportioned [it] to them by line, Unto the age they possess it, To all generations they dwell in it!
They joy from the wilderness and dry place, And rejoice doth the desert, and flourish as the rose,
Flourishing it doth flourish, and rejoice, Yea, [with] joy and singing, The honour of Lebanon hath been given to it, The beauty of Carmel and Sharon, They — they see the honour of Jehovah, The majesty of our God.
Strengthen ye the feeble hands, Yea, the stumbling knees strengthen.
Say to the hastened of heart, 'Be strong, Fear not, lo, your God; vengeance cometh, The recompence of God, He Himself doth come and save you.'
Then opened are eyes of the blind, And ears of the deaf are unstopped,
Then leap as a hart doth the lame, And sing doth the tongue of the dumb, For broken up in a wilderness have been waters, And streams in a desert.
And the mirage hath become a pond, And the thirsty land fountains of waters, In the habitation of dragons, Its place of couching down, a court for reed and rush.
And a highway hath been there, and a way, And the 'way of holiness' is called to it, Not pass over it doth the unclean, And He Himself [is] by them, Whoso is going in the way — even fools err not.
No lion is there, yea, a destructive beast Ascendeth it not, it is not found there, And walked have the redeemed,
And the ransomed of Jehovah return, And have entered Zion with singing. And joy age-during on their head, Joy and gladness they attain, And fled away have sorrow and sighing!
And it cometh to pass, in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah, come up hath Sennacherib king of Asshur against all the fenced cities of Judah, and seizeth them.
And the king of Asshur sendeth Rabshakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem, unto the king Hezekiah, with a heavy force, and he standeth by the conduit of the upper pool, in the highway of the fuller's field,
and go forth unto him doth Eliakim son of Hilkiah, who [is] over the house, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah son of Asaph, the remembrancer.
And Rabshakeh saith unto them, 'Say ye, I pray you, unto Hezekiah, 'Thus said the great king, the king of Asshur, What [is] this confidence in which thou hast confided?
I have said: Only, a word of the lips! counsel and might [are] for battle: now, on whom hast thou trusted, that thou hast rebelled against me?
'Lo, thou hast trusted on the staff of this broken reed — on Egypt — which a man leaneth on, and it hath gone into his hand, and pierced it — so [is] Pharaoh king of Egypt to all those trusting on him.
'And dost thou say unto me, Unto Jehovah our God we have trusted? is it not He, whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath turned aside, and saith to Judah and to Jerusalem, Before this altar ye do bow yourselves?
'And now, negotiate, I pray thee, with my lord the king of Asshur, and I give to thee two thousand horses, if thou art able to put for thee riders on them.
And how dost thou turn back the face of one captain of the least of the servants of my lord, and dost trust for thee on Egypt, for chariot and for horsemen?
And now, without Jehovah have I come up against this land to destroy it? Jehovah said unto me, Go up unto this land, and thou hast destroyed it.'
And Eliakim saith — and Shebna and Joah — unto Rabshakeh, 'Speak, we pray thee, unto thy servants [in] Aramaean, for we are understanding; and do not speak unto us [in] Jewish, in the ears of the people who [are] on the wall.'
And Rabshakeh saith, 'Unto thy lord, and unto thee, hath my lord sent me to speak these words? is it not for the men — those sitting on the wall to eat their own dung and to drink their own water with you?'
And Rabshakeh standeth and calleth with a great voice [in] Jewish, and saith, 'Hear ye the words of the great king, the king of Asshur:
Thus said the king, Let not Hezekiah lift you up, for he is not able to deliver you;
and let not Hezekiah make you trust unto Jehovah, saying, Jehovah doth certainly deliver us, this city is not given into the hand of the king of Asshur.
'Do not hearken unto Hezekiah, for thus said the king of Asshur, Make ye with me a blessing, and come out unto me, and eat ye each of his vine, and each of his fig-tree, and drink ye each the waters of his own well,
till my coming in, and I have taken you unto a land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards;
lest Hezekiah doth persuade you, saying, Jehovah doth deliver us. 'Have the gods of the nations delivered each his land out of the hand of the king of Asshur?
Where [are] the gods of Hamath and Arpad? Where the gods of Sepharvaim, that they have delivered Samaria out of my hand?
Who among all the gods of these lands [are] they who have delivered their land out of my hand, that Jehovah doth deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?'
And they keep silent, and have not answered him a word, for a command of the king is, saying, 'Do not answer him.'
And Eliakim son of Hilkiah, who [is] over the house, cometh in, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah son of Asaph, the remembrancer, unto Hezekiah with rent garments, and they declare to him the words of Rabshakeh.
And it cometh to pass, at the king Hezekiah's hearing, that he rendeth his garments, and covereth himself with sackcloth, and entereth the house of Jehovah,
and sendeth Eliakim, who [is] over the house, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests, covering themselves with sackcloth, unto Isaiah son of Amoz the prophet,
and they say unto him, 'Thus said Hezekiah, A day of distress, and rebuke, and despising, [is] this day; for come have sons unto the birth, and power there is not to bear.
'It may be Jehovah thy God doth hear the words of Rabshakeh with which the king of Asshur his lord hath sent him to reproach the living God, and hath decided concerning the words that Jehovah thy God hath heard, and thou hast lifted up prayer for the remnant that is found.'
And the servants of king Hezekiah come in unto Isaiah,
and Isaiah saith unto them, 'Thus do ye say unto your lord, Thus said Jehovah, Be not afraid because of the words that thou hast heard, with which the servants of the king of Asshur have reviled Me.
Lo, I am giving in him a spirit, and he hath heard a report, and hath turned back unto his land, and I have caused him to fall by the sword in his land.'
And Rabshakeh turneth back and findeth the king of Asshur fighting against Libnah, for he hath heard that he hath journeyed from Lachish.
And he heareth concerning Tirhakah king of Cush, saying, 'He hath come out to fight with thee;' and he heareth, and sendeth messengers unto Hezekiah, saying,
'Thus do ye speak unto Hezekiah king of Judah, saying, Let not thy God lift thee up in whom thou art trusting, saying, Jerusalem is not given into the hand of the king of Asshur.
Lo, thou hast heard that which the kings of Asshur have done to all the lands — to devote them — and thou art delivered!
Did the gods of the nations deliver them whom my fathers destroyed — Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the sons of Eden, who [are] in Telassar?
Where [is] the king of Hamath, and the king of Arpad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivvah?'
And Hezekiah taketh the letters out of the hand of the messengers, and readeth them, and Hezekiah goeth up to the house of Jehovah, and Hezekiah spreadeth it before Jehovah.
And Hezekiah prayeth unto Jehovah, saying,
'Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, inhabiting the cherubs, Thou [art] God Himself — Thyself alone — to all kingdoms of the earth, Thou hast made the heavens and the earth.
Incline, O Jehovah, Thine ear, and hear; open, O Jehovah, Thine eyes and see; and hear Thou all the words of Sennacherib that he hath sent to reproach the living God.
'Truly, O Jehovah, kings of Asshur have laid waste all the lands and their land,
so as to put their gods into fire — for they [are] no gods, but work of the hands of man, wood and stone — and they destroy them.
And now, Jehovah our God, save us from his hand, and all kingdoms of the earth do know that Thou [art] Jehovah, Thyself alone.'
And Isaiah son of Amoz sendeth unto Hezekiah, saying, 'Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, That which thou hast prayed unto me concerning Sennacherib king of Asshur —
this [is] the word that Jehovah spake concerning him: Trampled on thee, laughed at thee, Hath the virgin daughter of Zion, Behind thee shaken the head hath the daughter of Jerusalem.
Whom hast thou reproached and reviled? And against whom lifted up the voice? Yea, thou dost lift up on high thine eyes Against the Holy One of Israel.
By the hand of thy servants Thou hast reviled the Lord, and sayest: In the multitude of my chariots I have come up to a high place of hills, The sides of Lebanon, And I cut down the height of its cedars, The choice of its firs, And I enter the high place of its extremity, The forest of its Carmel.
I — I have dug and drunk waters, And I dry up with the sole of my steps All floods of a bulwark.
Hast thou not heard from afar? — it I did, From days of old — that I formed it. Now, I have brought it in, And it is to make desolate, Ruinous heaps — fenced cities,
And their inhabitants are feeble-handed, They were broken down, and are dried up. They have been the herb of the field, And the greenness of the tender grass, Grass of the roofs, And blasted corn, before it hath risen up.
And thy sitting down, and thy going out, And thy coming in, I have known, And thy anger towards Me.
Because of thy anger towards Me, And thy noise — it came up into Mine ears, I have put My hook in thy nose, And My bridle in thy lips, And I have caused thee to turn back In the way in which thou camest.
— And this to thee [is] the sign, Food of the year [is] self-sown grain, And in the second year the spontaneous growth, And in the third year, sow ye and reap, And plant vineyards, and eat their fruit.
And it hath continued — the escaped Of the house of Judah that hath been left — To take root beneath, And it hath made fruit upward.
For from Jerusalem goeth forth a remnant, And an escape from mount Zion, The zeal of Jehovah of Hosts doth this.
Therefore, thus said Jehovah, Concerning the king of Asshur: He doth not come in unto this city, Nor doth he shoot there an arrow, Nor doth he come before it [with] shield, Nor doth he pour out against it a mount.
In the way that he came, in it he turneth back, And unto this city he doth not come in, An affirmation of Jehovah,
And I have covered over this city, To save it, for Mine own sake, And for the sake of David My servant.'
And a messenger of Jehovah goeth out, and smiteth in the camp of Asshur a hundred and eighty and five thousand; and [men] rise early in the morning, and lo, all of them [are] dead corpses.
And journey, and go, and turn back doth Sennacherib king of Asshur, and dwelleth in Nineveh.
And it cometh to pass, he is bowing himself in the house of Nisroch his god, and Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons have smitten him with the sword, and they have escaped to the land of Ararat, and Esar-Haddon his son reigneth in his stead.
In those days hath Hezekiah been sick unto death, and come in unto him doth Isaiah son of Amoz, the prophet, and saith unto him, 'Thus said Jehovah: Give a charge to thy house, for thou [art] dying, and dost not live.'
And Hezekiah turneth round his face unto the wall, and prayeth unto Jehovah,
and saith, 'I pray thee, O Jehovah, remember, I pray Thee, how I have walked habitually before Thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and that which [is] good in thine eyes I have done;' and Hezekiah weepeth — a great weeping.
And a word of Jehovah is unto Isaiah, saying,
Go, and thou hast said to Hezekiah, Thus said Jehovah, God of David thy father, 'I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tear, lo, I am adding to thy days fifteen years,
and out of the hand of the king of Asshur I deliver thee and this city, and have covered over this city.
And this [is] to thee the sign from Jehovah, that Jehovah doth this thing that He hath spoken.
Lo, I am bringing back the shadow of the degrees that it hath gone down on the degrees of Ahaz, by the sun, backward ten degrees:' and the sun turneth back ten degrees in the degrees that it had gone down.
A writing of Hezekiah king of Judah concerning his being sick, when he reviveth from his sickness:
'I — I said in the cutting off of my days, I go in to the gates of Sheol, I have numbered the remnant of mine years.
I said, I do not see Jah — Jah! In the land of the living, I do not behold man any more, With the inhabitants of the world.
My sojourning hath departed, And been removed from me as a shepherd's tent, I have drawn together, as a weaver, my life, By weakness it cutteth me off, From day unto night Thou dost end me.
I have set [Him] till morning as a lion, So doth He break all my bones, From day unto night Thou dost end me.
As a crane — a swallow — so I chatter, I mourn as a dove, Drawn up have been mine eyes on high, O Jehovah, oppression [is] on me, be my surety.
— What do I say? seeing He said to me, And He Himself hath wrought, I go softly all my years for the bitterness of my soul.
Lord, by these do [men] live, And by all in them [is] the life of my spirit, And Thou savest me, make me also to live,
Lo, to peace He changed for me bitterness, And Thou hast delighted in my soul without corruption, For Thou hast cast behind Thy back all my sins.
For Sheol doth not confess Thee, Death doth not praise Thee, Those going down to the pit hope not for Thy truth.
The living, the living, he doth confess Thee.
Like myself to-day — a father to sons Doth make known of Thy faithfulness, O Jehovah — to save me: And my songs we sing all days of our lives In the house of Jehovah.'
And Isaiah saith, 'Let them take a bunch of figs, and plaster over the ulcer, and he liveth.'
And Hezekiah saith, 'What [is] the sign that I go up to the house of Jehovah!'
At that time hath Merodach-Baladan, son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present unto Hezekiah, when he heareth that he hath been sick, and is become strong.
And Hezekiah rejoiceth over them, and sheweth them the house of his spices, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the good ointment, and all the house of his vessels, and all that hath been found in his treasures; there hath not been a thing in his house, and in all his dominion, that Hezekiah hath not shewed them.
And Isaiah the prophet cometh in unto king Hezekiah, and saith unto him, 'What said these men? and whence come they unto thee?' And Hezekiah saith, 'From a land afar off they have come unto me — from Babylon.'
And he saith, 'What saw they in thy house?' and Hezekiah saith, 'All that [is] in my house they saw; there hath not been a thing that I have not shewed them among my treasures.'
And Isaiah saith unto Hezekiah, 'Hear a word of Jehovah of Hosts:
Lo, days are coming, and borne hath been all that [is] in thy house, and that thy fathers have treasured up till this day, to Babylon; there is not left a thing, said Jehovah;
and of thy sons who come forth from thee, whom thou begettest, they take, and they have been eunuchs in a palace of the king of Babylon.'
And Hezekiah saith unto Isaiah, 'Good [is] the word of Jehovah that thou hast spoken;' and he saith, 'Because there is peace and truth in my days.'
Comfort ye, comfort ye, My people, saith your God.
Speak to the heart of Jerusalem, and call to her, That her warfare hath been completed, That accepted hath been her punishment, That she hath received from the hand of Jehovah Double for all her sins.
A voice is crying — in a wilderness — Prepare ye the way of Jehovah, Make straight in a desert a highway to our God.
Every valley is raised up, And every mountain and hill become low, And the crooked place hath become a plain, And the entangled places a valley.
And revealed hath been the honour of Jehovah, And seen [it] have all flesh together, For the mouth of Jehovah hath spoken.
A voice is saying, 'Call,' And he said, 'What do I call?' All flesh [is] grass, and all its goodliness [is] As a flower of the field:
Withered hath grass, faded the flower, For the Spirit of Jehovah blew upon it, Surely the people [is] grass;
Withered hath grass, faded the flower, But a word of our God riseth for ever.
On a high mountain get thee up, O Zion, Proclaiming tidings, Lift up with power thy voice, O Jerusalem, proclaiming tidings, Lift up, fear not, say to cities of Judah, 'Lo, your God.'
Lo, the Lord Jehovah with strength cometh, And His arm is ruling for Him, Lo, His hire [is] with Him, and His wage before Him.
As a shepherd His flock He feedeth, With His arm He gathereth lambs, And in His bosom He carrieth [them]: Suckling ones He leadeth.
Who hath measured in the hollow of his hand the waters? And the heavens by a span hath meted out, And comprehended in a measure the dust of the earth, And hath weighed in scales the mountains, And the hills in a balance?
Who hath meted out the Spirit of Jehovah, And, [being] His counsellor, doth teach Him!
With whom consulted He, That he causeth Him to understand? And teacheth Him in the path of judgment, And teacheth Him knowledge? And the way of understanding causeth Him to know?
Lo, nations as a drop from a bucket, And as small dust of the balance, have been reckoned, Lo, isles as a small thing He taketh up.
And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, Nor its beasts sufficient for a burnt-offering.
All the nations [are] as nothing before Him, Less than nothing and emptiness, They have been reckoned to Him.
And unto whom do ye liken God, And what likeness do ye compare to Him?
The graven image poured out hath a artisan, And a refiner with gold spreadeth it over, And chains of silver he is refining.
He who is poor [by] heave-offerings, A tree not rotten doth choose, A skilful artisan he seeketh for it, To establish a graven image — not moved.
Do ye not know — do ye not hear? Hath it not been declared from the first to you? Have ye not understood [From] the foundations of the earth?
He who is sitting on the circle of the earth, And its inhabitants [are] as grasshoppers, He who is stretching out as a thin thing the heavens, And spreadeth them as a tent to dwell in.
He who is making princes become nothing, Judges of earth as emptiness hath made;
Yea, they have not been planted, Yea, they have not been sown, Yea, not taking root in the earth is their stock, And also He hath blown upon them, and they wither, And a whirlwind as stubble taketh them away.
And unto whom do ye liken Me, And [am] I equal? saith the Holy One.
Lift up on high your eyes, And see — who hath prepared these? He who is bringing out by number their host, To all of them by name He calleth, By abundance of strength (And [he is] strong in power) not one is lacking.
Why sayest thou, O Jacob? and speakest thou, O Israel? 'My way hath been hid from Jehovah, And from my God my judgment passeth over.'
Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard? The God of the age — Jehovah, Preparer of the ends of the earth, Is not wearied nor fatigued, There is no searching of His understanding.
He is giving power to the weary, And to those not strong He increaseth might.
Even youths are wearied and fatigued, And young men utterly stumble,
But those expecting Jehovah pass [to] power, They raise up the pinion as eagles, They run and are not fatigued, They go on and do not faint!
Keep silent towards Me, O isles, And the peoples pass on [to] power, They come nigh, then they speak, 'Together — to judgment we draw near.'
Who stirred up from the east a righteous one? He calleth him to His foot, He giveth before him nations, And kings He causeth him to rule, He giveth [them] as dust [to] his sword, As driven stubble [to] his bow.
He pursueth them, he passeth over in safety A path with his feet he entereth not.
Who hath wrought and done, Calling the generations from the first? I, Jehovah, the first, and with the last I [am] He.
Seen have isles and fear, ends of the earth tremble, They have drawn near, yea, they come.
Each his neighbour they help, And to his brother he saith, 'Be strong.'
And strengthen doth an artisan the refiner, A smoother [with] a hammer, Him who is beating [on] an anvil, Saying, 'For joining it [is] good,' And he strengtheneth it with nails, it is not moved!
— And thou, O Israel, My servant, Jacob, whom I have chosen, Seed of Abraham, My lover,
Whom I have taken hold of, from the ends of the earth, And from its near places I have called thee, And I say to thee, My servant Thou [art], I have chosen thee, and not rejected thee.
Be not afraid, for with thee I [am], Look not around, for I [am] thy God, I have strengthened thee, Yea, I have helped thee, yea, I upheld thee, With the right hand of My righteousness.
Lo, all those displeased with thee, They are ashamed and blush, They are as nothing, yea, perish Do the men who strive with thee.
Thou seekest them, and findest them not, The men who debate with thee, They are as nothing, yea, as nothing, The men who war with thee.
For I, Jehovah thy God, Am strengthening thy right hand, He who is saying to thee, 'Fear not, I have helped thee.'
Fear not, O worm Jacob, ye men of Israel, I helped thee, an affirmation of Jehovah, Even thy redeemer, the Holy One of Israel.
Lo, I have set thee for a new sharp threshing instrument, Possessing teeth, thou threshest mountains, And beatest small, and hills as chaff thou makest.
Thou winnowest them, and a wind lifteth them up, And a whirlwind scattereth them, And thou — thou rejoicest in Jehovah, In the Holy One of Israel dost boast thyself.
The poor and the needy are seeking water, And there is none, Their tongue with thirst hath failed, I, Jehovah do answer them, The God of Israel — I forsake them not.
I open on high places rivers, And in midst of valleys fountains, I make a wilderness become a pond of water, And a dry land become springs of water.
I give in a wilderness the cedar, Shittah, and myrtle, and oil-tree, I set in a desert the fir-pine and box-wood together.
So that they see, and know, And regard, and act wisely together, For the hand of Jehovah hath done this, And the Holy One of Israel hath prepared it.
Bring near your cause, saith Jehovah, Bring nigh your mighty ones, saith the king of Jacob.
They bring nigh, and declare to us that which doth happen, The first things — what they [are] declare ye, And we set our heart, and know their latter end, Or the coming things cause us to hear.
Declare the things that are coming hereafter, And we know that ye [are] gods, Yea, ye may do good or do evil, And we look around and see [it] together.
Lo, ye [are] of nothing, and your work of nought, An abomination — it fixeth on you.
I have stirred up [one] from the north, And he cometh, From the rising of the sun he calleth in My name, And he cometh in [on] prefects as [on] clay, And as a potter treadeth down mire.
Who hath declared from the first, and we know? And beforetime, and we say, 'Righteous?' yea, there is none declaring, Yea, there is none proclaiming, Yea, there is none hearing your sayings.
First to Zion, Behold, behold them, And to Jerusalem one proclaiming tidings I give,
And I see that there is no man, Yea, of these that there is no counsellor, And I ask them, and they return word:
'Lo, all of them [are] vanity, Nought [are] their works, Wind and emptiness their molten images!'
Lo, My servant, I take hold on him, My chosen one — My soul hath accepted, I have put My Spirit upon him, Judgment to nations he bringeth forth.
He doth not cry, nor lift up, Nor cause his voice to be heard, in the street.
A bruised reed he breaketh not, And dim flax he quencheth not, To truth he bringeth forth judgment.
He doth not become weak nor bruised, Till he setteth judgment in the earth, And for his law isles wait with hope.
Thus said God, Jehovah, preparing The heavens, and stretching them out, Spreading out the earth and its productions, Giving breath to the people on it, And spirit to those walking in it.
I, Jehovah, did call thee in righteousness, And I lay hold on thy hand, and keep thee, And I give thee for a covenant of a people, And a light of nations.
To open the eyes of the blind, To bring forth from prison the bound one, From the house of restraint those sitting in darkness.
I [am] Jehovah, this [is] My name, And Mine honour to another I give not, Nor My praise to graven images.
The former things, lo, have come, And new things I am declaring, Before they spring up I cause you to hear.
Sing to Jehovah a new song, His praise from the end of the earth, Ye who are going down to the sea, and its fulness, Isles, and their inhabitants.
The wilderness and its cities do lift up [the voice], The villages Kedar doth inhabit, Sing do the inhabitants of Sela, From the top of mountains they cry.
They ascribe to Jehovah honour, And His praise in the isles they declare.
Jehovah as a mighty one goeth forth. As a man of war He stirreth up zeal, He crieth, yea, He shrieketh, Against His enemies He showeth Himself mighty.
I have kept silent from of old, I keep silent, I refrain myself, As a travailing woman I cry out, I desolate and swallow up together.
I make waste mountains and hills, And all their herbs I dry up, And I have made rivers become isles, And ponds I dry up.
And I have caused the blind to go, In a way they have not known, In paths they have not known I cause them to tread, I make a dark place before them become light, And unlevelled places become a plain, These [are] the things I have done to them, And I have not forsaken them.
Removed backward — utterly ashamed, Are those trusting in a graven image, Those saying to a molten image, 'Ye [are] our gods.'
Ye deaf, hear; and ye blind, look to see.
Who [is] blind but My servant? And deaf as My messenger I send? Who [is] blind as he who is at peace, Yea, blind, as the servant of Jehovah?
Seeing many things, and thou observest not, Opening ears, and he heareth not.
Jehovah hath delight for the sake of His righteousness, He magnifieth law, and maketh honourable.
And this [is] a people seized and spoiled, Snared in holes — all of them, And in houses of restraint they were hidden, They have been for a prey, And there is no deliverer, A spoil, and none is saying, 'Restore.'
Who among you giveth ear [to] this? Attendeth, and heareth afterwards.
Who hath given Jacob for a spoil, And Israel to the spoilers? Is it not Jehovah — He against whom we sinned? Yea, they have not been willing in His ways to walk, Nor have they hearkened to His law.
And He poureth on him fury, His anger, and the strength of battle, And it setteth him on fire round about, And he hath not known, And it burneth against him, and he layeth it not to heart!
And now, thus said Jehovah, Thy Creator, O Jacob, and thy Fashioner, O Israel, Be not afraid, for I have redeemed thee, I have called on thy name — thou [art] Mine.
When thou passest into waters, I [am] with thee, And into floods, they do not overflow thee, When thou goest into fire, thou art not burnt, And a flame doth not burn against thee.
For I — Jehovah thy God, The Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour, I have appointed Egypt thine atonement, Cush and Seba in thy stead.
Since thou wast precious in Mine eyes, Thou wast honoured, and I have loved thee, And I appoint men in thy stead, And peoples instead of thy life.
Be not afraid, for I [am] with thee, From the east I bring in thy seed, And from the west I gather thee.
I am saying to the north, 'Give up,' And to the south, 'Restrain not.' Bring in My sons from afar, And My daughters from the end of the earth.
Every one who is called by My name, Even for My honour I have created him, I have formed him, yea, I have made him.
He brought out a blind people who have eyes, And deaf ones who have ears.
All the nations have been gathered together, And the peoples are assembled, Who among them declareth this, And former things causeth us to hear? They give their witnesses, And they are declared righteous, And they hear and say, 'Truth.'
Ye [are] My witnesses, an affirmation of Jehovah, And My servant whom I have chosen, So that ye know and give credence to Me, And understand that I [am] He, Before Me there was no God formed, And after Me there is none.
I — I [am] Jehovah, And besides Me there is no saviour.
I — I declared, and saved, and proclaimed, And there is no stranger with you, And ye [are] My witnesses, an affirmation of Jehovah, And I [am] God.
Even from the day I [am] He, And there is no deliverer from My hand, I work, and who doth turn it back?
Thus said Jehovah, your Redeemer, The Holy One of Israel: 'For your sake I have sent to Babylon, And caused bars to descend — all of them, And the Chaldeans, whose song [is] in the ships.
I [am] Jehovah, your Holy One, Creator of Israel, your King.'
Thus said Jehovah, Who is giving in the sea a way, And in the strong waters a path.
Who is bringing forth chariot and horse, A force, even a strong one: 'Together they lie down — they rise not, They have been extinguished, As flax they have been quenched.'
Remember not former things, And ancient things consider not.
Lo, I am doing a new thing, now it springeth up, Do ye not know it? Yea, I put in a wilderness a way, In a desolate place — floods.
Honour me doth the beast of the field, Dragons and daughters of an ostrich, For I have given in a wilderness waters, Floods in a desolate place, To give drink to My people — My chosen.
This people I have formed for Myself, My praise they recount.
And Me thou hast not called, O Jacob, For thou hast been wearied of me, O Israel,
Thou hast not brought in to Me, The lamb of thy burnt-offerings, And [with] thy sacrifices thou hast not honoured Me, I have not caused thee to serve with a present, Nor wearied thee with frankincense.
Thou hast not bought for Me with money sweet cane, And [with] the fat of thy sacrifices hast not filled Me, Only — thou hast caused Me to serve with thy sins, Thou hast wearied Me with thine iniquities.
I — I [am] He who is blotting out Thy transgressions for Mine own sake, And thy sins I do not remember.
Cause me to remember — we are judged together, Declare thou that thou mayest be justified.
Thy first father sinned, And thine interpreters transgressed against me,
And I pollute princes of the sanctuary, And I give Jacob to destruction, and Israel to revilings!
And now, hear, O Jacob, My servant, And Israel, whom I have fixed on:
Thus said Jehovah, thy Maker, and thy Former, From the womb He doth help thee; Fear not, my servant Jacob, And Jeshurun, whom I have fixed on.
For I pour waters on a thirsty one, And floods on a dry land, I pour My Spirit on thy seed, And My blessing on thine offspring.
And they have sprung up as among grass, As willows by streams of water.
This [one] saith, For Jehovah I [am], And this calleth [himself] by the name of Jacob, And this [one] writeth [with] his hand, 'For Jehovah,' and by the name of Israel surnameth himself.
Thus said Jehovah, king of Israel, And his Redeemer, Jehovah of Hosts: 'I [am] the first, and I the last, And besides Me there is no God.
And who as I, doth call and declare it, And arrange it for Me, Since My placing the people of antiquity, And things that are coming, And those that do come, declare they to them?
Fear not, nor be afraid, Have I not from that time caused thee to hear, and declared? And ye [are] My witnesses, Is there a God besides Me? yea, there is none, A Rock I have not known.
Framers of a graven image [are] all of them emptiness, And their desirable things do not profit, And their own witnesses they [are], They see not, nor know, that they may be ashamed.
Who hath formed a god, And a molten image poured out — not profitable?
Lo, all his companions are ashamed, As to artisans — they [are] of men, All of them gather together, they stand up, They fear, they are ashamed together.
He hath wrought iron [with] an axe, And hath wrought with coals, And with hammers doth form it, And doth work it by his powerful arm, Yea, he is hungry, and there is no power, He doth not drink water, and he is wearied.
He hath wrought [with] wood, He hath stretched out a rule, He doth mark it out with a line, He maketh it with carving tools, And with a compass he marketh it out, And maketh it according to the form of a man, According to the beauty of a man, To remain in the house.
Cutting down to himself cedars, He taketh also a cypress, and an oak, And he strengtheneth [it] for himself Among the trees of a forest, He hath planted an ash, and the shower doth nourish [it].
And it hath been for man to burn, And he taketh of them, and becometh warm, Yea, he kindleth [it], and hath baked bread, Yea, he maketh a god, and boweth himself, He hath made it a graven image, And he falleth down to it.
Half of it he hath burnt in the fire, By [this] half of it he eateth flesh, He roasteth a roasting, and is satisfied, Yea, he is warm, and saith: 'Aha, I have become warm, I have enjoyed the light.
And its remnant for a god he hath made — For his graven image, He falleth down to it, and worshippeth, And prayeth unto it, and he saith, 'Deliver me, for my god thou [art].'
They have not known, nor do they understand, For He hath daubed their eyes from seeing, Their heart from acting wisely.
And none doth turn [it] back unto his heart, Nor hath knowledge nor understanding to say, 'Half of it I have burned in the fire, Yea, also, I have baked bread over its coals, I roast flesh and I eat, And its remnant for an abomination I make, To the stock of a tree I fall down.'
Feeding on ashes, the heart is deceived, It hath turned him aside, And he delivereth not his soul, nor saith: 'Is there not a lie in my right hand?'
Remember these, O Jacob, and Israel, For My servant thou [art], I formed thee, a servant to Me thou [art], O Israel, thou dost not forget Me.
I have blotted out, as [by] a thick cloud, Thy transgressions, And as [by] a cloud thy sins, Return unto Me, for I have redeemed thee.
Sing, O heavens, for Jehovah hath wrought, Shout, O lower parts of earth, Break forth, O mountains, with singing, Forest, and every tree in it, For Jehovah hath redeemed Jacob, And in Israel He doth beautify Himself.
Thus said Jehovah, thy redeemer, And thy framer from the womb: 'I [am] Jehovah, doing all things, Stretching out the heavens by Myself, Spreading out the earth — who [is] with Me?
Making void the tokens of devisers, And diviners it maketh mad, Turning the wise backward, And their knowledge it maketh foolish.
Confirming the word of His servant, The counsel of His messengers it perfecteth, Who is saying of Jerusalem, She is inhabited, And of cities of Judah, They shall be built, and her wastes I raise up,
Who is saying to the deep, Be dry, and thy rivers I cause to dry up,
Who is saying of Cyrus, My shepherd, And all my delight He doth perfect, So as to say of Jerusalem, Thou art built, And of the temple, Thou art founded.
Thus said Jehovah, To His anointed, to Cyrus, Whose right hand I have laid hold on, To subdue nations before him, Yea, loins of kings I loose, To open before him two-leaved doors, Yea, gates are not shut:
'I go before thee, and crooked places make straight, Two-leaved doors of brass I shiver, And bars of iron I cut asunder,
And have given to thee treasures of darkness, Even treasures of secret places, So that thou knowest that I, Jehovah, Who am calling on thy name — [am] the God of Israel.
For the sake of my servant Jacob, And of Israel My chosen, I call also thee by thy name, I surname thee, And thou hast not known Me.
I [am] Jehovah, and there is none else, Except Me there is no God, I gird thee, and thou hast not known Me.
So that they know from the rising of the sun, And from the west, that there is none besides Me, I [am] Jehovah, and there is none else,
Forming light, and preparing darkness, Making peace, and preparing evil, I [am] Jehovah, doing all these things.'
Drop, ye heavens, from above, And clouds do cause righteousness to flow, Earth openeth, and they are fruitful, Salvation and righteousness spring up together, I, Jehovah, have prepared it.
Woe [to] him who is striving with his Former, (A potsherd with potsherds of the ground!) Doth clay say to its Framer, 'What dost thou?' And thy work, 'He hath no hands?'
Woe [to] him who is saying to a father, 'What dost thou beget?' Or to a wife, 'What dost thou bring forth?
Thus said Jehovah, The Holy One of Israel, and his Former: Ask Me of the things coming concerning My sons, Yea, concerning the work of My hands, ye command Me.'
I made earth, and man on it prepared, I — My hands stretched out the heavens, And all their host I have commanded.
I have stirred him up in righteousness, And all his ways I make straight, He doth build My city, and My captivity doth send out, Not for price, nor for bribe, said Jehovah of Hosts.
Thus said Jehovah, 'The labour of Egypt, And the merchandise of Cush, And of the Sebaim — men of measure, Unto thee pass over, and thine they are, After thee they go, in fetters they pass over, And unto thee they bow themselves, Unto thee they pray: Only in thee [is] God, And there is none else, no [other] God.
Surely Thou [art] a God hiding Thyself, God of Israel — Saviour!
They have been ashamed, And they have even blushed — all of them, Together gone in confusion have those carving images.
Israel hath been saved in Jehovah, A salvation age-during! Ye are not ashamed nor confounded Unto the ages of eternity!
For thus said Jehovah, Creator of heaven, He is God, Former of earth, and its Maker, He established it — not empty He prepared it, For inhabiting He formed it: 'I [am] Jehovah, and there is none else.
Not in secret have I spoken, in a dark place of the earth, I have not said to the seed of Jacob, In vain seek ye Me, I [am] Jehovah, speaking righteousness, Declaring uprightness.
Be gathered, and come in, Come nigh together, ye escaped of the nations, They have not known, Who are lifting up the wood of their graven image, And praying unto a god [that] saveth not.
Declare ye, and bring near, Yea, they take counsel together, Who hath proclaimed this from of old? From that time hath declared it? Is it not I — Jehovah? And there is no other god besides Me, A God righteous and saving, there is none save Me.
Turn to Me, and be saved, all ends of the earth, For I [am] God, and there is none else.
By Myself I have sworn, Gone out from my mouth in righteousness hath a word, And it turneth not back, That to Me, bow doth every knee, every tongue swear.
Only in Jehovah, said hath one, Have I righteousness and strength, Unto Him he cometh in, And ashamed are all those displeased with Him.
In Jehovah are all the seed of Israel justified, And they boast themselves.'
Bowed down hath Bel, stooping is Nebo, Their idols have been for the beast and for cattle, Your burdens are loaded, a burden to the weary.
They have stooped, they have bowed together, They have not been able to deliver the burden, And themselves into captivity have gone.
Hearken unto Me, O house of Jacob, And all the remnant of Israel, Who are borne from the belly, Who are carried from the womb,
Even to old age I [am] He, and to grey hairs I carry, I made, and I bear, yea, I carry and deliver.
To whom do ye liken Me, and make equal? And compare Me, that we may be like?
— They are pouring out gold from a bag, And silver on the beam they weigh, They hire a refiner, and he maketh it a god, They fall down, yea, they bow themselves.
They lift him up on the shoulder, They carry him, and cause him to rest in his place, And he standeth, from his place he moveth not, Yea, one crieth unto him, and he answereth not, From his adversity he saveth him not.
Remember this, and shew yourselves men, Turn [it] back, O transgressors, to the heart.
Remember former things of old, For I [am] Mighty, and there is none else, God — and there is none like Me.
Declaring from the beginning the latter end, And from of old that which hath not been done, Saying, 'My counsel doth stand, And all My delight I do.'
Calling from the east a ravenous bird, From a far land the man of My counsel, Yea, I have spoken, yea, I bring it in, I have formed [it], yea, I do it.
Hearken unto Me, ye mighty in heart, Who are far from righteousness.
I have brought near My righteousness, It is not far off, And My salvation — it doth not tarry, And I have given in Zion salvation, To Israel My glory!
Come down, and sit on the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, Sit on the earth, there is no throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans, For no more do they cry to thee, 'O tender and delicate one.'
Take millstones, and grind flour, Remove thy veil, draw up the skirt, Uncover the leg, pass over the floods.
Revealed is thy nakedness, yea, seen is thy reproach, Vengeance I take, and I meet not a man.
Our redeemer [is] Jehovah of Hosts, His name [is] the Holy One of Israel.
Sit silent, and go into darkness, O daughter of the Chaldeans, For no more do they cry to thee, 'Mistress of kingdoms.'
I have been wroth against My people, I have polluted Mine inheritance And I give them into thy hand, Thou hast not appointed for them mercies, On the aged thou hast made thy yoke very heavy,
And thou sayest, 'To the age I am mistress,' While thou hast not laid these things to thy heart, Thou hast not remembered the latter end of it.
And now, hear this, O luxurious one, Who is sitting confidently — Who is saying in her heart, 'I [am], and none else, I sit not a widow, nor know bereavement.'
And come in to thee do these two things, In a moment, in one day, childlessness and widowhood, According to their perfection they have come upon thee, In the multitude of thy sorceries, In the exceeding might of thy charms.
And thou art confident in thy wickedness, Thou hast said, 'There is none seeing me,' Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, It is turning thee back, And thou sayest in thy heart, 'I [am], and none else.'
And come in on thee hath evil, Thou knowest not its rising, And fall on thee doth mischief, Thou art not able to pacify it, And come on thee suddenly doth desolation, Thou knowest not.
Stand, I pray thee, in thy charms, And in the multitude of thy sorceries, In which thou hast laboured from thy youth, It may be thou art able to profit, It may be thou dost terrify!
Thou hast been wearied in the multitude of thy counsels, Stand up, I pray thee, and save thee, Let the charmers of the heavens, Those looking on the stars, Those teaching concerning the months, From those things that come on thee!
Lo, they have been as stubble! Fire hath burned them, They deliver not themselves from the power of the flame, There is not a coal to warm them, a light to sit before it.
So have they been to thee with whom thou hast laboured, Thy merchants from thy youth, Each to his passage they have wandered, Thy saviour is not!
Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, Who are called by the name of Israel, And from the waters of Judah came out, Who are swearing by the name of Jehovah, And of the God of Israel make mention, Not in truth nor in righteousness.
For from the Holy City they have been called, And on the God of Israel been supported, Jehovah of Hosts [is] His name.
The former things from that time I declared, And from my mouth they have gone forth, And I proclaim them, Suddenly I have done, and it cometh.
From my knowing that thou art obstinate, And a sinew of iron thy neck, And thy forehead brass,
And I declare to thee from that time, Before it cometh I have caused thee to hear, Lest thou say, 'Mine idol hath done them, And my graven image, And my molten image did command them.
Thou hast heard, see the whole of it, And ye, do ye not declare? I have caused thee to hear new things from this time, And things reserved that ye knew not.
Now they have been produced and not from that time, Yea, before the day, and thou hast not heard them, Lest thou say, 'Lo, I have known them.'
Yea, thou hast not heard, Yea, thou hast not known, Yea, from that time not opened hath thine ear, For I have known thou dealest treacherously, And 'Transgressor from the belly,' One is crying to thee.
For My name's sake I defer Mine anger, And My praise I restrain for thee, So as not to cut thee off.
Lo, I have refined thee, and not with silver, I have chosen thee in a furnace of affliction.
For My sake, for Mine own sake, I do [it], For how is it polluted? And Mine honour to another I give not.
Hearken to me, O Jacob, and Israel, My called one, I [am] He, I [am] first, and I [am] last;
Also, My hand hath founded earth, And My right hand stretched out the heavens, I am calling unto them, they stand together.
Be gathered all of you, and hear, Who among them did declare these things? Jehovah hath loved him, He doth His pleasure on Babylon, And His arm [is on] the Chaldeans.
I — I have spoken, yea, I have called him, I have brought him in, And he hath made prosperous his way.
Come ye near unto me, hear this, Not from the beginning in secret spake I, From the time of its being, there [am] I, And now the Lord Jehovah hath sent me, and His Spirit.
Thus said Jehovah, thy redeemer, The Holy One of Israel, 'I [am] Jehovah thy God, teaching thee to profit, Causing thee to tread in the way thou goest.
O that thou hadst attended to My commands, Then as a river is thy peace, And thy righteousness as billows of the sea,
And as sand is thy seed, And the offspring of thy bowels as its gravel, Not cut off nor destroyed his name before Me.
Go out from Babylon, flee from the Chaldeans, With a voice of singing declare, Cause ye this to be heard, Bring it forth unto the end of the earth, Say, Redeemed hath Jehovah His servant Jacob.
And they have not thirsted in waste places, He hath caused them to go on, Waters from a rock he hath caused to flow to them, Yea, he cleaveth a rock, and flow do waters.
There is no peace, said Jehovah, to the wicked!
Hearken, O isles, unto me, And attend, O peoples, from afar, Jehovah from the womb hath called me, From the bowels of my mother He hath made mention of my name.
And he maketh my mouth as a sharp sword, In the shadow of His hand He hath hid me, And He maketh me for a clear arrow, In His quiver He hath hid me.
And He saith to me, 'My servant Thou art, O Israel, In whom I beautify Myself.'
And I said, 'For a vain thing I laboured, For emptiness and vanity my power I consumed, But my judgment [is] with Jehovah, And my wage with my God.
And now, said Jehovah, who is forming me from the belly for a servant to Him, To bring back Jacob unto Him, (Though Israel is not gathered, Yet I am honoured in the eyes of Jehovah, And my God hath been my strength.)
And He saith, 'It hath been a light thing That thou art to Me for a servant To raise up the tribes of Jacob, And the preserved of Israel to bring back, And I have given thee for a light of nations, To be My salvation unto the end of the earth.'
Thus said Jehovah, Redeemer of Israel, His Holy One, To the despised in soul, To the abominated of a nation, To the servant of rulers: 'Kings see, and have risen, princes, and worship, For the sake of Jehovah, who is faithful, The Holy of Israel, and He chooseth thee.'
Thus said Jehovah: 'In a time of good pleasure I answered thee, And in a day of salvation I helped thee, And I keep thee, and give thee, For a covenant of the people, To establish the earth, To cause to inherit desolate inheritances.
To say to the bound, Go out, To those in darkness, Be uncovered. On the ways they feed, And in all high places is their pasture.
They do not hunger, nor thirst, Nor smite them doth mirage and sun, For He who is pitying them doth lead them, And by fountains of waters doth tend them.
And I have made all My mountains for a way, And My highways are lifted up.
Lo, these from afar come in, And lo, these from the north, and from the sea, And these from the land of Sinim.
Sing, O heavens, and joy, O earth, And break forth, O mountains, with singing, For comforted hath Jehovah His people, And His afflicted ones He doth pity.
And Zion saith, 'Jehovah hath forsaken me, And my Lord hath forgotten me.'
Forget doth a woman her suckling, The loved one — the son of her womb? Yea, these forget — but I — I forget not thee.
Lo, on the palms of the hand I have graven thee, Thy walls [are] before Me continually.
Hastened have those building thee, Those destroying thee, and laying thee waste, go out from thee.
Lift up round about thine eyes and see, All of them have been gathered, They have come to thee. I live, an affirmation of Jehovah! Surely all of them as an ornament thou puttest on, And thou bindest them on like a bride.
Because thy wastes, and thy desolate places, And the land of thy ruins, Surely now are straitened because of inhabitants, And far off have been those consuming thee.
Again do the sons of thy bereavement say in thine ears: 'The place is too strait for me, Come nigh to me — and I dwell.'
And thou hast said in thy heart: 'Who hath begotten for me — these? And I bereaved and gloomy, A captive, and turned aside, And these — who hath nourished? Lo, I — I was left by myself, these — whence [are] they?
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: 'Lo, I lift up unto nations My hand, And unto peoples I raise up Mine ensign, And they have brought thy sons in the bosom, And thy daughters on the shoulder are carried.
And kings have been thy nursing fathers, And their princesses thy nursing mothers; Face to the earth — they bow down to thee, And the dust of thy feet they lick up, And thou hast known that I [am] Jehovah, That those expecting Me are not ashamed.
Is prey taken from the mighty? And the captive of the righteous delivered?
For thus said Jehovah: Even the captive of the mighty is taken, And the prey of the terrible is delivered, And with thy striver I strive, and thy sons I save.
And I have caused thine oppressors to eat their own flesh, And as new wine they drink their own blood, And known have all flesh that I, Jehovah, Thy saviour, and thy redeemer, [Am] the Mighty One of Jacob!'
Thus said Jehovah: 'Where [is] this — the bill of your mother's divorce, Whom I sent away? Or to which of My creditors have I sold you? Lo, for your iniquities ye have been sold, And for your transgressions Hath your mother been sent away.
Wherefore have I come, and there is no one? I called, and there is none answering, Hath My hand been at all short of redemption? And is there not in me power to deliver? Lo, by My rebuke I dry up a sea, I make rivers a wilderness, Their fish stinketh, for there is no water, And dieth with thirst.
I clothe the heavens [with] blackness, And sackcloth I make their covering.
The Lord Jehovah hath given to me The tongue of taught ones, To know to aid the weary [by] a word, He waketh morning by morning, He waketh for me an ear to hear as taught ones.
The Lord Jehovah opened for me the ear, And I rebelled not — backward I moved not.
My back I have given to those smiting, And my cheeks to those plucking out, My face I hid not from shame and spitting.
And the Lord Jehovah giveth help to me, Therefore I have not been ashamed, Therefore I have set my face as a flint, And I know that I am not ashamed.
Near [is] He who is justifying me, Who doth contend with me? We stand together, who [is] mine opponent? Let him come nigh unto me.
Lo, the Lord Jehovah giveth help to me, Who [is] he that declareth me wicked? Lo, all of them as a garment wear out, A moth doth eat them.
Who [is] among you, fearing Jehovah, Hearkening to the voice of His servant, That hath walked in dark places, And there is no brightness for him? Let him trust in the name of Jehovah, And lean upon his God.
Lo, all ye kindling a fire, girding on sparks, Walk ye in the light of your fire, And in the sparks ye have caused to burn, From my hand hath this been to you, In grief ye lie down!
Hearken unto Me, ye pursuing righteousness, Seeking Jehovah, Look attentively unto the rock — ye have been hewn, And unto the hole of the pit — ye have been digged.
Look attentively unto Abraham your father, And unto Sarah — she bringeth you forth, For — one — I have called him, And I bless him, and multiply him.
For Jehovah hath comforted Zion, He hath comforted all her wastes, And He setteth her wilderness as Eden, And her desert as a garden of Jehovah, Joy, yea, gladness is found in her, Confession, and the voice of song.
Attend unto Me, O My people, And, O My nation, unto Me give ear. For a law from Me goeth out, And My judgment to the light, Peoples I do cause to rest.
Near [is] My righteousness, Gone out hath My salvation and Mine arms, Peoples they judge, on Me isles do wait, Yea, on Mine arm they do wait with hope.
Lift ye up to the heavens your eyes, And look attentively unto the earth beneath, For the heavens as smoke have vanished, And the earth as a garment weareth out, And its inhabitants as gnats do die, And My salvation is to the age, And My righteousness is not broken.
Hearken unto Me, ye who know righteousness, A people, in whose heart [is] My law, Fear ye not the reproach of men, And for their reviling be not affrighted,
For as a garment eat them doth a moth, And as wool eat them doth a worm, And My righteousness is to the age, And My salvation to all generations.
Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of Jehovah, Awake, as [in] days of old, generations of the ages, Art not Thou it that is hewing down Rahab, Piercing a dragon!
Art not Thou it that is drying up a sea, Waters of a great deep? That hath made deep places of a sea A way for the passing of the redeemed?
And the ransomed of Jehovah turn back, And they have come to Zion with singing, And joy age-during [is] on their head, Gladness and joy they attain, Fled away have sorrow and sighing,
I — I [am] He — your comforter, Who [art] thou — and thou art afraid of man? he dieth! And of the son of man — grass he is made!
And thou dost forget Jehovah thy maker, Who is stretching out the heavens, and founding earth, And thou dost fear continually all the day, Because of the fury of the oppressor, As he hath prepared to destroy. And where [is] the fury of the oppressor?
Hastened hath a wanderer to be loosed, And he doth not die at the pit, And his bread is not lacking.
And I [am] Jehovah thy God, Quieting the sea, when its billows roar, Jehovah of Hosts [is] His name.
And I put My words in thy mouth, And with the shadow of My hand have covered thee, To plant the heavens, and to found earth, And to say to Zion, 'My people [art] thou.'
Stir thyself, stir thyself, rise, Jerusalem, Who hast drunk from the hand of Jehovah The cup of His fury, The goblet, the cup of trembling, thou hast drunk, Thou hast wrung out.
There is not a leader to her Out of all the sons she hath borne, And there is none laying hold on her hand Out of all the sons she hath nourished.
These two are meeting thee, who is moved for thee? Spoiling and destruction — Famine and sword, who — I comfort thee?
Thy sons have been wrapped up, they have lain down, At the head of all out places, as a wild ox [in] a net, They are full of the fury of Jehovah, The rebuke of Thy God.
Therefore, hear, I pray thee, this, O afflicted and drunken one, and not with wine,
Thus said thy Lord Jehovah, and thy God, He pleadeth [for] his people: 'Lo, I have taken out of thy hand the cup of trembling, The goblet, the cup of My fury, Thou dost not add to drink it any more.
And I have put it into the hand of those afflicting thee, Who have said to thy soul, Bow down, and we pass over, And thou makest as the earth thy body, And as the street to those passing by!'
Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O Zion, Put on the garments of thy beauty, Jerusalem — the Holy City; For enter no more into thee again, Do the uncircumcised and unclean.
Shake thyself from dust, arise, sit, O Jerusalem, Bands of thy neck have loosed themselves, O captive, daughter of Zion.
For thus said Jehovah: 'For nought ye have been sold, And not by money are ye redeemed.'
For thus said the Lord Jehovah: 'To Egypt My people went down at first to sojourn there, And Asshur — for nought he hath oppressed it.
And now, what — to Me here, An affirmation of Jehovah, That taken is My people for nought? Its rulers cause howling, — an affirmation of Jehovah, And continually all the day My name is despised.
Therefore doth My people know My name, Therefore, in that day, Surely I [am] He who is speaking, behold Me.'
How comely on the mountains, Have been the feet of one proclaiming tidings, Sounding peace, proclaiming good tidings, Sounding salvation, Saying to Zion, 'Reigned hath thy God.'
The voice of thy watchmen! They have lifted up the voice, together they cry aloud, Because eye to eye they see, in Jehovah's turning back [to] Zion.
Break forth, sing together, O wastes of Jerusalem, For Jehovah hath comforted His people, He hath redeemed Jerusalem.
Jehovah hath made bare His holy arm Before the eyes of all the nations, And seen have all the ends of the earth, The salvation of our God.
Turn aside, turn aside, go out thence, The unclean touch not, go out from her midst, Be ye pure, who are bearing the weapons of Jehovah.
For not in haste do ye go out, Yea, with flight ye go not on, For going before you [is] Jehovah, And gathering you [is] the God of Israel!
Lo, My servant doth act wisely, He is high, and hath been lifted up, And hath been very high.
As astonished at thee have been many, (So marred by man his appearance, And his form by sons of men.)
So doth he sprinkle many nations. Concerning him kings shut their mouth, For that which was not recounted to them they have seen, And that which they had not heard they have understood!
Who hath given credence to that which we heard? And the arm of Jehovah, On whom hath it been revealed?
Yea, he cometh up as a tender plant before Him, And as a root out of a dry land, He hath no form, nor honour, when we observe him, Nor appearance, when we desire him.
He is despised, and left of men, A man of pains, and acquainted with sickness, And as one hiding the face from us, He is despised, and we esteemed him not.
Surely our sicknesses he hath borne, And our pains — he hath carried them, And we — we have esteemed him plagued, Smitten of God, and afflicted.
And he is pierced for our transgressions, Bruised for our iniquities, The chastisement of our peace [is] on him, And by his bruise there is healing to us.
All of us like sheep have wandered, Each to his own way we have turned, And Jehovah hath caused to meet on him, The punishment of us all.
It hath been exacted, and he hath answered, And he openeth not his mouth, As a lamb to the slaughter he is brought, And as a sheep before its shearers is dumb, And he openeth not his mouth.
By restraint and by judgment he hath been taken, And of his generation who doth meditate, That he hath been cut off from the land of the living? By the transgression of My people he is plagued,
And it appointeth with the wicked his grave, And with the rich [are] his high places, Because he hath done no violence, Nor [is] deceit in his mouth.
And Jehovah hath delighted to bruise him, He hath made him sick, If his soul doth make an offering for guilt, He seeth seed — he prolongeth days, And the pleasure of Jehovah in his hand doth prosper.
Of the labour of his soul he seeth — he is satisfied, Through his knowledge give righteousness Doth the righteous one, My servant, to many, And their iniquities he doth bear.
Therefore I give a portion to him among the many, And with the mighty he apportioneth spoil, Because that he exposed to death his soul, And with transgressors he was numbered, And he the sin of many hath borne, And for transgressors he intercedeth.
Sing, O barren, she hath not borne! Break forth with singing, and cry aloud, She hath not brought forth! For more [are] the sons of the desolate, Than the sons of the married one, said Jehovah.
Enlarge the place of thy tent, And the curtains of thy tabernacles they stretch out, Restrain not — lengthen thy cords, And thy pins make strong.
For right and left thou breakest forth, And thy seed doth nations possess,
And desolate cities they cause to be inhabited. Fear not, for thou art not ashamed, Nor blush, for thou art not confounded, For the shame of thy youth thou forgettest, And the reproach of thy widowhood Thou dost not remember any more.
For thy Maker [is] thy husband, Jehovah of Hosts [is] His name, And thy Redeemer [is] the Holy One of Israel, 'God of all the earth,' He is called.
For, as a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit, Called thee hath Jehovah, Even a youthful wife when she is refused, said thy God.
In a small moment I have forsaken thee, And in great mercies I do gather thee,
In overflowing wrath I hid my face [for] a moment from thee, And in kindness age-during I have loved thee, Said thy Redeemer — Jehovah!
For, the waters of Noah [is] this to Me, In that I have sworn — the waters of Noah Do not pass again over the earth — So I have sworn, Wrath is not upon thee, Nor rebuke against thee.
For the mountains depart, and the hills remove, And My kindness from thee departeth not, And the covenant of My peace removeth not, Said hath thy loving one — Jehovah.
O afflicted, storm-tossed, not comforted, Lo, I am laying with cement thy stones, And have founded thee with sapphires,
And have made of agate thy pinnacles, And thy gates of carbuncle stones, And all thy border of stones of delight,
And all thy sons are taught of Jehovah, And abundant [is] the peace of thy sons.
In righteousness thou establishest thyself, Be far from oppression, for thou fearest not, And from ruin, for it cometh not near unto thee.
Lo, he doth diligently assemble without My desire, Who hath assembled near thee? By thee he falleth!
Lo, I — I have prepared an artisan, Blowing on a fire of coals, And bringing out an instrument for his work, And I have prepared a destroyer to destroy.
No weapon formed against thee prospereth, And every tongue rising against thee, In judgment thou condemnest. This [is] the inheritance of the servants of Jehovah, And their righteousness from me, an affirmation of Jehovah!
Ho, every thirsty one, come ye to the waters, And he who hath no money, Come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy Without money and without price, wine and milk.
Why do ye weigh money for that which is not bread? And your labour for that which is not for satiety? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat good, And your soul doth delight itself in fatness.
Incline your ear, and come unto me, Hear, and your soul doth live, And I make for you a covenant age-during, The kind acts of David — that are stedfast.
Lo, a witness to peoples I have given him, A leader and commander to peoples.
Lo, a nation thou knowest not, thou callest, And a nation who know thee not unto thee do run, For the sake of Jehovah thy God, And for the Holy One of Israel, Because He hath beautified thee.
Seek ye Jehovah, while He is found, Call ye Him, while He is near,
Forsake doth the wicked his way, And the man of iniquity his thoughts, And he returneth to Jehovah, and He pitieth him, And unto our God for He multiplieth to pardon.
For not My thoughts [are] your thoughts, Nor your ways My ways, — an affirmation of Jehovah,
For high have the heavens been above the earth, So high have been My ways above your ways, And My thoughts above your thoughts.
For, as come down doth the shower, And the snow from the heavens, And thither returneth not, But hath watered the earth, And hath caused it to yield, and to spring up, And hath given seed to the sower, and bread to the eater,
So is My word that goeth out of My mouth, It turneth not back unto Me empty, But hath done that which I desired, And prosperously effected that [for] which I sent it.
For with joy ye go forth, And with peace ye are brought in, The mountains and the hills Break forth before you [with] singing, And all trees of the field clap the hand.
Instead of the thorn come up doth fir, Instead of the brier come up doth myrtle, And it hath been to Jehovah for a name, For a sign age-during — it is not cut off!
Thus said Jehovah: 'Keep ye judgment, and do righteousness, For near [is] My salvation to come, And My righteousness to be revealed.'
O the happiness of a man who doth this, And of a son of man who keepeth hold on it, Keeping the sabbath from polluting it, And keeping his hand from doing any evil.
Nor speak let a son of the stranger, Who is joined unto Jehovah, saying: 'Jehovah doth certainly separate me from His people.' Nor say let the eunuch, 'Lo, I am a tree dried up,'
For thus said Jehovah of the eunuchs, Who do keep My sabbaths, And have fixed on that which I desired, And are keeping hold on My covenant:
I have given to them in My house, And within My walls a station and a name, Better than sons and than daughters, A name age-during I give to him That is not cut off.
And sons of the stranger, who are joined to Jehovah, To serve Him, and to love the name of Jehovah, To be to Him for servants, Every keeper of the sabbath from polluting it, And those keeping hold on My covenant.
I have brought them unto My holy mountain, And caused them to rejoice in My house of prayer, Their burnt-offerings and their sacrifices [Are] for a pleasing thing on Mine altar, For My house, 'A house of prayer,' Is called for all the peoples.
An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, Who is gathering the outcasts of Israel: 'Again I gather to him — to his gathered ones.'
Every beast of the field, Come to devour, every beast in the forest.
Blind [are] his watchmen — all of them, They have not known, All of them [are] dumb dogs, they are not able to bark, Dozing, lying down, loving to slumber.
And the dogs [are] strong of desire, They have not known sufficiency, And they [are] shepherds! They have not known understanding, All of them to their own way they did turn, Each to his dishonest gain from his quarter:
'Come ye, I take wine, And we drink, quaff strong drink, And as this day hath been to-morrow, Great — exceeding abundant!'
The righteous hath perished, And there is none laying [it] to heart, And men of kindness are gathered, Without any considering that from the face of evil Gathered is the righteous one.
He entereth into peace, they rest on their beds, [Each] is going straightforward.
And ye, come near hither, O sons of a sorceress, seed of an adulterer, Even thou dost commit whoredom.
Against whom do ye sport yourselves? Against whom enlarge ye the mouth? Prolong ye the tongue? Are not ye children of transgression? a false seed?
Who are inflamed among oaks, under every green tree, Slaughtering the children in valleys, Under clefts of the rocks.
Among the smooth things of a brook [is] thy portion, They — they [are] thy lot, Also to them thou hast poured out an oblation, Thou hast caused a present to ascend, For these things am I comforted?
On a mountain, high and exalted, Thou hast set thy couch, Also thither thou hast gone up to make a sacrifice.
And behind the door, and the post, Thou hast set up thy memorial, For from Me thou hast removed, and goest up, Thou hast enlarged thy couch, And dost covenant for thyself among them, Thou hast loved their couch, the station thou sawest,
And goest joyfully to the king in ointment, And dost multiply thy perfumes, And sendest thine ambassadors afar off, And humblest thyself unto Sheol.
In the greatness of thy way thou hast laboured, Thou hast not said, 'It is desperate.' The life of thy hand thou hast found, Therefore thou hast not been sick.
And of whom hast thou been afraid, and fearest, That thou liest, and Me hast not remembered? Thou hast not laid [it] to thy heart, Am not I silent, even from of old? And Me thou fearest not?
I declare thy righteousness, and thy works, And they do not profit thee.
When thou criest, let thy gatherings deliver thee, And all of them carry away doth wind, Take away doth vanity, And whoso is trusting in Me inheriteth the land, And doth possess My holy mountain.
And he hath said, 'Raise up, raise up, prepare a way, Lift a stumbling-block out of the way of My people.'
For thus said the high and exalted One, Inhabiting eternity, and holy [is] His name: 'In the high and holy place I dwell, And with the bruised and humble of spirit, To revive the spirit of the humble, And to revive the heart of bruised ones,'
For, not to the age do I strive, nor for ever am I wroth, For the spirit from before Me is feeble, And the souls I have made.
For the iniquity of his dishonest gain, I have been wroth, and I smite him, Hiding — and am wroth, And he goeth on turning back in the way of his heart.
His ways I have seen, and I heal him, yea, I lead him, And recompense comforts to him and to his mourning ones.
Producing the fruit of the lips, 'Peace, peace,' to the far off, and to the near, And I have healed him, said Jehovah.
And the wicked [are] as the driven out sea, For to rest it is not able, And its waters cast out filth and mire.
There is no peace, said my God, to the wicked!
Call with the throat, restrain not, As a trumpet lift up thy voice, And declare to My people their transgression, And to the house of Jacob their sins;
Seeing — Me day by day they seek, And the knowledge of My ways they desire, As a nation that righteousness hath done, And the judgment of its God hath not forsaken, They ask of me judgments of righteousness, The drawing near of God they desire:
'Why have we fasted, and Thou hast not seen? We have afflicted our soul, and Thou knowest not.' Lo, in the day of your fast ye find pleasure, And all your labours ye exact.
Lo, for strife and debate ye fast, And to smite with the fist of wickedness, Ye fast not as [to] -day, To sound in the high place your voice.
Like this is the fast that I choose? The day of a man's afflicting his soul? To bow as a reed his head, And sackcloth and ashes spread out? This dost thou call a fast, And a desirable day — to Jehovah?
Is not this the fast that I chose — To loose the bands of wickedness, To shake off the burdens of the yoke, And to send out the oppressed free, And every yoke ye draw off?
Is it not to deal to the hungry thy bread, And the mourning poor bring home, That thou seest the naked and cover him, And from thine own flesh hide not thyself?
Then broken up as the dawn is thy light, And thy health in haste springeth up, Gone before thee hath thy righteousness, The honour of Jehovah doth gather thee.
Then thou callest, and Jehovah answereth, Thou criest, and He saith, 'Behold Me.' If thou turn aside from thy midst the yoke, The sending forth of the finger, And the speaking of vanity,
And dost bring out to the hungry thy soul, And the afflicted soul dost satisfy, Then risen in the darkness hath thy light, And thy thick darkness [is] as noon.
And Jehovah doth lead thee continually, And hath satisfied in drought thy soul, And thy bones He armeth, And thou hast been as a watered garden, And as an outlet of waters, whose waters lie not.
And they have built out of thee the wastes of old, The foundations of many generations thou raisest up, And one calleth thee, 'Repairer of the breach, Restorer of paths to rest in.'
If thou dost turn from the sabbath thy foot, Doing thine own pleasure on My holy day, And hast cried to the sabbath, 'A delight,' To the holy of Jehovah, 'Honoured,' And hast honoured it, without doing thine own ways, Without finding thine own pleasure, And speaking a word.
Then dost thou delight thyself on Jehovah, And I have caused thee to ride on high places of earth, And have caused thee to eat the inheritance of Jacob thy father, For the mouth of Jehovah hath spoken!
Lo, the hand of Jehovah Hath not been shortened from saving, Nor heavy his ear from hearing.
But your iniquities have been separating Between you and your God, And your sins have hidden The Presence from you — from hearing.
For your hands have been polluted with blood, And your fingers with iniquity, Your lips have spoken falsehood, Your tongue perverseness doth mutter.
There is none calling in righteousness, And there is none pleading in faithfulness, Trusting on emptiness, and speaking falsehood, Conceiving perverseness, and bearing iniquity.
Eggs of a viper they have hatched, And webs of a spider they weave, Whoso is eating their eggs doth die, And the crushed hatcheth a viper.
Their webs become not a garment, Nor do they cover themselves with their works, Their works [are] works of iniquity, And a deed of violence [is] in their hands.
Their feet to evil do run, And they haste to shed innocent blood, Their thoughts [are] thoughts of iniquity, Spoiling and destruction [are] in their highways.
A way of peace they have not known, And there is no judgment in their paths, Their paths they have made perverse for themselves, No treader in it hath known peace.
Therefore hath judgment been far from us, And righteousness reacheth us not, We wait for light, and lo, darkness, For brightness — in thick darkness we go,
We feel like the blind [for] the wall, Yea, as without eyes we feel, We have stumbled at noon as at twilight, In desolate places as the dead.
We make a noise as bears — all of us, And as doves we coo sorely; We wait for judgment, and there is none, For salvation — it hath been far from us.
For our transgressions have been multiplied before Thee, And our sins have testified against us, For our transgressions [are] with us, And our iniquities — we have known them.
Transgressing, and lying against Jehovah, And removing from after our God, Speaking oppression and apostasy, Conceiving and uttering from the heart Words of falsehood.
And removed backward is judgment, And righteousness afar off standeth, For truth hath been feeble in the street, And straightforwardness is not able to enter,
And the truth is lacking, And whoso is turning aside from evil, Is making himself a spoil. And Jehovah seeth, and it is evil in His eyes, That there is no judgment.
And He seeth that there is no man, And is astonished that there is no intercessor, And His own arm giveth salvation to Him, And His righteousness — it sustained Him.
And He putteth on righteousness as a breastplate, And an helmet of salvation on His head, And He putteth on garments of vengeance [for] clothing, And is covered, as [with] an upper-robe, [with] zeal.
According to deeds — so He repayeth. Fury to His adversaries, [their] deed to His enemies, To the isles [their] deed He repayeth.
And they fear from the west the name of Jehovah, And from the rising of the sun — His honour, When come in as a flood doth an adversary, The Spirit of Jehovah hath raised an ensign against him.
And come to Zion hath a redeemer, Even to captives of transgression in Jacob, An affirmation of Jehovah.
And I — this [is] My covenant with them, said Jehovah, My Spirit that [is] on thee, And My words that I have put in thy mouth, Depart not from thy mouth, And from the mouth of thy seed, And from the mouth of thy seed's seed, said Jehovah, From henceforth unto the age!
Arise, be bright, for come hath thy light, And the honour of Jehovah hath risen on thee.
For, lo, the darkness doth cover the earth, And thick darkness the peoples, And on thee rise doth Jehovah, And His honour on thee is seen.
And come have nations to thy light, And kings to the brightness of thy rising.
Lift up round about thine eyes and see, All of them have been gathered, they have come to thee, Thy sons from afar do come, And thy daughters on the side are supported.
Then thou seest, and hast become bright, And thine heart hath been afraid and enlarged, For turn unto thee doth the multitude of the sea, The forces of nations do come to thee.
A company of camels covereth thee, Dromedaries of Midian and Ephah, All of them from Sheba do come, Gold and frankincense they bear, And of the praises of Jehovah they proclaim the tidings.
All the flock of Kedar are gathered to thee, The rams of Nebaioth do serve thee, They ascend for acceptance Mine altar, And the house of My beauty I beautify.
Who [are] these — as a thick cloud they fly, And as doves unto their windows?
Surely for Me isles do wait, And ships of Tarshish first, To bring thy sons from afar, Their silver and their gold with them, To the name of Jehovah thy God, And to the Holy One of Israel, Because He hath beautified thee.
And sons of a stranger have built thy walls, And their kings do serve thee, For in My wrath I have smitten thee, And in My good pleasure I have pitied thee.
And opened have thy gates continually, By day and by night they are not shut, To bring unto thee the force of nations, Even their kings are led.
For the nation and the kingdom that do not serve thee perish, Yea, the nations are utterly wasted.
The honour of Lebanon unto thee doth come, Fir, pine, and box together, To beautify the place of My sanctuary, And the place of My feet I make honourable.
And come unto thee, bowing down, Have sons of those afflicting thee, And bowed themselves to the soles of thy feet Have all despising thee, And they have cried to thee: 'City of Jehovah, Zion of the Holy One of Israel.'
Instead of thy being forsaken and hated, And none passing through, I have made thee for an excellency age-during, A joy of generation and generation.
And thou hast sucked the milk of nations, Yea, the breast of kings thou suckest, And thou hast known that I, Jehovah, Thy Saviour, and Thy Redeemer, [Am] the Mighty One of Jacob.
Instead of the brass I bring in gold, And instead of the iron I bring in silver, And instead of the wood brass, And instead of the stone iron, And I have made thy inspection peace, And thy exactors righteousness.
Violence is not heard any more in thy land, Spoiling and destruction in thy borders, And thou hast called 'Salvation' thy walls, And thy gates, 'Praise.'
To thee no more is the sun for a light by day, And for brightness the moon giveth not light to thee, And Jehovah hath become to thee A light age-during, and thy God thy beauty.
Thy sun goeth no more in, And thy moon is not removed, For Jehovah becometh to thee a light age-during. And the days of thy mourning have been completed.
And thy people [are] all of them righteous, To the age they possess the earth, A branch of My planting, A work of My hands, to be beautified.
The little one doth become a chief, And the small one a mighty nation, I, Jehovah, in its own time do hasten it!
The Spirit of the Lord Jehovah [is] on me, Because Jehovah did anoint me To proclaim tidings to the humble, He sent me to bind the broken of heart, To proclaim to captives liberty, And to bound ones an opening of bands.
To proclaim the year of the good pleasure of Jehovah, And the day of vengeance of our God, To comfort all mourners.
To appoint to mourners in Zion, To give to them beauty instead of ashes, The oil of joy instead of mourning, A covering of praise for a spirit of weakness, And He is calling to them, 'Trees of righteousness, The planting of Jehovah — to be beautified.'
And they have built the wastes of old, The desolations of the ancients they raise up, And they have renewed waste cities, The desolations of generation and generation.
And strangers have stood and fed your flock, Sons of a foreigner [are] your husbandmen, And your vine-dressers.
And ye are called 'Priests of Jehovah,' 'Ministers of our God,' is said of you, The strength of nations ye consume, And in their honour ye do boast yourselves.
Instead of your shame and confusion, A second time they sing of their portion, Therefore in their land A second time do they take possession, Joy age-during [is] for them.
For I [am] Jehovah, loving judgment, Hating plunder for a burnt-offering, And I have given their wage in truth, And a covenant age-during I make for them.
And known among nations hath been their seed, And their offspring in the midst of the peoples, All their beholders acknowledge them, For they [are] a seed Jehovah hath blessed.
I greatly rejoice in Jehovah, Joy doth my soul in my God, For He clothed me with garments of salvation, With a robe of righteousness covereth Me, As a bridegroom prepareth ornaments, And as a bride putteth on her jewels.
For, as the earth bringeth forth her shoots, And as a garden causeth its sown things to shoot up, So the Lord Jehovah causeth righteousness and praise To shoot up before all the nations!
For Zion's sake I am not silent, And for Jerusalem's sake I do not rest, Till her righteousness go out as brightness, And her salvation, as a torch that burneth.
And nations have seen thy righteousness, And all kings thine honour, And He is giving to thee a new name, That the mouth of Jehovah doth define.
And thou hast been a crown of beauty in the hand of Jehovah, And a diadem of royalty in the hand of thy God,
It is not said of thee any more, 'Forsaken!' And of thy land it is not said any more, 'Desolate,' For to thee is cried, 'My delight [is] in her,' And to thy land, 'Married,' For Jehovah hath delighted in thee, And thy land is married.
For a young man doth marry a virgin, Thy Builders do marry thee, With the joy of a bridegroom over a bride, Rejoice over thee doth thy God.
'On thy walls, O Jerusalem, I have appointed watchmen, All the day, and all the night, Continually, they are not silent.' O ye remembrancers of Jehovah, Keep not silence for yourselves,
And give not silence to Him, Till He establish, and till He make Jerusalem A praise in the earth.
Sworn hath Jehovah by His right hand, Even by the arm of His strength: 'I give not thy corn any more [as] food for thine enemies, Nor do sons of a stranger drink thy new wine, For which thou hast laboured.
For, those gathering it do eat it, and have praised Jehovah, And those collecting it do drink it in My holy courts.'
Pass ye on, pass on through the gates, Prepare ye the way of the people, Raise up, raise up the highway, clear it from stones, Lift up an ensign over the peoples.
Lo, Jehovah hath proclaimed unto the end of the earth: 'Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Lo, thy salvation hath come,' Lo, his hire [is] with him, and his wage before him.
And they have cried to them, 'People of the Holy One, Redeemed of Jehovah,' Yea, to thee is called, 'Sought out one, a city not forsaken!'
'Who [is] this coming from Edom? With dyed garments from Bozrah? This that is honourable in his clothing, Travelling in the abundance of his power?' — 'I, speaking in righteousness, mighty to save.'
'Wherefore [is] thy clothing red? And thy garments as treading in a wine fat?'
— 'A wine-press I have trodden by myself, And of the peoples there is no one with me, And I tread them in mine anger, And I trample them in my fury, Sprinkled is their strength on my garments, And all my clothing I have polluted.
For the day of vengeance [is] in my heart, And the year of my redeemed hath come.
And I look attentively, and there is none helping, And I am astonished that there is none supporting, And give salvation to me doth mine own arm. And my wrath — it hath supported me.
And I tread down peoples in mine anger, And I make them drunk in my fury, And I bring down to earth their strength.
The kind acts of Jehovah I make mention of, The praises of Jehovah, According to all that Jehovah hath done for us, And the abundance of the goodness to the house of Israel, That He hath done for them, According to His mercies, And according to the abundance of His kind acts.
And He saith, Only My people they [are], Sons — they lie not, and He is to them for a saviour.
In all their distress [He is] no adversary, And the messenger of His presence saved them, In His love and in His pity He redeemed them, And He doth lift them up, And beareth them all the days of old.
And they have rebelled and grieved His Holy Spirit, And He turneth to them for an enemy, He Himself hath fought against them.
And He remembereth the days of old, Moses — his people. Where [is] He who is bringing them up from the sea, The shepherd of his flock? Where [is] He who is putting in its midst His Holy Spirit?
Leading by the right hand of Moses, the arm of His glory, Cleaving waters from before them, To make to Himself a name age-during.
Leading them through the depths, As a horse in a plain they stumble not.
As a beast into a valley goeth down, The Spirit of Jehovah causeth him to rest, So hast Thou led Thy people, To make to Thyself a glorious name.
Look attentively from the heavens, And see from Thy holy and beauteous habitation, Where [is] Thy zeal and Thy might? The multitude of Thy bowels and Thy mercies Towards me have refrained themselves.
For Thou [art] our Father, For Abraham hath not known us, And Israel doth not acknowledge us, Thou, O Jehovah, [art] our Father, Our redeemer from the age, [is] Thy name.
Why causest Thou us to wander, O Jehovah, from Thy ways? Thou hardenest our heart from Thy fear, Turn back for Thy servants' sake, The tribes of Thine inheritance.
For a little while did Thy holy people possess, Our adversaries have trodden down Thy sanctuary.
We have been from of old, Thou hast not ruled over them, Not called is Thy name upon them!
Didst Thou not rend the heavens? Thou didst come down, From thy presence did mountains flow, (As fire kindleth stubble — Fire causeth water to boil,) To make known Thy name to Thine adversaries, From Thy presence do nations tremble.
In Thy doing fearful things — we expect not, Thou didst come down, From Thy presence did mountains flow.
Even from antiquity [men] have not heard, They have not given ear, Eye hath not seen a God save Thee, He doth work for those waiting for Him.
Thou hast met with the rejoicer And the doer of righteousness, In Thy ways they remember Thee, Lo, Thou hast been wroth when we sin, By them [is] continuance, and we are saved.
And we are as unclean — all of us, And as a garment passing away, all our righteous acts; And we fade as a leaf — all of us. And our iniquities as wind do take us away.
And there is none calling in Thy name, Stirring up himself to lay hold on Thee, For Thou hast hid Thy face from us, And thou meltest us away by our iniquities.
And now, O Jehovah, thou [art] our Father, We [are] the clay, and Thou our Framer, And the work of Thy hand — all of us.
Be not wroth, O Jehovah, very sore, Nor for ever remember iniquity, Lo, look attentively, we beseech Thee, Thy people [are] we all.
Thy holy cities have been a wilderness, Zion a wilderness hath been, Jerusalem a desolation.
Our holy and our beautiful house, Where praise Thee did our fathers, Hath become burnt with fire, And all our desirable things have become a waste.
For these dost Thou refrain Thyself, Jehovah? Thou art silent, and dost afflict us very sore!'
I have been inquired of by those who asked not, I have been found by those who sought Me not, I have said, 'Behold Me, behold Me,' Unto a nation not calling in My name.
I have spread out My hands all the day Unto an apostate people, Who are going in the way not good after their own thoughts.
The people who are provoking Me to anger, To My face continually, Sacrificing in gardens, and making perfume on the bricks:
Who are dwelling among sepulchres, And lodge in reserved places, Who are eating flesh of the sow, And a piece of abominable things — their vessels.
Who are saying, 'Keep to thyself, come not nigh to me, For I have declared thee unholy.' These [are] a smoke in Mine anger, A fire burning all the day.
Lo, it is written before Me: 'I am not silent, but have recompensed; And I have recompensed into their bosom,
Your iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers together, said Jehovah, Who have made perfume on the mountains, And on the heights have reproached Me, And I have measured their former work into their bosom.'
Thus said Jehovah: As the new wine is found in the cluster, And one hath said, 'Destroy it not for a blessing [is] in it,' So I do for My servants' sake, not to destroy the whole.
And I have brought out from Jacob a seed, And from Judah a possessor of My mount, And possess it do My chosen ones, And My servants do dwell there.
And Sharon hath been for the habitation of a flock, And the valley of Achor for the lying down of a herd, For My people who have sought Me.
And ye [are] those forsaking Jehovah, Who are forgetting My holy mountain, Who are setting in array for Gad a table, And who are filling for Meni a mixture.
And I have numbered you for the sword, And all of you for slaughter bow down, Because I called, and ye have not answered, I have spoken, and ye have not hearkened, And ye do the evil thing in Mine eyes, And on that which I desired not — fixed.
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, My servants do eat, and ye do hunger, Lo, My servants do drink, and ye do thirst, Lo, My servants rejoice, and ye are ashamed,
Lo, My servants sing from joy of heart, And ye cry from pain of heart, And from breaking of spirit ye do howl.
And ye have left your name For an oath for My chosen ones, And the Lord Jehovah hath put thee to death, And to His servants He giveth another name.
So that he who is blessing himself in the earth, Doth bless himself In the God of faithfulness, And he who is swearing in the earth, Doth swear by the God of faithfulness, Because the former distresses have been forgotten, And because they have been hid from Mine eyes.
For, lo, I am creating new heavens, and a new earth, And the former things are not remembered, Nor do they ascend on the heart.
But joy ye, and rejoice for ever, that I [am] Creator, For, lo, I am creating Jerusalem a rejoicing, And her people a joy.
And I have rejoiced in Jerusalem, And have joyed in My people, And not heard in her any more Is the voice of weeping, and the voice of crying.
There is not thence any more a suckling of days, And an aged man who doth not complete his days, For the youth a hundred years old dieth, And the sinner, a hundred years old, is lightly esteemed.
And they have built houses, and inhabited, And planted vineyards, and eaten their fruit.
They do not build, and another inhabit, They do not plant, and another eat, For as the days of a tree [are] the days of My people, And the work of their hands wear out do My chosen ones.
They labour not for a vain thing, Nor do they bring forth for trouble, For the seed of the blessed of Jehovah [are] they, And their offspring with them.
And it hath come to pass, They do not yet call, and I answer, They are yet speaking, and I hear.
Wolf and lamb do feed as one, And a lion as an ox eateth straw, As to the serpent — dust [is] its food, They do no evil, nor destroy, In all My holy mountain, said Jehovah!
Thus said Jehovah: The heavens [are] My throne, And the earth My footstool, Where [is] this — the house that ye build for Me? And where [is] this — the place — My rest?
And all these My hand hath made, And all these things are, An affirmation of Jehovah! And unto this one I look attentively, Unto the humble and bruised in spirit, And who is trembling at My word.
Whoso slaughtereth the ox smiteth a man, Whoso sacrificeth the lamb beheadeth a dog, Whoso is bringing up a present — The blood of a sow, Whoso is making mention of frankincense, Is blessing iniquity. Yea, they have fixed on their own ways, And in their abominations their soul hath delighted.
I also — I fix on their vexations, And their fears I bring in to them, Because I have called, and there is none answering, I spake, and they have not hearkened, And they do the evil things in Mine eyes, And on that which I desired not — fixed.
Hear a word of Jehovah, Ye who are trembling unto His word, Said have your brethren who are hating you, Who are driving you out, for My name's sake: 'Honoured is Jehovah, and we look on your joy,' But they are ashamed.
A voice of noise [is] from the city, a voice from the temple, The voice of Jehovah, giving recompence to His enemies.
Before she is pained she hath brought forth, Before a pang cometh to her, She hath delivered a male.
Who hath heard anything like this? Who hath seen anything like these? Is earth caused to bring forth in one day? Born is a nation at once? For she hath been pained, Zion also hath borne her sons.
'Do I bring to the birth, And not cause to bring forth?' saith Jehovah, 'Am not I He who is causing to beget? I have also restrained,' said thy God.
Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, And be glad in her, all ye loving her, Rejoice ye with her for joy, All ye are mourning for her,
So that ye suck, and have been satisfied, From the breast of her consolations, So that ye wring out, and have delighted yourselves From the abundance of her honour.
For thus said Jehovah: 'Lo, I am stretching out to her peace as a river, And as an overflowing stream the honour of nations, And ye have sucked, on the side ye are carried, And on the knees ye are dandled.
As one whom his mother comforteth, so do I comfort you, Yea, in Jerusalem ye are comforted.
And ye have seen, and rejoiced hath your heart, And your bones as tender grass do flourish, And the hand of Jehovah hath been known unto His servants, And He hath been indignant with His enemies.
For, lo, Jehovah in fire cometh, And as a hurricane His chariots, To refresh in fury His anger, And His rebuke in flames of fire.
For by fire and by His sword, Doth Jehovah do judgment with all flesh. And many have been Jehovah's pierced ones.'
Those sanctifying and cleansing themselves at the gardens, After Ahad in the midst, Eating flesh of the sow, And of the abomination, and of the mouse, Together are consumed, An affirmation of Jehovah.
And I — their works and their thoughts, I come to gather all the nations and tongues, And they have come and seen My honour.
And I have set among them a sign, And have sent out of them those escaping unto the nations, (Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, drawing bow, Tubal and Javan, the isles that are far off,) Who have not heard My fame, nor seen Mine honour, And they have declared Mine honour among nations.
And they have brought all your brethren out of all the nations, A present to Jehovah, On horses, and on chariot, and on litters, And on mules, and on dromedaries, Unto My holy mountain Jerusalem, said Jehovah, As the sons of Israel bring the present in a clean vessel, Into the house of Jehovah.
And also of them I take for priests, For Levites, said Jehovah.
For, as the new heavens and the new earth that I am making, Are standing before Me, An affirmation of Jehovah! So remain doth your seed and your name.
And it hath been from month to month, And from sabbath to sabbath, Come do all flesh to bow themselves before Me, Said Jehovah.
And they have gone forth, And looked on the carcases of the men Who are transgressing against me, For their worm dieth not, And their fire is not quenched, And they have been an abhorrence to all flesh!
Words of Jeremiah son of Hilkiah, of the priests who [are] in Anathoth, in the land of Benjamin,
unto whom the word of Jehovah hath been in the days of Josiah son of Amon, king of Judah, in the thirteenth year of his reign,
and it is in the days of Jehoiakim son of Josiah, king of Judah, till the completion of the eleventh year of Zedekiah son of Josiah, king of Judah, till the removal of Jerusalem in the fifth month.
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Before I form thee in the belly, I have known thee; and before thou comest forth from the womb I have separated thee, a prophet to nations I have made thee.'
And I say, 'Ah, Lord Jehovah! lo, I have not known — to speak, for I [am] a youth.'
And Jehovah saith unto me, 'Do not say, I [am] a youth, for to all to whom I send thee thou goest, and all that I command thee thou speakest.
Be not afraid of their faces, for with thee [am] I to deliver thee, — an affirmation of Jehovah.'
And Jehovah putteth forth His hand, and striketh against my mouth, and Jehovah saith unto me, 'Lo, I have put my words in thy mouth.
See, I have charged thee this day concerning the nations, and concerning the kingdoms, to pluck up, and to break down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build, and to plant.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying, 'What art thou seeing, Jeremiah?' And I say, 'A rod of an almond tree I am seeing.'
And Jehovah saith unto me, 'Thou hast well seen: for I am watching over My word to do it.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me a second time, saying, 'What art thou seeing?' And I say, 'A blown pot I am seeing, and its face [is] from the north.'
And Jehovah saith unto me, 'From the north is the evil loosed against all inhabitants of the land.
For, lo, I am calling for all families of the kingdoms of the north, — an affirmation of Jehovah — and they have come, and put each his throne at the opening of the gates of Jerusalem, and by its walls round about, and by all cities of Judah.
And I have spoken My judgments with them concerning all their evil, in that they have forsaken Me, and make perfume to other gods, and bow themselves to the works of their own hands.
'And thou, thou dost gird up thy loins, and hast arisen, and spoken unto them all that I command thee: be not affrighted because of them, lest I affright thee before them.
And I, lo, I have given thee this day for a fenced city, and for an iron pillar, and for brazen walls over all the land, to the kings of Judah, to its heads, to its priests, and to the people of the land;
and they have fought against thee, and they prevail not against thee; for with thee [am] I, — an affirmation of Jehovah — to deliver thee.
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Go, and thou hast called in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, Thus said Jehovah: I have remembered for thee The kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, Thy going after Me in a wilderness, in a land not sown.
Holy [is] Israel to Jehovah, The first-fruit of His increase, All consuming him are guilty, Evil cometh in unto them, an affirmation of Jehovah.
Hear a word of Jehovah, O house of Jacob, And all ye families of the house of Israel.
Thus said Jehovah: What — have your fathers found in Me perversity, That they have gone far off from Me, And go after the vanity, and become vain,
And have not said, Where [is] Jehovah, Who bringeth us up out of the land of Egypt, Who leadeth us in a wilderness, In a land of deserts and pits, In a dry land, and of death-shade, In a land — none hath passed through it, Nor dwelt hath man there?'
Yea, I bring you in to a land of fruitful fields, To eat its fruit and its goodness, And ye come in and defile My land, And Mine inheritance have made an abomination.
The priests have not said, 'Where [is] Jehovah?' And those handling the law have not known Me. And the shepherds transgressed against Me, And the prophets have prophesied by Baal, And after those who profit not have gone.
Therefore, yet I plead with you, An affirmation of Jehovah, And with your sons' sons I plead.
For, pass to the isles of Chittim, and see, And to Kedar send, and consider well, And see if there hath been like this:
Hath a nation changed gods? (And they [are] no gods!) And My people hath changed its honour For that which doth not profit.
Be astonished, ye heavens, at this, Yea, be frightened, be greatly wasted, An affirmation of Jehovah.
For two evils hath My people done, Me they have forsaken, a fountain of living waters, To hew out for themselves wells — broken wells, That contain not the waters.
A servant [is] Israel? Is he a child of the house? Wherefore hath he been for a prey?
Against him roar do young lions, They have given forth their voice, And make his land become a desolation, His cities have been burnt without inhabitant.
Also sons of Noph and Tahapanes Consume thee — the crown of the head!
Dost thou not do this to thyself? [By] thy forsaking Jehovah thy God, At the time He is leading thee in the way?
And now, what — to thee in the way of Egypt, To drink the waters of Sihor? And what — to thee in the way of Asshur, To drink the waters of the River?
Instruct thee doth thy wickedness, And thy backslidings reprove thee, Know and see that an evil and a bitter thing [Is] thy forsaking Jehovah thy God, And My fear not being on thee, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah of Hosts.
For from of old thou hast broken thy yoke, Drawn away thy bands, and sayest, 'I do not serve,' For, on every high height, and under every green tree, Thou art wandering — a harlot.
And I planted thee a choice vine, wholly a true seed, And how hast thou been turned to Me, To the degenerate shoots of a strange vine?
But though thou dost wash with nitre, And dost multiply to thyself soap, Marked is thine iniquity before Me, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
How sayest thou, 'I have not been defiled, After the Baalim I have not gone?' See thy way in a valley, know what thou hast done, A swift dromedary winding her ways,
A wild ass accustomed to a wilderness, In the desire of her soul she hath swallowed up wind, Her meeting — who doth turn her back? None seeking her do weary themselves, In her month they find her.
Withhold thy foot from being unshod, And thy throat from thirst, And thou sayest, 'It is incurable, No, for I have loved strangers, and after them I go.'
As the shame of a thief when he is found, So put to shame have been the house of Israel, They, their kings, their heads, And their priests, and their prophets,
Saying to wood, 'My father [art] thou!' And to a stone, 'Thou hast brought me forth,' For they turned unto me the back and not the face, And in the time of their vexation, They say, 'Arise Thou, and save us.'
And where [are] thy gods, that thou hast made to thyself? Let them arise, if they may save thee, In the time of thy vexation, For — the number of thy cities have been thy gods, O Judah,
Why do ye strive with Me? All of you have transgressed against Me, An affirmation of Jehovah.
In vain I have smitten your sons, Instruction they have not accepted, Devoured hath your sword your prophets, As a destroying lion.
O generation, see ye the word of Jehovah: A wilderness have I been to Israel? A land of thick darkness? Wherefore have My people said, 'We mourned, We come not in again unto Thee.'
Doth a virgin forget her ornaments? A bride her bands? And My people have forgotten Me days without number.
What — dost thou make pleasing thy ways to seek love? Therefore even the wicked thou hast taught thy ways.
Also in thy skirts hath been found the blood of innocent needy souls, Not by digging have I found them, but upon all these.
And thou sayest, 'Because I have been innocent, Surely turned back hath His anger from me?' Lo, I have been judged with thee, Because of thy saying, 'I have not sinned.'
What? thou art very vile to repeat thy way, Even of Egypt thou art ashamed, As thou hast been ashamed of Asshur,
Also from this thou goest out, And thy hands on thy head, For Jehovah hath kicked at thy confidences, And thou dost not give prosperity to them!
Saying, 'Lo, one sendeth away his wife, And she hath gone from him, And she hath been to another man, Doth he turn back unto her again? Greatly defiled is not that land? And thou hast committed whoredom with many lovers, And turn again to Me, an affirmation of Jehovah.
Lift thine eyes to the high places, and see, Where hast thou not been lain with? On the ways thou hast sat for them, As an Arab in a wilderness, And thou defilest the land, By thy fornications, and by thy wickedness.
And withheld are showers, and gathered rain hath not been. The forehead of a whorish woman thou hast, Thou hast refused to be ashamed.
Hast thou not henceforth called to Me, 'My father, Thou [art] the leader of my youth?
Doth He keep to the age? watch for ever?' Lo, these things thou hast spoken, And thou dost the evil things, and prevailest.
And Jehovah saith unto me, in the days of Josiah the king, 'Hast thou seen that which backsliding Israel hath done? She is going on every high mountain, and unto the place of every green tree, and committeth fornication there.
And I say, after her doing all these, Unto Me thou dost turn back, and she hath not turned back, and see [it] doth her treacherous sister Judah.
And I see when (for all the causes whereby backsliding Israel committed adultery) I have sent her away, and I give the bill of her divorce unto her, that treacherous Judah her sister hath not feared, and goeth and committeth fornication — she also.
And it hath come to pass, from the vileness of her fornication, that the land is defiled, and she committeth fornication with stone and with wood.
And even in all this her treacherous sister Judah hath not turned back unto Me with all her heart, but with falsehood, an affirmation of Jehovah.'
And Jehovah saith unto me: 'Justified herself hath backsliding Israel, More than treacherous Judah.
Go, and thou hast proclaimed these words toward the north, and hast said, Turn back, O backsliding Israel, An affirmation of Jehovah! I cause not Mine anger to fall upon you, For I [am] kind, an affirmation of Jehovah, I watch not to the age.
Only, know thine iniquity, For against Jehovah thy God thou hast transgressed, And thou dost scatter thy ways to strangers, Under every green tree, And to My voice thou hast not hearkened, An affirmation of Jehovah.
Turn back, O backsliding sons, An affirmation of Jehovah. For I have ruled over you, And taken you one of a city, and two of a family, And have brought you to Zion,
And I have given to you shepherds According to Mine own heart, And they have fed you with knowledge and understanding.
And it hath come to pass, when ye are multiplied, And have been fruitful in the land, In those days — an affirmation of Jehovah, They say not any more, 'The ark of the covenant of Jehovah,' Nor doth it go up on the heart, Nor do they remember concerning it, Nor do they inspect, nor is it made again.
At that time they cry to Jerusalem, 'O throne of Jehovah,' And gathered unto her hath been all the nations, For the name of Jehovah, to Jerusalem, Nor do they go any more after the stubbornness of their evil heart.
In those days do the house of Judah Go unto the house of Israel, And they come together from the land of the south, unto the land That I caused your fathers to inherit.
And I have said, How do I put thee among the sons, And give to thee a desirable land, A beauteous inheritance of the hosts of nations, And I say, My father — ye do call to Me, And from after Me ye do not turn back.
But — a woman hath deceived her friend, So ye have dealt treacherously with Me, O house of Israel, an affirmation of Jehovah.
A voice on high places is heard — weeping, Supplications of the sons of Israel, For they have made perverse their way, They have forgotten Jehovah their God.
Turn back, O backsliding sons, I cause your backslidings to cease. — Behold us, we have come to Thee, For Thou [art] Jehovah our God.
Surely in vain from the heights, The multitude of mountains — Surely in Jehovah our God [is] the salvation of Israel.
And the shameful thing hath devoured The labour of our fathers from our youth, Their flock and their herd, Their sons and their daughters.
We have lain down in our shame, and cover us doth our confusion, For against Jehovah our God we have sinned, We, and our fathers, from our youth even unto this day, Nor have we hearkened to the voice of Jehovah our God!
If thou dost turn back, O Israel, An affirmation of Jehovah, unto Me turn back, And if thou dost turn aside Thine abominations from My face, Then thou dost not bemoan.
And thou hast sworn — Jehovah liveth, In truth, in judgment, and in righteousness, And blessed themselves in Him have nations, And in Him they boast themselves.
For thus said Jehovah, To the man of Judah, and to Jerusalem: Till for yourselves tillage, And do not sow unto the thorns.
Be circumcised to Jehovah, And turn aside the foreskins of your heart, O man of Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, Lest My fury go out as fire, and hath burned, And there is none quenching, Because of the evil of your doings.
Declare in Judah, and in Jerusalem sound, And say ye, 'Blow a trumpet in the land,' Call ye fully, and say ye: 'Be gathered, and we go in to the fenced city.'
Lift up an ensign Zionward, Strengthen yourselves, stand not still, For evil I am bringing in from the north, And a great destruction.
Gone up hath a lion from his thicket, And a destroyer of nations hath journeyed, He hath come forth from his place To make thy land become a desolation, Thy cities are laid waste, without inhabitant.
For this, gird on sackcloth, lament and howl, For the fierce anger of Jehovah hath not turned back from us.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, An affirmation of Jehovah: 'Perish doth the heart of the king, And the heart of the princes, And astonished have been the priests, And the prophets do wonder.'
And I say, 'Ah, Lord Jehovah, Surely thou hast entirely forgotten this people and Jerusalem, saying, Peace is for you, And struck hath a sword unto the soul!'
At that time it is said of this people, And of Jerusalem: 'A dry wind of high places in the wilderness,' The way of the daughter of My people, (Not for winnowing, nor for cleansing,)
A full wind from these doth come for Me, Now, also, I speak judgments with them.
Lo, as clouds he cometh up, And as a hurricane his chariots, Lighter than eagles have been his horses, Woe to us, for we have been spoiled.
Wash from evil thy heart, O Jerusalem, That thou mayest be saved, Till when dost thou lodge in thy heart Thoughts of thy strength?
For a voice is declaring from Dan, And sounding sorrow from mount Ephraim.
Make ye mention to the nations, Lo, sound ye to Jerusalem: 'Besiegers are coming from the land afar off, And they give forth against cities of Judah their voice.
As the keepers of a field They have been against her round about, For with Me she hath been rebellious, An affirmation of Jehovah.'
Thy way and thy doings have done these to thee, This [is] thy vexation, for [it is] bitter, For it hath struck unto thy heart.
My bowels, my bowels! I am pained [at] the walls of my heart, Make a noise for me doth My heart, I am not silent, For the voice of a trumpet I have heard, O my soul — a shout of battle!
Destruction on destruction is proclaimed, For spoiled hath been all the land, Suddenly spoiled have been my tents, In a moment — my curtains.
Till when do I see an ensign? Do I hear the voice of a trumpet?
For my people [are] foolish, me they have not known, Foolish sons [are] they, yea, they [are] not intelligent, Wise [are] they to do evil, And to do good they have not known.
I looked [to] the land, and lo, waste and void, And unto the heavens, and their light is not.
I have looked [to] the mountains, And lo, they are trembling. And all the hills moved themselves lightly.
I have looked, and lo, man is not, And all fowls of the heavens have fled.
I have looked, and lo, The fruitful place [is] a wilderness, And all its cities have been broken down, Because of Jehovah, Because of the fierceness of His anger.
For thus said Jehovah: All the land is a desolation, but a completion I make not.
For this doth the land mourn, And black have been the heavens above, because I have spoken — I have purposed, And I have not repented, Nor do I turn back from it.
From the voice of the horseman, And of him shooting with the bow, all the city is fleeing, They have come into thickets, And on cliffs they have gone up, All the city is forsaken, And there is no one dwelling in them.
And thou, O spoiled one, what dost thou? For thou puttest on scarlet, For thou adornest thyself [with] ornaments of gold. For thou rendest with pain thine eyes, In vain thou dost make thyself fair, Kicked against thee have doting ones, Thy life they do seek.
For a voice as of a sick woman I have heard, Distress, as of one bringing forth a first-born, The voice of the daughter of Zion, She bewaileth herself, she spreadeth out her hands, 'Woe to me now, for weary is my soul of slayers!'
Go to and fro in streets of Jerusalem, And see, I pray you, and know, And seek in her broad places, if ye find a man, If there be one doing judgment, seeking stedfastness — Then am I propitious to her.
And if they say, 'Jehovah liveth,' Surely to a falsehood they swear.
Jehovah, Thine eyes, are they not on stedfastness? Thou hast smitten them, and they have not grieved, Thou hast consumed them, They have refused to receive instruction, They made their faces harder than a rock, They have refused to turn back.
And I — I said, 'Surely these [are] poor, They have been foolish, For they have not known the way of Jehovah, The judgment of their God.
I get me to the great, and I speak with them, For they have known the way of Jehovah, The judgment of their God.' Surely they together have broken the yoke, They have drawn away the bands.
Therefore smitten them hath a lion out of the forest, A wolf of the deserts doth spoil them, A leopard is watching over their cities, Every one who is going out of them is torn, For many have been their transgressions, Mighty have been their backslidings.
For this I am not propitious to thee, Thy sons have forsaken Me, And are satisfied by that which is not god, I satisfy them, and they commit adultery, And at the house of a harlot They gather themselves together.
Fed horses — they have been early risers, Each to the wife of his neighbour they neigh.
For these do I not lay a charge? An affirmation of Jehovah, And on a nation such as this, Doth not My soul avenge itself?
Go ye up on her walls, and destroy, And a completion make not, Turn aside her branches, for they [are] not Jehovah's,
For dealt treacherously against Me have the house of Israel, And the house of Judah, an affirmation of Jehovah.
They have lied against Jehovah, And they say, '[It is] not He, Nor come in against us doth evil, Yea, sword and famine we do not see.
And the prophets become wind, And the word is not in them,' — thus it is done by them.
Therefore, thus said Jehovah, God of Hosts, Because of your speaking this word, Lo, I am making My words in thy mouth become fire, And this people wood, and it hath devoured them.
Lo, I am bringing against you a nation from afar, O house of Israel, an affirmation of Jehovah, A nation — strong it [is], a nation — from of old it [is], A nation — thou knowest not its tongue, Nor understandest what it speaketh.
Its quiver [is] as an open sepulchre, All of them — mighty ones.
And it hath consumed thy harvest and thy bread, They consume thy sons, and thy daughters, It consumeth thy flock, and thy herd, It consumeth thy vine, and thy fig-tree, It maketh poor thy fenced cities, In which thou art trusting — by the sword.
And even in those days, an affirmation of Jehovah, I do not make you a completion.
And it hath come to pass, when ye say, 'For what hath Jehovah our God done to us all these?' That thou hast said unto them, 'As ye have forsaken Me, And serve the gods of a foreigner in your land, So do ye serve strangers in a land not yours.
Declare ye this in the house of Jacob, And sound ye it in Judah, saying,
Hear ye, I pray you, this, O people, foolish and without heart, Eyes they have, and they see not, Ears they have, and they hear not.
Me do ye not fear, an affirmation of Jehovah? From My presence are ye not pained? Who hath made sand the border of the sea, A limit age-during, and it passeth not over it, They shake themselves, and they are not able, Yea, sounded have its billows, and they pass not over.
And this people hath an apostate and rebellious heart, They have turned aside, and they go on.
And they have not said in their heart, 'Let us fear, we pray you, Jehovah our God, who is giving rain, The sprinkling and the gathered, in its season, The appointed weeks of harvest He keepeth for us.'
Your iniquities have turned these away, And your sins have kept the good from you.
For the wicked have been found among My people. It looketh about the covering of snares, They have set up a trap — men they capture.
As a cage full of fowls, So their houses are full of deceit, Therefore they have been great, and are rich.
They have been fat, they have shone, Yea, they have overpassed the acts of the evil, Judgment they have not judged, The judgment of the fatherless — and they prosper, And the judgment of the needy they have not judged.
For these do not I inspect, an affirmation of Jehovah, On a nation such as this, Doth not My soul avenge itself?
An astonishing and horrible thing hath been in the land.
The prophets have prophesied falsely, And the priests bear rule by their means, And My people have loved [it] so, And what do they at its latter end?
Strengthen yourselves, sons of Benjamin, From the midst of Jerusalem, And in Tekoa blow ye a trumpet, And over Beth-Haccerem lift ye up a flame, For evil hath been seen from the north, And great destruction.
The comely and the delicate one I have cut off, The daughter of Zion.
Unto her come do shepherds and their droves, They have stricken tents by her round about, They have fed each [in] his own station.
Sanctify ye against her the battle, Rise, and we go up at noon. Woe to us, for turned hath the day, For stretched out are the shades of evening,
'Rise, and we go up by night, And we destroy her palaces.'
For thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Cut down her wood, And pour out against Jerusalem a mount, She [is] the city to be inspected, Wholly — she is oppression in her midst.
As the digging of a well, is [for] its waters, So she hath digged [for] her wickedness, Violence and spoil is heard in her, Before My face continually [are] sickness and smiting.
Be instructed, O Jerusalem, Lest My soul be alienated from thee, Lest I make thee a desolation, a land not inhabited.
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: They surely glean, as a vine, the remnant of Israel, Put back thy hand, as a gatherer to the baskets.
To whom do I speak, and testify, and they hear? Lo, their ear [is] uncircumcised, And they are not able to attend. Lo, a word of Jehovah hath been to them for a reproach, They delight not in it.
And with the fury of Jehovah I have been filled, (I have been weary of containing,) To pour [it] on the suckling in the street, And on the assembly of youths together, For even husband with wife are captured, An elder with one full of days,
And their houses have been turned to others, Fields and wives together, For I stretch out My hand against the inhabitants of the land, An affirmation of Jehovah.
For from their least unto their greatest, Every one is gaining dishonest gain, And from prophet even unto priest, Every one is dealing falsely,
And they heal the breach of the daughter of my people slightly, Saying, 'Peace, peace!' and there is no peace.
They were ashamed when they did abomination! Yea, they are not at all ashamed, Yea, blushing they have not known, Therefore they do fall among those falling, In the time I have inspected them, They stumble, said Jehovah.
Thus said Jehovah: Stand ye by the ways and see, and ask for paths of old, Where [is] this — the good way? and go ye in it, And find rest for yourselves. And they say, 'We do not go.'
And I have raised up for you watchmen, Attend ye to the voice of the trumpet. And they say, 'We do not attend.'
Therefore hear, O nations, and know, O company, That which [is] upon them.
Hear, O earth, lo, I am bringing evil on this people, The fruit of their devices, For to My words they gave no attention, And My law — they kick against it.
Why [is] this to Me? frankincense from Sheba cometh, And the sweet cane from a land afar off, Your burnt-offerings [are] not for acceptance, And your sacrifices have not been sweet to Me.
Therefore thus said Jehovah: Lo, I do give to this people stumbling blocks, And stumbled against them have fathers and sons together, The neighbour and his friend do perish.
Thus said Jehovah: Lo, a people hath come from a north country, And a great nation is stirred up from the sides of the earth.
Bow and javelin they take hold of, Fierce it [is], and they have no mercy, Their voice as a sea doth sound, And on horses they ride, set in array as a man of war, Against thee, O daughter of Zion.
'We have heard its sound, feeble have been our hands, Distress hath seized us, pain as of a travailing woman.
Go not forth to the field, And in the way walk not, For a sword hath the enemy, fear [is] round about.
O daughter of My people, Gird on sackcloth, and roll thyself in ashes, The mourning of an only one make for thee, A lamentation most bitter, For suddenly come doth the spoiler against us.
A watch-tower I have given thee, Among My people a fortress, And thou knowest, and hast tried their way.
All of them are turned aside by apostates, Walking slanderously — brass and iron, All of them are corrupters.
The bellows have been burnt, By fire hath the lead been consumed, In vain hath a refiner refined, And the wicked have not been drawn away.
'Silver rejected,' they have called to them, For Jehovah hath kicked against them!
The word that hath been unto Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,
Stand in the gate of the house of Jehovah, and thou hast proclaimed there this word, and hast said, Hear a word of Jehovah, all ye of Judah, who are coming in at these gates, to bow before Jehovah:
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, Amend your ways, and your doings, And I cause you to dwell in this place.
Do not trust for yourselves Unto the words of falsehood, saying, The temple of Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah, The temple of Jehovah [are] they!
For, if ye do thoroughly amend your ways and your doings, If ye do judgment thoroughly Between a man and his neighbour,
Sojourner, fatherless, and widow, ye oppress not, And innocent blood do not shed in this place, And after other gods do not walk, for evil to yourselves,
Then I have caused you to dwell in this place, In the land that I gave to your fathers, From age even unto age.
Lo, ye are trusting for yourselves On the words of falsehood, so as not to profit.
Stealing, murdering, and committing adultery, And swearing to falsehood, and giving perfume to Baal, And going after other gods whom ye knew not.
And ye have come in and stood before Me, In this house on which My name is called, And have said, 'We have been delivered,' In order to do all these abominations.
A den of burglars hath this house, On which My name is called, been in your eyes? Even I, lo, I have seen, an affirmation of Jehovah.
But go ye, I pray you, Unto My place that [is] in Shiloh, Where I caused My name to dwell at first, And see that which I have done to it, For the wickedness of My people Israel.
And now, because of your doing all these works, An affirmation of Jehovah, And I speak unto you, rising early and speaking, And ye have not hearkened, And I call you, and ye have not answered,
I also to the house on which My name is called, In which ye are trusting, And to the place that I gave to you, and to your fathers, Have done, as I have done to Shiloh.
And I have cast you from before My face, As I have cast out all your brethren, The whole seed of Ephraim.
And thou dost not pray for this people, Nor lift up for them crying and prayer, Nor intercede with Me, for I hear thee not.
Art thou not seeing what they are doing In cities of Judah, and in streets of Jerusalem?
The sons are gathering wood, And the fathers are causing the fire to burn, And the women are kneading dough, To make cakes to the queen of the heavens, And to pour out libations to other gods, So as to provoke Me to anger.
Me are they provoking to anger? an affirmation of Jehovah, Is it not themselves, For the shame of their own faces?
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah, Lo, Mine anger and My fury is poured out on this place, On man, and beast, and on tree of the field, And on fruit of the ground, And it hath burned, and it is not quenched.
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, Your burnt-offerings add to your sacrifices, And eat ye flesh.
For I did not speak with your fathers, Nor did I command them in the day of My bringing them out of the land of Egypt, Concerning the matters of burnt-offering and sacrifice,
But this thing I commanded them, saying: Hearken to My voice, And I have been to you for God, And ye — ye are to Me for a people, And have walked in all the way that I command you, So that it is well for you.
And they have not hearkened, nor inclined their ear, And they walk in the counsels, In the stubbornness, of their evil heart, And are for backward, and not for forward.
Even from the day when your fathers Went out of the land of Egypt till this day, I send to you all my servants the prophets, Daily rising early and sending,
And they have not hearkened unto Me, Nor inclined their ear, and harden their neck, They have done evil above their fathers.
And thou hast spoken unto them all these words, And they do not hearken to thee, And thou hast called unto them, And they do not answer thee.
And thou hast said unto them: This [is] the nation that hath not hearkened, To the voice of Jehovah its God, Nor have they accepted instruction, Perished hath stedfastness, Yea, it hath been cut off from their mouth.
Cut off thy crown, and cast [it] away, And lift up on high places lamentation, For Jehovah hath rejected, And He leaveth the generation of His wrath.
For the sons of Judah Have done the evil thing in Mine eyes, An affirmation of Jehovah, They have set their abominations in the house On which My name is called — to defile it,
And have built the high places of Tophet, That [are] in the valley of the son of Hinnom, To burn their sons and their daughters with fire, Which I did not command, Nor did it come up on My heart.
Therefore, lo, days are coming, An affirmation of Jehovah, And it is not said any more, 'The Tophet,' And 'Valley of the son of Hinnom,' But 'Valley of the slaughter,' And they have buried in Tophet — without place.
And the carcase of this people hath been for food To a fowl of the heavens, and to a beast of the earth, And there is none troubling.
And I have caused to cease from cities of Judah, And from streets of Jerusalem, The voice of joy, and the voice of gladness, Voice of bridegroom, and voice of bride, For the land doth become a desolation!
At that time, an affirmation of Jehovah, They bring the bones of the kings of Judah, And the bones of its princes, And the bones of the priests, And the bones of the prophets, And the bones of inhabitants of Jerusalem, Out of their graves,
And have spread them to sun, and to moon, And to all the host of the heavens, that they have loved, And that they have served, And that they have walked after, And that they have sought, And to which they have bowed themselves, They are not gathered, nor buried, They are for dung on the face of the ground.
And chosen is death rather than life By all the remnant who are left of this evil family, In all the remaining places, whither I have driven them, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts.
And thou hast said unto them: Thus said Jehovah, Do they fall, and not rise? Doth he turn back, and not return?
Wherefore hath this people of Jerusalem Turned back — a perpetual backsliding? They have kept hold on deceit, They have refused to turn back.
I have given attention, yea, I hearken, They do not speak right, No man hath repented of his wickedness, Saying, What have I done? Every one hath turned to his courses, As a horse is rushing into battle.
Even a stork in the heavens hath known her seasons, And turtle, and swallow, and crane, Have watched the time of their coming, And — My people have not known the judgment of Jehovah.
How do ye say, We [are] wise, And the law of Jehovah [is] with us? Surely, lo, falsely it hath wrought, The false pen of scribes.
Ashamed have been the wise, They have been affrighted, and are captured, Lo, against a word of Jehovah they kicked, And the wisdom of what — have they?
Therefore, I give their wives to others, Their fields to dispossessors, For from the least even unto the greatest, Every one is gaining dishonest gain, From prophet even unto priest, every one is dealing falsely.
And they heal the breach of the daughter of my people slightly, Saying, Peace, peace! and there is no peace.
They were ashamed when they did abomination! Yea, they are not at all ashamed, And blushing they have not known, Therefore, they do fall among falling ones, In the time of their inspection they stumble, said Jehovah.
I utterly consume them, an affirmation of Jehovah, There are no grapes in the vine, Yea, there are no figs in the fig-tree, And the leaf hath faded, And the strength they have passeth from them.
Wherefore are we sitting still? Be gathered, and we go in to the fenced cities, And we are silent there, For Jehovah our God hath made us silent, Yea, He causeth us to drink water of gall, For we have sinned against Jehovah.
Looking for peace — and there is no good, For a time of healing, and lo, terror.
From Dan hath been heard the snorting of his horses, From the voice of the neighings of his mighty ones, Trembled hath all the land, And they come in and consume the land and its fulness, The city and the inhabitants in it.
For, lo, I am sending among you serpents, Vipers that have no charmer, And they have bitten you, an affirmation of Jehovah.
My refreshing for me [is] sorrow, For me my heart [is] sick.
Lo, the voice of a cry of the daughter of my people from a land afar off, Is Jehovah not in Zion? is her king not in her? Wherefore have they provoked Me with their graven images, With the vanities of a foreigner?
Harvest hath passed, summer hath ended, And we — we have not been saved.
For a breach of the daughter of my people have I been broken, I have been black, astonishment hath seized me.
Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no physician there? For wherefore hath not the health of the daughter of my people gone up?
Who doth make my head waters, And mine eye a fountain of tears? And I weep by day and by night, For the wounded of the daughter of my people.
Who doth give me in a wilderness A lodging-place of travellers? And I leave my people, and go from them, For all of them [are] adulterers, An assembly of treacherous ones.
And they bend their tongue, their bow [is] a lie, And not for stedfastness have they been mighty in the land, For from evil unto evil they have gone forth, And Me they have not known, An affirmation of Jehovah!
Each of his friend — beware ye, And on any brother, do not trust, For every brother doth utterly supplant, For every friend slanderously doth walk,
And each at his friend they mock, And truth they do not speak, They taught their tongue to speak falsehood, To commit iniquity they have laboured.
thy dwelling [is] in the midst of deceit, Through deceit they refused to know Me, An affirmation of Jehovah.
Therefore, thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Lo, I am refining them, and have tried them, For how do I do because of the daughter of My people?
A slaughtering arrow [is] their tongue, Deceit it hath spoken in its mouth, Peace with its neighbour it speaketh, And in its heart it layeth its ambush,
For these things do not I see after them? An affirmation of Jehovah, Against a nation such as this doth not My soul avenge itself?
For the mountains I lift up weeping and wailing, And for the habitations of the wilderness a lamentation, For they have been burnt up without any passing over, Nor have they heard the voice of cattle, From the fowl of the heavens unto the beast they have fled, they have gone.
And I make Jerusalem become heaps, A habitation of dragons, And the cities of Judah I make a desolation, Without inhabitant.
Who [is] the wise man? and he understandeth this, And he to whom the mouth of Jehovah spake? And he doth declare it, For what hath the land perished? It hath been burnt up as a wilderness, Without any passing through.
And Jehovah saith: Because of their forsaking My law that I set before them, And they have not hearkened to My voice nor walked in it,
And they walk after the stubbornness of their heart, And after the Baalim, that their fathers taught them,
Therefore, thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel: Lo, I am causing them — this people — to eat wormwood, And I have caused them to drink water of gall,
And I have scattered them among nations Which they knew not, they and their fathers, And have sent after them the sword, Till I have consumed them.
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Consider ye, and call for mourning women, And they come, And to the wise women send, and they come,
And they hasten, and lift up for us a wailing. And run down our eyes do tears, And from our eyelids do waters flow.
For — a voice of wailing is heard from Zion: How have we been spoiled! We have been greatly ashamed, Because we have forsaken the land, Because they have cast down our tabernacles.
But hear, ye women, a word of Jehovah, And your ear receiveth a word of His mouth, And teach ye your daughters wailing, and each her neighbour lamentation.
For death hath come up into our windows, It hath come into our palaces, To cut off the suckling from without, Young men from the broad places.
Speak thus — an affirmation of Jehovah, And fallen hath the carcase of man, As dung on the face of the field, And as a handful after the reaper, And there is none gathering.
Thus said Jehovah: Let not the wise boast himself in his wisdom, Nor let the mighty boast himself in his might, Let not the rich boast himself in his riches,
But — in this let the boaster boast himself, In understanding and knowing Me, For I [am] Jehovah, doing kindness, Judgment, and righteousness, in the earth, For in these I have delighted, An affirmation of Jehovah.
Lo, days are coming — an affirmation of Jehovah, And I have laid a charge on all circumcised in the foreskin,
On Egypt, and on Judah, and on Edom, And on the sons of Ammon, and on Moab, And on all cutting the corner [of the beard], Who are dwelling in the wilderness, For all the nations [are] uncircumcised, And all the house of Israel [are] uncircumcised in heart!
Hear ye the word, O house of Israel, That Jehovah hath spoken for you.
Thus said Jehovah: Unto the way of the nations accustom not yourselves, And by the signs of the heavens be not affrighted, For the nations are affrighted by them.
For the statutes of the peoples are vanity, For a tree from a forest hath one cut, Work of the hands of an artificer, with an axe,
With silver and with gold they beautify it, With nails and with hammers they fix it, And it doth not stumble.
As a palm they [are] stiff, and they speak not, They are surely borne, for they step not, Be not afraid of them, for they do no evil, Yea, also to do good is not in them.
Because there is none like Thee, O Jehovah, Great [art] Thou, and great Thy name in might.
Who doth not fear Thee, king of the nations? For to Thee it is becoming, For among all the wise of the nations, And in all their kingdom there is none like Thee.
And in one they are brutish and foolish, An instruction of vanities [is] the tree itself.
Spread-out silver from Tarshish is brought, And gold from Uphaz, Work of an artisan, and of the hands of a refiner, Blue and purple [is] their clothing, Work of the skilful — all of them.
And Jehovah [is] a God of truth, He [is] a living God, and a king age-during, From His wrath shake doth the earth, And nations endure not His indignation.
Thus do ye say to them, The gods Who the heavens and earth have not made, They do perish from the earth, And from under these heavens.
The maker of the earth by His power, The establisher of the world by His wisdom, Who, by His understanding, stretched forth the heavens,
At the voice He giveth forth, A multitude of waters [is] in the heavens, And He causeth vapours to come up from the end of the earth, Lightnings for rain He hath made, And bringeth out wind from His treasures.
Brutish is every man by knowledge, Put to shame is every refiner by a graven image, For false [is] his molten image. And there is no breath in them.
Vanity [are] they, work of erring ones, In the time of their inspection they perish.
Not like these [is] the Portion of Jacob, For framer of all things [is] He, And Israel [is] the rod of His inheritance, Jehovah of Hosts [is] His name.
Gather from the land thy merchandise, O dweller in the bulwark,
For thus said Jehovah: Lo, I am slinging out the inhabitants of the land at this time, And have been an adversary to them, So that they are found out.
Woe to me for my breaking, Grievious hath been my smiting, And I said, Only, this [is] my sickness, and I bear it.
My tent hath been spoiled, And all my cords have been broken, My sons have gone out from me, and they are not, There is none stretching out any more my tent, And raising up my curtains.
For the shepherds have become brutish, And Jehovah they have not sought, Therefore they have not acted wisely, And all their flock is scattered.
A voice of a report, lo, it hath come, Even a great shaking from the north country, To make the cities of Judah a desolation, A habitation of dragons.
I have known, O Jehovah, that not of man [is] his way, Not of man the going and establishing of his step.
Chastise me, O Jehovah, only in judgment, Not in Thine anger, lest Thou make me small.
Pour out Thy fury on the nations that have not known Thee, And on the families that have not called in Thy name, For they have eaten up Jacob, Yea, they have eaten him up, yea, they consume him, And his habitation they have made desolate!
The word that hath been unto Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
'Hear ye the words of this covenant, and ye have spoken unto the men of Judah, and unto the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and thou hast said unto them, Thus said Jehovah God of Israel: Cursed [is] the man who doth not obey the words of this covenant,
That I commanded your fathers, In the day of My bringing them out from the land of Egypt, Out of the iron furnace, saying, Hearken to My voice, and ye have done them, According to all that I command you, And ye have been to Me for a people, And I am to you for God,
In order to establish the oath that I have sworn to your fathers, To give to them a land flowing with milk and honey, as this day. And I answer and say, 'Amen, O Jehovah.'
And Jehovah saith unto me, 'Proclaim all these words in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, saying: Hear ye the words of this covenant, And ye have done them.
For I certainly testified against your fathers, In the day of My bringing them up out of the land of Egypt — till this day, Rising early and testifying, saying, Hearken to My voice,
And they have not hearkened nor inclined their ear, And they walk each in the stubbornness of their evil heart, And I bring on them all the words of this covenant, That I commanded to do, and they did not.'
And Jehovah saith unto me: 'A conspiracy is found in the men of Judah, And in the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
They have turned back to the iniquities of their first fathers, Who refused to hear My words, And they have gone after other gods to serve them, The house of Israel, and the house of Judah, Have made void My covenant, that I made with their fathers.
Therefore thus said Jehovah: Lo, I am bringing in unto them evil, That they are not able to go out from, And they have cried unto Me, And I do not hearken unto them.
And the cities of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem have gone, And they have cried unto the gods, To whom they are making perfume, And they give no deliverance at all to them, In the time of their vexation.
For — the number of thy cities have been thy gods, O Judah, And — the number of the streets of Jerusalem Ye have placed altars to a shameful thing, Altars to make perfume to Baal.
And thou, thou dost not pray for this people, Nor dost thou lift up for them cry and prayer, For I do not hearken in the time of their calling unto Me for their vexation.
What — to My beloved in My house, Her doing wickedness with many, And the holy flesh do pass over from thee? When thou dost evil, then thou exultest.
'An olive, green, fair, of goodly fruit,' Hath Jehovah called thy name, At the noise of a great tumult He hath kindled fire against it, And broken have been its thin branches.
And Jehovah of Hosts, who is planting thee, Hath spoken evil concerning thee, For the evil of the house of Israel, and of the house of Judah, That they have done to themselves, To provoke Me to anger, to make perfume to Baal.
And, O Jehovah, cause me to know, and I know, Then Thou hast showed me their doings.
And I [am] as a trained lamb brought to slaughter, And I have not known That against me they have devised devices: We destroy the tree with its food, and cut him off From the land of the living, And his name is not remembered again.
And O Jehovah of Hosts, judging righteousness, Trying reins and heart, I do see Thy vengeance against them, For unto Thee I have revealed my cause.'
Therefore, thus said Jehovah concerning the men of Anathoth, who are seeking thy life, saying: Do not prophesy in the name of Jehovah, And thou dost not die by our hands.
Therefore, thus said Jehovah of Hosts: 'Lo, I am seeing after them, The chosen ones die by sword, Their sons and their daughters die by famine,
And they have no remnant, For I bring evil unto the men of Anathoth, The year of their inspection!'
Righteous [art] Thou, O Jehovah, When I plead towards thee, Only, judgments do I speak with Thee, Wherefore did the way of the wicked prosper? At rest have been all treacherous dealers.
Thou hast planted them, yea, they have taken root, They go on, yea, they have made fruit, Near [art] Thou in their mouth, And far off from their reins.
And Thou, O Jehovah, Thou hast known me, Thou seest me, and hast tried my heart with Thee, Draw them away as sheep to slaughter, And separate them for a day of slaughter.
Till when doth the earth mourn, And the herb of the whole field wither? For the wickedness of those dwelling in it, Consumed have been beast and fowl, Because they said, 'He doth not see our latter end.'
For — with footmen thou hast run, And they weary thee, And how dost thou fret thyself with horses! Even in the land of peace, [In which] thou art confident — And how dost thou in the rising of Jordan!
For even thy brethren and the house of thy father, Even they dealt treacherously against thee, Even they — they called after thee fully, Trust not in them, when they speak to thee good things.
I have forsaken My house, I have left Mine inheritance, I have given the beloved of My soul Into the hand of her enemies.
Mine inheritance hath been to Me as a lion in a forest, She gave forth against Me with her voice, Therefore I have hated her.
A speckled fowl [is] Mine inheritance to Me? Is the fowl round about against her? Come, assemble, every beast of the field, Come ye for food.
Many shepherds did destroy My vineyard, They have trodden down My portion, They have made My desirable portion Become a wilderness — a desolation.
He hath made it become a desolation, The desolation hath mourned unto Me, Desolated hath been all the land, But there is no one laying it to heart.
On all high places in the plain have spoilers come in, For the sword of Jehovah is consuming, From the end of the land even unto the end of the land, There is no peace to any flesh.
They sowed wheat, and have thorns reaped, They have become sick — they profit not, And they have been ashamed of your increases, Because of the fierceness of the anger of Jehovah.
Thus said Jehovah concerning all my evil neighbours, who are striking against the inheritance that I caused my people — Israel — to inherit: 'Lo, I am plucking them from off their ground, And the house of Judah I pluck out of their midst.
And it hath been, after My plucking them out, I turn back, and have pitied them, And I have brought them back, Each to his inheritance, and each to his land.
And it hath come to pass, If they learn well the ways of My people, To swear by My name, 'Jehovah liveth,' As they taught My people to swear by Baal, Then they have been built up in the midst of My people.
And if they do not hearken, Then I have plucked up that nation, Plucking up and destroying, An affirmation of Jehovah!'
Thus said Jehovah unto me, 'Go, and thou hast got for thee a girdle of linen, and hast placed it on thy loins, and into water thou dost not cause it to enter:'
and I get the girdle, according to the word of Jehovah, and I place [it] on my loins.
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me a second time, saying,
'Take the girdle that thou hast got, that [is] on thy loins, and rise, go to Phrat, and hide it there in a hole of the rock;
and I go and hide it by Phrat, as Jehovah commanded me.
And it cometh to pass, at the end of many days, that Jehovah saith unto me, 'Rise, go to Phrat, and take thence the girdle, that I commanded thee to hide there;'
and I go to Phrat, and dig, and take the girdle from the place where I had hid it; and lo, the girdle hath been marred, it is not profitable for anything.
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying, 'Thus said Jehovah:
Thus do I mar the excellency of Judah, And the great excellency of Jerusalem.
This evil people, who refuse to hear My words, Who walk in the stubbornness of their heart, And go after other gods to serve them, And to bow themselves to them, Yea it is — as this girdle, that is not profitable for anything.
For, as the girdle cleaveth unto the loins of a man, So I caused to cleave unto Me The whole house of Israel, And the whole house of Judah, an affirmation of Jehovah, To be to Me for a people, and for a name, And for praise, and for beauty, And they have not hearkened.
And thou hast said unto them this word, Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, 'Every bottle is full of wine,' And they have said unto thee: 'Do we not certainly know that every bottle is full of wine?'
And thou hast said unto them, 'Thus said Jehovah: Lo, I am filling all the inhabitants of this land, And the kings who sit for David on his throne, And the priests, and the prophets, And all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, [With] drunkenness,
And have dashed them one against another, And the fathers and the sons together, An affirmation of Jehovah, I do not pity, nor spare, nor have I mercy, So as not to destroy them.
Hear, and give ear — be not haughty, For Jehovah hath spoken.
Give ye to Jehovah your God honour, Before He doth cause darkness, And before your feet stumble on dark mountains, And ye have waited for light, And He hath made it for death-shade, And hath appointed [it] for thick darkness.
And if ye do not hear it, In secret places doth my soul weep, because of pride, Yea, it weepeth sore, And the tear cometh down mine eyes, For the flock of Jehovah hath been taken captive.
Say to the king and to the mistress: Make yourselves low — sit still, For come down have your principalities, The crown of your beauty.
The cities of the south have been shut up, And there is none opening, Judah hath been removed — all of her, She hath been removed completely —
Lift up your eyes, and see those coming in from the north, Where [is] the drove given to thee, thy beautiful flock?
What dost thou say, when He looketh after thee? And thou — thou hast taught them [to be] over thee — leaders for head? Do not pangs seize thee as a travailing woman?
And when thou dost say in thy heart, 'Wherefore have these met me?' For the abundance of thine iniquity Have thy skirts been uncovered, Have thy heels suffered violence.
Doth a Cushite change his skin? and a leopard his spots? Ye also are able to do good, who are accustomed to do evil.
And I scatter them as stubble, Passing away, by a wind of the wilderness.
This [is] thy lot, the portion of thy measures from Me — an affirmation of Jehovah, Because thou hast forgotten me, And dost trust in falsehood.
I also have made bare thy skirts before thy face, And thy shame hath been seen.
Thine adulteries, and thy neighings, The wickedness of thy whoredom, on heights in a field, I have seen thine abominations. Woe to thee, O Jerusalem, Thou art not cleansed, after when [is it] again?
That which hath been the word of Jehovah unto Jeremiah concerning the matters of the dearths:
Mourned hath Judah, and her gates have languished, They have mourned to the earth, And the cry of Jerusalem hath gone up.
And their honourable ones have sent their little ones to the water, They have come unto ditches, They have not found water, They have turned back — their vessels empty! They have been ashamed, And have blushed and covered their head.
Because the ground hath been broken, For there hath been no rain in the land, Ashamed have been husbandmen, They have covered their head.
For even the hind in the field hath brought forth — to forsake [it!] For there hath been no grass.
And wild asses have stood on high places, They have swallowed up wind like dragons, Consumed have been their eyes, for there is no herb.
Surely our iniquities have testified against us, O Jehovah, work for Thy name's sake, For many have been our backslidings, Against Thee we have sinned.
O Hope of Israel — its saviour in time of trouble, Why art Thou as a sojourner in the land? And as a traveller turned aside to lodge?
Why art Thou as one dumb? As a mighty one not able to save? And Thou [art] in our midst, O Jehovah, And Thy name over us is called, leave us not.
Thus said Jehovah concerning this people: Well they have loved to wander, Their feet they have not restrained, And Jehovah hath not accepted them, Now doth He remember their iniquity, And inspect their sin.
And Jehovah saith unto me: Thou dost not pray for this people for good,
When they fast, I hearken not unto their cry, And when they cause to ascend burnt-offering and present, I accept them not, For by sword, and by famine, And by pestilence, I am consuming them.
And I say, 'Ah, Lord Jehovah, Lo, the prophets are saying to them: Ye do not see a sword, yea, famine is not to you, For true peace I give to you in this place.'
And Jehovah saith unto me: Falsehood the prophets are prophesying in My name, I did not send them, nor command them, Nor have I spoken unto them: A false vision, and divination, and vanity, And the deceit of their own heart, they are prophesying to you.
Therefore, thus said Jehovah concerning the prophets who are prophesying in My name, and I have not sent them, and they are saying, Sword and famine is not in this land: By sword and by famine are these prophets consumed.
And the people to whom they are prophesying, Are cast into out-places of Jerusalem, Because of the famine, and of the sword, And they have none burying them, Them, their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, And I have poured out upon them this evil.
And thou hast said unto them this word: Tears come down mine eyes night and day, And they do not cease, For, [with] a great breach, Broken hath been the virgin daughter of my people, A very grievous stroke.
If I have gone forth to the field, Then, lo, the pierced of the sword! And if I have entered the city, Then, lo, the diseased of famine! For both prophet and priest have gone up and down Unto a land that they knew not.
Hast Thou utterly rejected Judah? Zion hath Thy soul loathed? Wherefore hast Thou smitten us, And there is no healing to us? Looking for peace, and there is no good, And for a time of healing, and lo, terror.
We have known, O Jehovah, our wickedness, The iniquity of our fathers, For we have sinned against Thee.
Do not despise, for Thy name's sake, Dishonour not the throne of Thine honour, Remember, break not Thy covenant with us.
Are there among the vanities of the nations any causing rain? And do the heavens give showers? Art not Thou He, O Jehovah our God? And we wait for thee, for Thou — Thou hast done all these!
And Jehovah saith unto me: Though Moses and Samuel should stand before Me, My soul is not toward this people, Send from before My face, and they go out.
And it hath come to pass, when they say to thee, Whither do we go out? that thou hast said unto them, Thus said Jehovah: Those who [are] for death — to death, And those who are for the sword, to the sword, And those who are for famine, to famine, And those who are for captivity, to captivity.
And I have appointed over them four kinds, an affirmation of Jehovah, The sword to slay, and the dogs to drag, And the fowl of the heavens, And the beast of the earth, to consume and to devour.
And I have given them for a trembling To all kingdoms of the earth, Because of Manasseh son of Hezekiah king of Judah, For that which he did in Jerusalem.
For who hath pity on thee, O Jerusalem? And who doth bemoan for thee? And who turneth aside to ask of thy welfare?
Thou — thou hast left Me — an affirmation of Jehovah, Backward thou goest, And I stretch out My hand against thee, And I destroy thee, I have been weary of repenting,
And I scatter them with a fan, in the gates the land, I bereaved, I have destroyed My people, From their ways they turned not back.
Its widows have been more to Me than the sand of the seas, I brought in to them — against the mother — A young man — a spoiler — at noon. I caused to fall upon her suddenly, wrath and trouble.
Languished hath the bearer of seven, She hath breathed out her spirit, Gone in hath her sun while yet day, It hath been ashamed and confounded, And their residue to the sword I give up before their enemies, An affirmation of Jehovah.
Woe to me, my mother, For thou hast borne me a man of strife, And a man of contention to all the land, I have not lent on usury, Nor have they lent on usury to me — All of them are reviling me.
Jehovah said, Did I not direct thee for good? Did not I intercede for thee in a time of evil, And in a time of adversity, with the enemy?
Doth one break iron — northern iron, and brass?
Thy strength and thy treasures For a prey I do give — not for price, Even for all thy sins, and in all thy borders.
And I have caused thine enemies To pass over into the land — Thou hast not known, For a fire hath been kindled in Mine anger, Against you it doth burn.
Thou, Thou hast known, O Jehovah, Remember me, and inspect me, And take vengeance for me of my pursuers, In Thy long-suffering take me not away, Know — I have borne for Thee reproach.
Thy words have been found, and I eat them, And Thy word is to me for a joy, And for the rejoicing of my heart, For Thy name is called on me, O Jehovah, God of Hosts.
I have not sat in an assembly of deriders, Nor do I exult, because of thy hand, — Alone I have sat, For [with] indignation Thou hast filled me.
Why hath my pain been perpetual? And my wound incurable? It hath refused to be healed, Thou art surely to me as a failing stream, Waters not stedfast.
Therefore, thus said Jehovah: If thou turnest back, then I bring thee back, Before Me thou dost stand, And if thou bringest out the precious from the vile, As My mouth thou art! They — they turn back unto thee, And thou dost not turn back unto them.
And I have made thee to this people For a wall — brazen — fenced, And they have fought against thee, And they do not prevail against thee, For with thee [am] I to save thee, And to deliver thee — an affirmation of Jehovah,
And I have delivered thee from the hand of evil doers, And I have ransomed thee From the hand of the terrible!
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying:
Thou dost not take to thee a wife, Nor hast thou sons and daughters in this place.
For thus said Jehovah, Of the sons and of the daughters who are born in this place, And of their mothers — those bearing them, And of their fathers — those begetting them in this land:
Of painful deaths they die, They are not lamented, nor are they buried, For dung on the face of the ground they are, And by sword and by famine are consumed, And their carcase hath been for food To the fowl of the heavens, And to the beast of the earth.
For thus said Jehovah: Do not enter the house of a mourning-feast, Nor go to lament nor bemoan for them, For I have removed My peace from this people, An affirmation of Jehovah, The kindness and the mercies.
And died have great and small in this land, They are not buried, and none lament for them, Nor doth any cut himself, nor become bald for them.
Nor do they deal out to them for mourning, To comfort him concerning the dead, Nor cause them to drink a cup of consolations For his father and for his mother.
A house of banqueting thou dost not enter, To sit with them, to eat and to drink,
For thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel: Lo, I am causing to cease from this place, Before your eyes, and in your days, The voice of joy, and the voice of rejoicing, The voice of bridegroom and voice of bride.
And it hath come to pass when thou declarest to this people all these words, and they have said unto thee, 'For what hath Jehovah spoken against us all this great evil? yea, what [is] our iniquity, and what our sin, that we have sinned against Jehovah our God?'
Then thou hast said unto them: Because that your fathers have forsaken Me, An affirmation of Jehovah, And go after other gods, and serve them, And they bow themselves to them, And Me have forsaken, and My law not kept,
Ye also have done evil above your fathers, And lo, ye are walking each after the stubbornness of his evil heart, So as not to hearken unto Me.
And I have cast you from off this land, On to a land that ye have not known, Ye and your fathers, And ye have served there other gods by day and by night, Where I do not give to you grace.
Therefore, lo, days are coming, An affirmation of Jehovah, And it is not said any more: 'Jehovah liveth, who brought up The sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt,'
But, 'Jehovah liveth, who brought up The sons of Israel out of the land of the north, And out of all the lands whither He drove them,' And I have brought them back to their land, That I gave to their fathers.
Lo, I am sending for many fishers, An affirmation of Jehovah, And they have fished them, And after this I send for many hunters, And they have hunted them from off every mountain, And from off every hill, and from holes of the rocks.
For Mine eyes [are] upon all their ways, They have not been hidden from My face, Nor hath their iniquity been concealed from before Mine eyes.
And I have recompensed a first — A second time — their iniquity and their sin, Because of their polluting My land, With the carcase of their detestable things, Yea, their abominable things have filled Mine inheritance.
O Jehovah, my strength, and my fortress, And my refuge in a day of adversity, Unto Thee nations do come from the ends of earth, And say, Only falsehood did our fathers inherit, Vanity, and none among them is profitable.
Doth man make for himself gods, And they — no gods?
Therefore, lo, I am causing them to know at this time, I cause them to know My hand and My might, And they have known that My name [is] Jehovah!
The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, With the point of a diamond, Graven on the tablet of their heart, And on the horns of your altars,
As their sons remember their altars and their shrines, By the green tree, by the high hills.
O My mountain in the field — thy strength, All thy treasures — for a prey I give, Thy high places for sin in all thy borders.
And thou hast let go — even through thyself, Of thine inheritance that I gave to thee, And I have caused thee to serve thine enemies, In a land that thou hast not known, For a fire ye have kindled in Mine anger, Unto the age it doth burn.
Thus said Jehovah: Cursed [is] the man who doth trust in man, And hath made flesh his arm, And from Jehovah whose heart turneth.
And he hath been as a naked thing in a desert, And doth not see when good cometh, And hath inhabited parched places in a wilderness, A salt land, and not inhabited.
Blessed [is] the man who trusteth in Jehovah, And whose confidence hath been Jehovah.
And hath been as a tree planted by waters, And by a rivulet he sendeth forth his roots, And he doth not see when heat cometh, And his leaf hath been green, And in a year of dearth he is not sorrowful, Nor doth he cease from making fruit.
Crooked [is] the heart above all things, And it [is] incurable — who doth know it?
I Jehovah do search the heart, try the reins, Even to give to each according to his way, According to the fruit of his doings.
A partridge hatching, and not bringing forth, [Is] one making wealth, and not by right, In the midst of his days he doth forsake it, And in his latter end — he is a fool.
A throne of honour on high from the beginning, The place of our sanctuary,
The hope of Israel [is] Jehovah, All forsaking Thee are ashamed, And 'My apostates' in the earth are written, For they have forsaken Jehovah, A fountain of living waters.
Heal me, O Jehovah, and I am healed, Save me, and I am saved, for my praise [art] Thou.
Lo, they are saying unto me: 'Where [is] the word of Jehovah? pray, let it come.'
And I hastened not from feeding after Thee, And the desperate day I have not desired, Thou — Thou hast known, The produce of my lips, before Thy face it hath been,
Be not Thou to me for a terror, My hope [art] Thou in a day of evil.
Let my pursuers be ashamed, and let not me be ashamed — me! Let them be affrighted, and let not me be affrighted — me! Bring in on them a day of evil, And a second time [with] destruction destroy them.
Thus said Jehovah unto me: 'Go, and thou hast stood in the gate of the sons of the people, by which kings of Judah come in, and by which they go out, and in all gates of Jerusalem,
and thou hast said unto them: Hear a word of Jehovah, ye kings of Judah, and all Judah, and all inhabitants of Jerusalem, who are coming in by these gates,
Thus said Jehovah, Take ye heed to yourselves, And ye bear not a burden on the day of rest, Nor have ye brought [it] in by the gates of Jerusalem.
Nor do ye take out a burden from your houses on the day of rest, Yea, any work ye do not do, And ye have sanctified the day of rest, As I have commanded your fathers.
And they have not hearkened nor inclined their ear, And they stiffen their neck not to hear, And not to receive instruction.
And it hath been, if ye certainly hearken unto Me, An affirmation of Jehovah, So as not to bring in a burden By the gates of this city on the day of rest, And to sanctify the day of rest, So as not to do in it any work —
Then entered by the gates of this city have kings and princes, Sitting on the throne of David, Riding in a chariot, and on horses, They, and their princes, the man of Judah, And inhabitants of Jerusalem, And this city hath remained to the age.
And they have come in from cities of Judah, And from suburbs of Jerusalem, And from the land of Benjamin, And from the low country, And from the hill-country, and from the south, Bringing in burnt-offering, and sacrifice, And present, and frankincense, And bringing praise [to] the house of Jehovah.
And if ye do not hearken unto me to sanctify the day of rest, And so as not to bear a burden, And to come in at the gates of Jerusalem on the day of rest, Then I have kindled a fire in its gates, And it hath consumed the high places of Jerusalem, And it is not quenched!'
The word that hath been unto Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,
Rise, and thou hast gone down [to] the potter's house, and there I cause thee to hear My words;
and I go down [to] the potter's house, and lo, he is doing a work on the stones,
and marred is the vessel that he is making, as clay in the hand of the potter, and he hath turned and he maketh it another vessel, as it was right in the eyes of the potter to make.
And there is a word of Jehovah to me, saying:
As this potter am I not able to do to you? O house of Israel, an affirmation of Jehovah. Lo, as clay in the hand of the potter, So [are] ye in My hand, O house of Israel.
The moment I speak concerning a nation, And concerning a kingdom, To pluck up and to break down, and to destroy,
And that nation hath turned from its evil, Because I have spoken against it, Then I have repented of the evil that I thought to do to it.
And the moment I speak concerning a nation, And concerning a kingdom, to build, and to plant,
And it hath done the evil thing in Mine eyes, So as not to hearken to My voice, Then I have repented of the good That I have spoken of doing to it.
And now, speak, I pray thee, unto men of Judah, And against inhabitants of Jerusalem, Saying: Thus said Jehovah: Lo, I am framing against you evil, And devising against you a device, Turn back, I pray you, each from his evil way And amen your ways and your doings.
And they have said, It is incurable, For after our own devices we do go, And each the stubbornness of his evil heart we do.
Therefore, thus said Jehovah: Ask, I pray you, among the nations, Who hath heard like these? A very horrible thing hath the virgin of Israel done.
Doth snow of Lebanon Cease from the rock of the field? Failed are the cold strange waters that flow?
But My people have forgotten Me, to a vain thing they make perfume, And they cause them to stumble in their ways — paths of old, To walk in paths — a way not raised up,
To make their land become a desolation, A hissing age-during, Every passer by it is astonished, And bemoaneth with his head.
As an east wind I scatter them before an enemy, The neck, and not the face, I shew them, In the day of their calamity.'
And they say, Come, And we devise against Jeremiah devices, For law doth not perish from the priest, Nor counsel from the wise, Nor the word from the prophet, Come, and we smite him with the tongue, And we do not attend to any of his words.
Give attention, O Jehovah, unto me, And hearken to the voice of those contending with me.
Is evil recompensed instead of good, That they have dug a pit for my soul? Remember my standing before Thee to speak good of them, To turn back Thy wrath from them.
Therefore, give up their sons to famine, And cause them to run on the sides of the sword, And their wives are bereaved and widows, And their men are slain by death, Their young men smitten by sword in battle,
A cry is heard from their houses, For Thou bringest against them suddenly a troop, For they dug a pit to capture me, And snares they have hidden for my feet.
And Thou, O Jehovah, Thou hast known, All their counsel against me [is] for death, Thou dost not cover over their iniquity, Nor their sin from before Thee blottest out, And they are made to stumble before Thee, In the time of Thine anger work against them!
Thus said Jehovah, 'Go, and thou hast got a potter's earthen vessel, and of the elders of the people, and of the elders of the priests,
and thou hast gone forth unto the valley of the son of Hinnom, that [is] at the opening of the gate of the pottery, and hast proclaimed there the words that I speak unto thee,
and hast said, Hear a word of Jehovah, ye kings of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem, Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel: 'Lo, I am bringing in evil on this place, at which the ears of every one who is hearing it do tingle,
because that they have forsaken Me, and make known this place, and make perfume in it to other gods, that they knew not, they and their fathers, and the kings of Judah, and they have filled this place [with] innocent blood,
and have built the high places of Baal to burn their sons with fire, burnt-offerings to Baal, that I commanded not, nor spake of, nor did it come up on My heart.
'Therefore, lo, days are coming — an affirmation of Jehovah — and this place is not called any more, Tophet, and Valley of the son of Hinnom, but, Valley of slaughter.
And I have made void the counsel of Judah and Jerusalem in this place, and have caused them to fall by the sword before their enemies, and by the hand of those seeking their life, and I have given their carcase for food to the fowl of the heavens, and to the beast of the earth,
and I have made this city for a desolation, and for a hissing, every passer by it is astonished, and doth hiss for all its plagues.
And I have caused them to eat the flesh of their sons, and the flesh of their daughters, and each the flesh of his friend they do eat, in the siege and in the straitness with which straiten them do their enemies, and those seeking their life.
'And thou hast broken the bottle before the eyes of the men who are going with thee,
and hast said unto them: Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, Thus do I break this people and this city, as one breaketh the potter's vessel, that is not able to be repaired again, and in Tophet they bury — without place to bury;
so I do to this place — an affirmation of Jehovah — and to its inhabitants, so as to make this city as Tophet;
and the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses of the kings of Judah, have been — as the place of Tophet — defiled, even all the houses on whose roofs they have made perfume to all the host of the heavens, so as to pour out oblations to other gods.'
And Jeremiah cometh in from Tophet, whither Jehovah had sent him to prophesy, and he standeth in the court of the house of Jehovah, and he saith unto all the people:
'Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel: Lo, I am bringing in unto this city, and on all its cities, all the evil that I have spoken against it, for they have hardened their neck — not to hear My words!'
And Pashhur son of Immer the priest — who also [is] overseer, leader in the house of Jehovah — heareth Jeremiah prophesying these things,
and Pashhur smiteth Jeremiah the prophet, and putteth him unto the stocks, that [are] by the high gate of Benjamin, that [is] by the house of Jehovah.
and it cometh to pass on the morrow, that Pashhur bringeth out Jeremiah from the stocks, and Jeremiah saith unto him, 'Not Pashhur hath Jehovah called thy name, but — Magor-Missabib.
For thus said Jehovah: Lo, I am making thee for a fear to thyself, And to all loving thee, And they have fallen by the sword of their enemies, and thine eyes are beholding, And all Judah I give into the hand of the king of Babylon, And he hath removed them to Babylon, And he hath smitten them with the sword.
And I have given all the strength of this city, And all its labour, and all its precious things, Yea, all the treasures of the kings of Judah I do give into the hand of their enemies, And they have spoiled them, and taken them, And have brought them into Babylon.
And thou, Pashhur, and all dwelling in thy house, Do go into captivity. and Babylon thou dost enter, And there thou diest, and there thou art buried, Thou and all loving thee, To whom thou hast prophesied falsely.'
Thou hast persuaded me, O Jehovah, and I am persuaded; Thou hast hardened me, and dost prevail, I have been for a laughter all the day, Every one is mocking at me,
Because from the time I speak I cry out, 'Violence and destruction,' I cry, For the word of Jehovah hath been to me For reproach and for derision all the day.
And I said, 'I do not mention Him, Nor do I speak any more in His name,' And it hath been in my heart As a burning fire shut up in my bones, And I have been weary of containing, And I am not able.
For I have heard the evil report of many, Fear [is] round about: 'Declare, and we declare it,' All mine allies are watching [for] my halting, 'Perhaps he is enticed, and we prevail over him, And we take our vengeance out of him.'
And Jehovah [is] with me, as a terrible mighty one, Therefore my persecutors stumble and prevail not, They have been exceedingly ashamed, For they have not acted wisely, Confusion age-during is not forgotten.
And, O Jehovah of Hosts, trier of the righteous, Beholder of reins and heart, I do see Thy vengeance out of them, For unto Thee I have revealed my cause.
Sing ye to Jehovah, praise Jehovah, For He hath delivered the soul of the needy From the hand of evil doers.
Cursed [is] the day in which I was born, The day that my mother bare me, Let it not be blessed!
Cursed [is] the man who bore tidings [to] my father, saying, 'Born to thee hath been a child — a male,' Making him very glad!
Then hath that man been as the cities, That Jehovah overthrew, and repented not, And he hath heard a cry at morning, And a shout at time of noon.
Because he hath not put me to death from the womb, And my mother is to me — my grave, And her womb a pregnancy age-during.
Why [is] this? from the womb I have come out, To see labour and sorrow, Yea, consumed in shame are my days!
The word that hath been unto Jeremiah from Jehovah, in the king Zedekiah's sending unto him Pashhur son of Malchiah, and Zephaniah son of Maaseiah the priest, saying,
'Inquire, we pray thee, for us at Jehovah, for Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath fought against us; perhaps Jehovah doth deal with us according to all His wonders, and doth cause him to go up from off us.'
And Jeremiah saith unto them, 'Thus do ye say unto Zedekiah,
Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel: Lo, I am turning round the weapons of battle That [are] in your hand, With which ye do fight the king of Babylon, And the Chaldeans, who are laying siege against you, At the outside of the wall, And I have gathered them into the midst of this city,
And I — I have fought against you, With a stretched-out hand, and with a strong arm, And in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath,
And I have smitten the inhabitants of this city, Both man and beast, By a great pestilence do they die.
And after this — an affirmation of Jehovah, I give Zedekiah king of Judah, And his servants, and the people, And those left in this city, From the pestilence, from the sword, and from the famine, Into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, And into the hand of their enemies, And into the hand of those seeking their life, And he hath smitten them by the mouth of the sword, He hath no pity on them, Nor doth he spare, nor hath he mercy.
And unto this people thou dost say, Thus said Jehovah: Lo, I am setting before you the way of life, And the way of death!
Whoso is abiding in this city — dieth, By sword, and by famine, and by pestilence, And whoso is going forth, And hath fallen unto the Chaldeans, Who are laying siege against you — liveth, And his life hath been to him for a spoil.
For I have set My face against this city for evil, And not for good — an affirmation of Jehovah. Into the hand of the king of Babylon it is given, And he hath burned it with fire.
And as to the house of the king of Judah, Hear ye a word of Jehovah;
O house of David, thus said Jehovah: Decide ye judgment at morning, And deliver the plundered from the hand of the oppressor, Lest My fury go forth as fire, And hath burned, and none is quenching, Because of the evil of your doings.
Lo, I [am] against thee — an affirmation of Jehovah, O inhabitant of the valley, rock of the plain, Who are saying, Who cometh down against us? And who cometh into our habitations?
And I have laid a charge against you, According to the fruit of your doings, An affirmation of Jehovah, And I have kindled a fire in its forest, And it hath consumed — all its suburbs!
Thus said Jehovah, 'Go down [to] the house of the king of Judah, and thou hast spoken there this word, and hast said,
Hear a word of Jehovah, O king of Judah, who art sitting on the throne of David, thou, and thy servants, and thy people, who are coming in at these gates,
Thus said Jehovah: Do ye judgment and righteousness, And deliver the plundered from the hand of the oppressor, And sojourner, orphan, and widow, ye do not oppress nor wrong, And innocent blood ye do not shed in this place.
For, if ye certainly do this thing, Then come in by the gates of this house Have kings sitting for David on his throne, Riding on chariot, and on horses, He, and his servants, and his people.
And if ye do not hear these words, By myself I have sworn — an affirmation of Jehovah, That this house is for a desolation.
For thus said Jehovah, Concerning the house of the king of Judah: Gilead [art] thou to Me — head of Lebanon, If not — I make thee a wilderness, Cities not inhabited.
And I have separated for thee destroyers, Each with his weapons, And they have cut down the choice of thy cedars, And have cast them on the fire.
And many nations have passed by this city, And they have said, each to his neighbour, For what hath Jehovah done thus to this great city?
And they have said, 'Because that they have forsaken The covenant of Jehovah their God, And bow themselves to other gods, and serve them.'
Ye do not weep for the dead, nor bemoan for him, Weep ye sore for the traveller, For he doth not return again, Nor hath he seen the land of his birth.
For thus said Jehovah concerning Shallum son of Josiah king of Judah, who is reigning instead of Josiah his father, who hath gone forth from this place: He doth not turn back hither again;
For in the place whither they have removed him he dieth, And this land he doth not see again.
Woe to him who is building his house by unrighteousness, And his upper chambers by injustice, On his neighbour he layeth service for nought, And his wage he doth not give to him.
Who is saying, 'I build for myself a large house, And airy upper chambers,' And he hath cut out for himself its windows, Ceiled with cedar, and painted with vermilion.
Dost thou reign, because thou art fretting thyself in cedar? Thy father — did he not eat and drink? Yea, he did judgment and righteousness, Then [it is] well with him.
He decided the cause of the poor and needy, Then [it is] well — is it not to know Me? An affirmation of Jehovah.
But thine eyes and thy heart are not, Except on thy dishonest gain, And on shedding of innocent blood, And on oppression, and on doing of violence.
Therefore, thus said Jehovah concerning Jehoiakim son of Josiah king of Judah: They do not lament for him, Ah, my brother, and Ah, sister, They do not lament for him, Ah, lord, and Ah, his honour.
The burial of an ass — he is buried, Dragged and cast out thence to the gates of Jerusalem.
Go up to Lebanon, and cry, And in Bashan give forth thy voice, And cry from Abarim, For destroyed have been all loving thee.
I have spoken unto thee in thine ease, Thou hast said, 'I do not hearken,' This [is] thy way from thy youth, For thou hast not hearkened to My voice.
All thy friends consume doth wind, And thy lovers into captivity do go, Surely then thou art ashamed, And hast blushed for all thy wickedness.
O dweller in Lebanon, making a nest among cedars, How gracious hast thou been when pangs come to thee, Pain — as of a travailing woman.
I live — an affirmation of Jehovah, Though Coniah son of Jehoiakim king of Judah Were a seal on My right hand, Surely thence I draw thee away,
And I have given thee into the hand of those seeking thy life, And into hands of which thou art afraid, Into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, And into the hand of the Chaldeans.
And I have cast thee, And thy mother who bore thee, unto another country, Where ye were not born, and there do ye die.
And to the land whither they are lifting up their soul to return, Thither they do not return.
A grief — a despised broken thing — is this man Coniah? A vessel in which there is no pleasure? Wherefore have they been cast up and down, He and his seed, Yea, they were cast on to a land that they knew not?
Earth, earth, earth, hear a word of Jehovah,
Thus said Jehovah: Write ye this man childless, A man — he doth not prosper in his days, For none of his seed doth prosper, Sitting on the throne of David, And ruling again in Judah!
Woe to shepherds destroying, And scattering the flock of My pasture, An affirmation of Jehovah.
Therefore, thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, Against the shepherds who feed My people, Ye have scattered My flock, and drive them away, And have not inspected them, Lo, I am charging on you the evil of your doings, An affirmation of Jehovah.
And I do gather the remnant of My flock Out of all the lands whither I drove them, And have brought them back unto their fold, And they have been fruitful, and multiplied.
And I have raised for them shepherds, And they have fed them, And they fear no more, nor are affrighted, Nor are they lacking — an affirmation of Jehovah.
Lo, days are coming — an affirmation of Jehovah, And I have raised to David a righteous shoot, And a king hath reigned and acted wisely, And done judgment and righteousness in the earth.
In his days is Judah saved, and Israel dwelleth confidently, And this his name that Jehovah proclaimeth him, 'Our Righteousness.'
Therefore, lo, days are coming, An affirmation of Jehovah, And they do not say any more, Jehovah liveth who brought up The sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt,
But — Jehovah liveth, who brought up, And who brought in, the seed of the house of Israel, From the land of the north, And from all the lands whither I drove them, And they have dwelt on their own ground!
In reference to the prophets: Broken hath been my heart in my midst, Fluttered have all my bones, I have been as a man — a drunkard, And as a man — wine hath passed over him, Because of Jehovah, and of His holy words.
For of adulterers hath the land been full, For because of these hath the land mourned, Dried up hath been the pleasant places of the wilderness, And their course is evil, and their might — not right.
For both prophet and priest have been profane, Yea, in My house I found their wickedness, An affirmation of Jehovah.
Therefore is their way to them as slippery places, Into thick darkness they are driven, And they have fallen in it, For I bring in against them evil, The year of their inspection, An affirmation of Jehovah.
And in prophets of Samaria I have seen folly, They have prophesied by Baal, And cause my people — Israel — to err.
And in prophets of Jerusalem I have seen a horrible thing, Committing adultery, and walking falsely, Yea, they strengthened the hands of evil doers, So that they have not turned back Each from his wickedness, They have been to me — all of them — as Sodom, And its inhabitants as Gomorrah.
Therefore, thus said Jehovah of Hosts, concerning the prophets: Lo, I am causing them to eat wormwood, And have caused them to drink water of gall, For, from prophets of Jerusalem Hath profanity gone forth to all the land.
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Ye do not hearken unto the words Of the prophets who are prophesying to you, They are making you vain things, A vision of their own heart they speak, Not from the mouth of Jehovah.
Saying diligently to those despising The word of Jehovah: Peace is for you, And [to] every one walking in the stubbornness of his heart they have said: Evil doth not come in unto you.
For who hath stood in the counsel of Jehovah, And seeth and heareth His word? Who hath regarded My word, and hearkeneth?
Lo, a whirlwind of Jehovah — Fury hath gone out, even a piercing whirlwind, On the head of the wicked it stayeth.
The anger of Jehovah doth not turn back Till His doing, and till His establishing, The thoughts of His heart, In the latter end of the days ye attend to it With understanding.
I have not sent the prophets, and they have run, I have not spoken unto them, and they have prophesied.
But — if they stood in My counsel, Then they cause My people to hear My words, And they turn them back from their evil way, And from the evil of their doings.
A God near [am] I — an affirmation of Jehovah, And not a God afar off?
Is any one hidden in secret places, And I see him not? an affirmation of Jehovah, Do not I fill the heavens and the earth? An affirmation of Jehovah.
I have heard that which the prophets said, Who prophesy in My name falsehood, saying, 'I have dreamed, I have dreamed.'
Till when is it in the heart of the prophets? The prophets of falsehood, Yea, prophets of the deceit of their heart,
Who are devising to cause My people To forget My name by their dreams, That they recount each to his neighbour, As their fathers forgot my name for Baal.
The prophet with whom [is] a dream, Let him recount the dream, And he with whom [is] My word, Let him truly speak My word. What — to the straw with the corn? An affirmation of Jehovah.
Is it not thus? My word [is] as a fire, An affirmation of Jehovah. And as a hammer — it breaketh in pieces a rock.
Therefore, lo, I [am] against the prophets, An affirmation of Jehovah, Stealing My words each from his neighbour.
Lo, I [am] against the prophets, An affirmation of Jehovah, Who are making smooth their tongue, And they affirm — an affirmation.
Lo, I [am] against the prophets of false dreams, An affirmation of Jehovah, And they recount them, and cause my people to err, By their falsehoods, and by their instability, And I — I have not sent them, Nor have I commanded them, And they are not at all profitable to this people, An affirmation of Jehovah.
And when this people, or the prophet, Or a priest, doth ask thee, saying, What [is] the burden of Jehovah? Then thou hast said unto them: Ye [are] the burden, and I have left you, An affirmation of Jehovah.
And the prophet, and the priest, and the people, That saith, The burden of Jehovah, I have seen after that man, and after his house.
Thus do ye say each unto his neighbour, And each unto his brother: What hath Jehovah answered? And what hath Jehovah spoken?
And the burden of Jehovah ye do not mention any more, For the burden to each is — His word, And ye have overturned the words of the living God, Jehovah of Hosts, our God.
Thus dost thou say unto the prophet What hath Jehovah answered thee? And what hath Jehovah spoken?
And if the burden of Jehovah ye say, Therefore thus said Jehovah: Because of your saying this word, The burden of Jehovah, And I do send unto you, saying, Ye do not say, The burden of Jehovah.
Therefore, lo, I — I have taken you utterly away, And I have sent you out, And the city that I gave to you, And to your fathers, from before My face,
And I have put on you reproach age-during, And shame age-during that is not forgotten!
Jehovah hath shewed me, and lo, two baskets of figs, appointed before the temple of Jehovah, — after the removing by Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, of Jeconiah, son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, and the heads of Judah, and the artisan, and the smith, from Jerusalem, when he bringeth them into Babylon —
In the one basket [are] figs very good, like the first-ripe figs, and in the other basket [are] figs very bad, that are not eaten for badness.
And Jehovah saith unto me, 'What art thou seeing, Jeremiah?' and I say, 'Figs, the good figs [are] very good, and the bad [are] very bad, that are not eaten for badness.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying:
Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, Like these good figs so do I acknowledge The removed of Judah — that I sent from this place, [To] the land of the Chaldeans — for good.
And I have set Mine eyes on them for good, And have brought them back to this land, And built them up, and I throw not down, And have planted them, and pluck not up.
And have given to them a heart to know Me, For I [am] Jehovah, And they have been to Me for a people, And I am to them for God, For they turned back unto Me with all their heart.
And like the bad figs, that are not eaten for badness, Surely thus said Jehovah: So do I make Zedekiah king of Judah, And his heads, and the remnant of Jerusalem, Who are left in this land, And who are dwelling in the land of Egypt,
And I have given them for a trembling, For evil — to all kingdoms of the earth, For a reproach, and for a simile, For a byword, and for a reviling, In all the places whither I drive them.
And I have sent against them the sword, The famine and the pestilence, Till their consumption from off the ground, That I gave to them and to their fathers!
The word that hath been unto Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim son of Josiah king of Judah, — it [is] the first year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, —
Which Jeremiah the prophet hath spoken concerning all the people of Judah, even unto all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying:
'From the thirteenth year of Josiah son of Amon king of Judah, and unto this day — this three and twentieth year — hath the word of Jehovah been unto me, and I speak unto you, rising early and speaking, and ye have not hearkened;
And Jehovah hath sent unto you all His servants, the prophets, rising early and sending, and ye have not hearkened, nor inclined your ear to hear, saying:
'Turn back, I pray you, each from his evil way, and from the evil of your doings, and dwell on the ground that Jehovah hath given to you and to your fathers from age unto age,
And ye do not go after other gods to serve them, and to bow yourselves to them, nor do ye provoke Me to anger with the work of your hands, and I do no evil to you;
And ye have not hearkened unto Me — an affirmation of Jehovah — so as to provoke Me to anger with the work of your hands for evil to you.
'Therefore thus said Jehovah of Hosts, Because that ye have not obeyed My words,
Lo, I am sending, and have taken all the families of the north — an affirmation of Jehovah — even unto Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, My servant, and have brought them in against this land, and against its inhabitants, and against all these nations round about, and have devoted them, and appointed them for an astonishment, and for a hissing, and for wastes age-during.
And I have destroyed from them the voice of rejoicing, and the voice of joy, voice of bridegroom and voice of bride, noise of millstones, and the light of lamps.
And all this land hath been for a waste, for an astonishment, and these nations have served the king of Babylon seventy years.
'And it hath come to pass, at the fulness of seventy years, I charge against the king of Babylon, and against that nation — an affirmation of Jehovah — their iniquity, and against the land of the Chaldeans, and have appointed it for desolations age-during.
And I have brought in on that land all My words that I have spoken against it, all that is written in this book, that Jeremiah hath prophesied concerning all the nations.
For laid service on them — also them — have many nations and great kings, and I have given recompence to them according to their doing, and according to the work of their hands.
'For thus said Jehovah God of Israel unto me, Take the wine cup of this fury out of My hand, and thou hast caused all the nations to drink it unto whom I am sending thee;
And they have drunk, and shaken themselves and shewn themselves foolish, because of the sword that I am sending among them.
'And I take the cup out of the hand of Jehovah, and cause all the nations to drink unto whom Jehovah sent me:
Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah, And its kings, its heads, To give them to waste, to astonishment, To hissing, and to reviling, as [at] this day.
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and his servants, And his heads, and all his people,
And all the mixed people, And all the kings of the land of Uz, And all the kings of the land of the Philistines, And Ashkelon, and Gazzah, and Ekron, And the remnant of Ashdod,
Edom, and Moab, and the sons of Ammon,
And all the kings of Tyre, And all the kings of Zidon, And the kings of the isle that [is] beyond the sea,
Dedan, and Tema, and Buz, And all cutting the corners [of the beard],
And all the kings of Arabia, And all the kings of the mixed people, Who are dwelling in the wilderness,
And all the kings of Zimri, And all the kings of Elam, And all the kings of Media,
And all the kings of the north, The near and the far off, one unto another, And all the kingdoms of the earth, That [are] on the face of the ground, And king Sheshach drinketh after them.
And thou hast said unto them: Thus said Jehovah of Hosts God of Israel, Drink ye, yea drink abundantly, And vomit, and fall, and rise not, Because of the sword that I am sending among you.
And it hath come to pass, When they refuse to receive the cup out of thy hand to drink, That thou hast said unto them: Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, Ye do certainly drink.
For lo, in the city over which My name is called, I am beginning to do evil, And ye — ye are entirely acquitted! Ye are not acquitted, for a sword I am proclaiming, For all inhabitants of the land, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts.
And thou, thou dost prophesy unto them all these words, and hast said unto them: Jehovah from the high place doth roar, And from His holy habitation giveth forth His voice, He surely roareth for His habitation, A shout as of treaders down, God answereth all the inhabitants of the land,
Wasting hath come unto the end of the earth, For a controversy hath Jehovah with nations, He hath executed judgment for all flesh, The wicked! He hath given them to the sword, An affirmation of Jehovah.
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Lo, evil is going out from nation to nation, And a great whirlwind is stirred up from the sides of the earth.
And the pierced of Jehovah have been in that day, From the end of the earth even unto the end of the earth, They are not lamented, nor gathered, nor buried, For dung on the face of the ground they are.
Howl, ye shepherds, and cry, And roll yourselves, ye honourable of the flock, For full have been your days, For slaughtering, and [for] your scatterings, And ye have fallen as a desirable vessel.
And perished hath refuge from the shepherds, And escape from the honourable of the flock.
A voice [is] of the cry of the shepherds, And a howling of the honourable of the flock, For Jehovah is spoiling their pasture.
And the peaceable habitations have been cut down, Because of the fierceness of the anger of Jehovah.
He hath forsaken, as a young lion, His covert, Surely their land hath become a desolation, Because of the oppressing fierceness, And because of the fierceness of His anger!
In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim son of Josiah, king of Judah, hath this word been from Jehovah, saying:
'Thus said Jehovah, Stand thou in the court of the house of Jehovah, and thou hast spoken unto all [those of] the cities of Judah who are coming in to bow themselves in the house of Jehovah, all the words that I have commanded thee to speak unto them, thou dost not diminish a word.
If so be they hearken, and turn back each from his evil way, then I have repented concerning the evil that I am thinking of doing to them, because of the evil of their doings.
'And thou hast said unto them: Thus said Jehovah, If ye do not hearken unto Me, to walk in My law, that I set before you,
To hearken to the words of My servants the prophets, whom I am sending unto you, yea, rising early and sending, and ye have not hearkened,
Then I have given up this house as Shiloh, and this city I give up for a reviling to all nations of the earth.'
And the priests, and the prophets, and all the people, hear Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of Jehovah,
And it cometh to pass, at the completion of Jeremiah's speaking all that Jehovah hath commanded him to speak unto all the people, that the priests, and the prophets, and all the people catch him, saying, Thou dost surely die,
Wherefore hast thou prophesied in the name of Jehovah, saying, 'As Shiloh this house shall be, and this city is wasted, without inhabitant?' and all the people are assembled unto Jeremiah in the house of Jehovah.
And the heads of Judah hear these things, and they go up from the house of the king [to] the house of Jehovah, and sit in the opening of the new gate of Jehovah.
And the priests and the prophets speak unto the heads, and unto all the people, saying, 'Judgment of death [is] for this man, for he hath prophesied against this city, as ye have heard with your ears.'
And Jeremiah speaketh unto all the heads, and unto all the people, saying, 'Jehovah sent me to prophesy concerning this house, and concerning this city, all the words that ye have heard;
And now, amend your ways, and your doings, and hearken to the voice of Jehovah your God, and Jehovah doth repent concerning the evil that He hath spoken against you.
'And I, lo, I [am] in your hand, do to me as is good and as is right in your eyes;
Only, know ye certainly, that if ye are putting me to death, surely innocent blood ye are putting on yourselves, and on this city, and on its inhabitants; for truly hath Jehovah sent me unto you to speak in your ears all these words.'
And the heads and all the people say unto the priests and unto the prophets, 'There is not for this man a judgment of death, for in the name of Jehovah our God he hath spoken unto us.'
And certain of the elders of the land rise up, and speak unto all the assembly of the people, saying,
'Micah the Morashtite hath been prophesying in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and he saith unto all the people of Judah, saying: Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Zion is a plowed field, and Jerusalem is heaps, And the mountain of the house is for high places of a forest.
'Put him at all to death did Hezekiah king of Judah, and all Judah? Did he not fear Jehovah? yea, he appeaseth the face of Jehovah, and Jehovah repenteth concerning the evil that He spake against them; and we are doing great evil against our souls.
'And also there hath been a man prophesying in the name of Jehovah, Urijah son of Shemaiah, of Kirjath-Jearim, and he prophesieth against this city, and against this land according to all the words of Jeremiah,
And the king Jehoiakim, and all his mighty ones, and all the heads, hear his words, and the king seeketh to put him to death, and Urijah heareth, and feareth, and fleeth, and goeth in to Egypt.
And the king Jehoiakim sendeth men to Egypt — Elnathan son of Achbor, and men with him unto Egypt —
And they bring out Urijah from Egypt, and bring him in unto the king Jehoiakim, and he smiteth him with a sword, and casteth his corpse unto the graves of the sons of the people.'
Only, the hand of Ahikam son of Shaphan hath been with Jeremiah so as not to give him up into the hand of the people to put him to death.
In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim son of Josiah, king of Judah, hath this word been unto Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,
'Thus said Jehovah unto me, Make to thee bands and yokes,
And thou hast put them on thy neck, and hast sent them unto the king of Edom, and unto the king of Moab, and unto the king of the sons of Ammon, and unto the king of Tyre, and unto the king of Zidon, by the hand of messengers who are coming in to Jerusalem, unto Zedekiah king of Judah;
And thou hast commanded them for their lords, saying, Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel,
Thus do ye say unto your lords, I — I have made the earth with man, and the cattle that [are] on the face of the earth, by My great power, and by My stretched-out arm, and I have given it to whom it hath been right in Mine eyes.
'And now, I — I have given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, My servant, and also the beast of the field I have given to him to serve him;
And served him have all the nations, and his son, and his son's son, till the coming in of the time of his land, also it; and done service for him have many nations and great kings.
And it hath come to pass, the nation and the kingdom that do not serve him — Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon — and that which putteth not its neck into the yoke of the king of Babylon, with sword, and with famine, and with pestilence, I lay a charge on that nation — an affirmation of Jehovah — till I consume them by his hand.
'And ye, ye do not hearken unto your prophets, and unto your diviners, and unto your dreamers, and unto your observers of clouds, and unto your sorcerers who are speaking unto you, saying, Ye do not serve the king of Babylon, —
For falsehood they are prophesying to you, so as to remove you far from off your ground, and I have driven you out, and ye have perished.
And the nation that causeth its neck to enter into the yoke of the king of Babylon, and hath served him — I have left it on its ground — an affirmation of Jehovah — and it hath tilled it, and dwelt in it.'
And unto Zedekiah king of Judah I have spoken according to all these words, saying, 'Cause your necks to enter into the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him and his people, and live.
Why do ye die, thou and thy people, by sword, by famine, and by pestilence, as Jehovah hath spoken concerning the nation that doth not serve the king of Babylon?
'And ye do not hearken unto the words of the prophets who are speaking unto you, saying, Ye do not serve the king of Babylon, — for falsehood they are prophesying to you.
For I have not sent them — an affirmation of Jehovah — and they are prophesying in My name falsely, so as to drive you out, and ye have perished, ye, and the prophets who are prophesying to you.'
And unto the priests, and unto all this people, I have spoken, saying, 'Thus said Jehovah, Ye do not hearken unto the words of your prophets, who are prophesying to you, saying, Lo, the vessels of the house of Jehovah are brought back from Babylon now in haste, for falsehood they are prophesying to you.
Ye do not hearken unto them, serve the king of Babylon, and live. Why is this city a waste?
'And, if they be prophets, and if a word of Jehovah be with them, let them intercede, I pray you, with Jehovah of Hosts, so that the vessels that are left in the house of Jehovah, and [in] the house of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem, have not gone into Babylon.
For thus said Jehovah of Hosts concerning the pillars, and concerning the sea, and concerning the bases, and concerning the rest of the vessels that are left in this city,
That Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon hath not taken, in his removing Jeconiah son of Jehoiakim king of Judah from Jerusalem to Babylon with all the freemen of Judah and Jerusalem,
Surely thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, concerning the vessels that are left of the house of Jehovah, and of the house of the king of Judah, and [in] Jerusalem:
To Babylon they are brought, and there they are till the day of My inspecting them — an affirmation of Jehovah; then I have brought them up, and have brought them back unto this place.'
And it cometh to pass, in that year, in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fourth year, in the fifth month, spoken unto me hath Hananiah son of Azur the prophet, who [is] of Gibeon, in the house of Jehovah, before the eyes of the priests, and all the people, saying,
'Thus spake Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, saying, I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon;
Within two years of days I am bringing back unto this place all the vessels of the house of Jehovah that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon hath taken from this place, and doth carry to Babylon,
And Jeconiah son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, and all the removed of Judah, who are entering Babylon, I am bringing back unto this place — an affirmation of Jehovah; for I do break the yoke of the king of Babylon.'
And Jeremiah the prophet saith unto Hananiah the prophet, before the eyes of the priests, and before the eyes of all the people who are standing in the house of Jehovah,
Yea, Jeremiah the prophet saith, 'Amen! so may Jehovah do; Jehovah establish thy words that thou hast prophesied, to bring back the vessels of the house of Jehovah and all the removal from Babylon, unto this place.
'Only, hear, I pray thee, this word that I am speaking in thine ears, and in the ears of all the people.
The prophets who have been before me, and before thee, from of old, even they prophesy concerning many lands, and concerning great kingdoms, of battle, and of evil, and of pestilence.
The prophet who doth prophesy of peace — by the coming in of the word of the prophet, known is the prophet that Jehovah hath truly sent him.'
And Hananiah the prophet taketh the yoke from off the neck of Jeremiah the prophet, and breaketh it,
And Hananiah speaketh before the eyes of all the people, saying, 'Thus said Jehovah, Thus I break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, within two years of days, from off the neck of all the nations;' and Jeremiah the prophet goeth on his way.
And there is a word of Jehovah unto Jeremiah after the breaking, by Hananiah the prophet, of the yoke from off the neck of Jeremiah the prophet, saying,
'Go, and thou hast spoken unto Hananiah, saying, Thus said Jehovah, Yokes of wood thou hast broken, and I have made instead of them yokes of iron;
For thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, A yoke of iron I have put on the neck of all these nations to serve Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and they have served him, and also the beast of the field I have given to him.'
And Jeremiah the prophet saith unto Hananiah the prophet, 'Hear, I pray thee, O Hananiah; Jehovah hath not sent thee, and thou hast caused this people to trust on falsehood.
Therefore thus said Jehovah, Lo, I am casting thee from off the face of the ground; this year thou diest, for apostasy thou hast spoken concerning Jehovah.'
And Hananiah the prophet dieth in that year, in the seventh month.
And these [are] words of the letter that Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem unto the remnant of the elders of the removal, and unto the priests, and unto the prophets, and unto all the people — whom Nebuchadnezzar removed from Jerusalem to Babylon,
After the going forth of Jeconiah the king, and the mistress, and the officers, heads of Judah and Jerusalem, and the artificer, and the smith, from Jerusalem —
By the hand of Eleasah son of Shaphan, and Gemariah son of Hilkijah, whom Zedekiah king of Judah sent unto Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon — to Babylon, saying,
'Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, to all the removal that I removed from Jerusalem to Babylon,
Build ye houses, and abide; and plant ye gardens, and eat their fruit;
Take ye wives, and beget sons and daughters; and take for your sons wives, and your daughters give to husbands, and they bear sons and daughters; and multiply there, and ye are not few;
And seek the peace of the city whither I have removed you, and pray for it unto Jehovah, for in its peace ye have peace.
'For thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, Let not your prophets who [are] in your midst, and your diviners, lift you up, nor hearken ye unto their dreams, that ye are causing [them] to dream;
For with falsehood they are prophesying to you in My name; I have not sent them, an affirmation of Jehovah.
'For thus said Jehovah, Surely at the fulness of Babylon — seventy years — I inspect you, and have established towards you My good word, to bring you back unto this place.
For I have known the thoughts that I am thinking towards you — an affirmation of Jehovah; thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give to you posterity and hope.
'And ye have called Me, and have gone, and have prayed unto Me, and I have hearkened unto you,
And ye have sought Me, and have found, for ye seek Me with all your heart;
And I have been found of you — an affirmation of Jehovah; and I have turned back [to] your captivity, and have gathered you out of all the nations, and out of all the places whither I have driven you — an affirmation of Jehovah — and I have brought you back unto the place whence I removed you.
'Because ye have said, Jehovah hath raised up to us prophets in Babylon,
Surely thus said Jehovah concerning the king who is sitting on the throne of David, and concerning all the people that is dwelling in this city, your brethren who went not forth with you in the removal;
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, Lo, I am sending among them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and I have given them up as figs that [are] vile, that are not eaten for badness.
And I have pursued after them with sword, with famine, and with pestilence, and have given them for a trembling to all kingdoms of the earth, for a curse and for an astonishment, and for a hissing, and for a reproach among all the nations whither I have driven them,
Because that they have not hearkened unto My words — an affirmation of Jehovah — that I sent unto them by My servants the prophets, rising early and sending, and ye hearkened not — an affirmation of Jehovah.
'And ye, hear ye a word of Jehovah, all ye of the captivity that I have sent from Jerusalem to Babylon,
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, concerning Ahab son of Kolaiah, and concerning Zedekiah son of Maaseiah, who are prophesying to you in My name falsehood: Lo, I am giving them into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and he hath smitten them before your eyes,
And taken from them hath been a reviling by all the removed of Judah that [are] in Babylon, saying, Jehovah doth set thee as Zedekiah, and as Ahab, whom the king of Babylon roasted with fire;
Because that they have done folly in Israel, and commit adultery with the wives of their neighbours, and speak a word in My name falsely that I have not commanded them, and I [am] He who knoweth and a witness — an affirmation of Jehovah.
'And unto Shemaiah the Nehelamite thou dost speak, saying,
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, saying, Because that thou hast sent in thy name letters unto all the people who [are] in Jerusalem, and unto Zephaniah son of Maaseiah the priest, and unto all the priests, saying,
Jehovah hath made thee priest instead of Jehoiada the priest, for there being inspectors of the house of Jehovah, for every one mad and making himself a prophet, and thou hast put him unto the torture and unto the stocks.
And now, why hast thou not pushed against Jeremiah of Anathoth, who is making himself a prophet to you?
Because that he hath sent unto us to Babylon, saying, It [is] long, build ye houses, and abide; and plant ye gardens, and eat their fruit.'
And Zephaniah the priest readeth this letter in the ears of Jeremiah the prophet.
And there is a word of Jehovah unto Jeremiah, saying,
'Send unto all the removal, saying, Thus said Jehovah concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite, Because that Shemaiah prophesied to you, and I — I have not sent him, and he doth cause you to trust on falsehood,
Therefore, thus said Jehovah, Lo, I am seeing after Shemaiah the Nehelamite, and after his seed, he hath none dwelling in the midst of this people, nor doth he look on the good that I am doing to My people — an affirmation of Jehovah — for apostasy he hath spoken against Jehovah.'
The word that hath been unto Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,
'Thus spake Jehovah, God of Israel, saying, Write for thee all the words that I have spoken unto thee on a book.
For, lo, days are coming — an affirmation of Jehovah — and I have turned back [to] the captivity of My people Israel and Judah, said Jehovah, and I have caused them to turn back unto the land that I gave to their fathers, and they do possess it.'
And these [are] the words that Jehovah hath spoken concerning Israel and concerning Judah:
Surely thus said Jehovah: A voice of trembling we have heard, Fear — and there is no peace.
Ask, I pray you, and see, is a male bringing forth? Wherefore have I seen every man, His hands on his loins, as a travailing woman, And all faces have been turned to paleness?
Woe! for great [is] that day, without any like it, Yea, a time of adversity it [is] to Jacob, Yet out of it he is saved.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts, I break his yoke from off thy neck, And thy bands I draw away, And lay no more service on him do strangers.
And they have served Jehovah their God, And David their king whom I raise up to them.
And thou, be not afraid, My servant Jacob, An affirmation of Jehovah, Nor be affrighted, O Israel, For, lo, I am saving thee from afar, And thy seed from the land of their captivity, And Jacob hath turned back and rested, And is quiet, and there is none troubling.
For with thee [am] I, An affirmation of Jehovah — to save thee, For I make an end of all the nations Whither I have scattered thee, Only, of thee I do not make an end, And I have chastised thee in judgment, And do not entirely acquit thee.
For thus said Jehovah: Incurable is thy breach, grievous thy stroke,
There is none judging thy cause to bind up, Healing medicines there are none for thee.
all loving thee have forgotten thee, Thee they do not seek, For with the stroke of an enemy I smote thee, The chastisement of a fierce one, Because of the abundance of thy iniquity, Mighty have been thy sins!
What! — thou criest concerning thy breach! Incurable [is] thy pain, Because of the abundance of thy iniquity, Mighty have been thy sins! I have done these to thee.
Therefore all consuming thee are consumed, And all thine adversaries — all of them — Into captivity do go, And thy spoilers have been for a spoil, And all thy plunderers I give up to plunder.
For I increase health to thee, And from thy strokes I do heal thee, An affirmation of Jehovah, For 'Outcast' they have called to thee, 'Zion it [is], there is none seeking for her.'
Thus said Jehovah: Lo, I turn back [to] the captivity of the tents of Jacob, And his dwelling places I pity, And the city hath been built on its heap, And the palace according to its ordinance remaineth.
And gone forth from them hath thanksgiving, And the voice of playful ones, And I have multiplied them and they are not few, And made them honourable, and they are not small.
And his sons have been as aforetime, And his company before Me is established, And I have seen after all his oppressors.
And his honourable one hath been of himself, And his ruler from his midst goeth forth, And I have caused him to draw near, And he hath drawn nigh unto Me, For who [is] he who hath pledged his heart To draw nigh unto Me? An affirmation of Jehovah.
And ye have been to Me for a people, And I am to you for God.
Lo, a whirlwind of Jehovah — Fury hath gone forth — a cutting whirlwind, On the head of the wicked it stayeth.
The fierceness of the anger of Jehovah Doth not turn back till His doing, Yea, till His establishing the devices of His heart, In the latter end of the days we consider it!
At that time, an affirmation of Jehovah, I am for God to all families of Israel, And they — they are to Me for a people.
Thus said Jehovah: Found grace in the wilderness Hath a people remaining from the sword Going to cause it to rest — Israel.
From afar Jehovah hath appeared to me, With love age-during I have loved thee, Therefore I have drawn thee [with] kindness.
Again do I build thee, And thou hast been built, O virgin of Israel, Again thou puttest on thy tabrets, And hast gone out in the chorus of the playful.
Again thou dost plant vineyards In mountains of Samaria, Planters have planted, and made common.
For there is a day, Cried have watchmen on mount Ephraim, 'Rise, and we go up to Zion, unto Jehovah our God;
For thus said Jehovah: Sing, O ye to Jacob, [with] joy, And cry aloud at the head of the nations, Sound ye, praise ye, and say, Save, O Jehovah, thy people, the remnant of Israel.
Lo, I am bringing them in from the north country, And have gathered them from the sides of the earth, Among them [are] blind and lame, Conceiving and travailing one — together, A great assembly — they turn back hither.
With weeping they come in, And with supplications I bring them, I cause them to go unto streams of waters, In a right way — they stumble not in it, For I have been to Israel for a father, And Ephraim — My first-born [is] he.
Hear a word of Jehovah, O nations, And declare ye among isles afar off, and say: He who is scattering Israel doth gather him, And hath kept him as a shepherd [doth] his flock,
For Jehovah hath ransomed Jacob, And redeemed him from a hand stronger than he.
And they have come in, And have sung in the high place of Zion, And flowed unto the goodness of Jehovah, For wheat, and for new wine, and for oil, And for the young of the flock and herd, And their soul hath been as a watered garden, And they add not to grieve any more.
Then rejoice doth a virgin in a chorus, Both young men and old men — together, And I have turned their mourning to joy, And have comforted them, And gladdened them above their sorrow,
And satisfied the soul of the priests [with] fatness, And My people with My goodness are satisfied, An affirmation of Jehovah.
Thus said Jehovah, A voice in Ramah is heard, wailing, weeping most bitter, Rachel is weeping for her sons, She hath refused to be comforted for her sons, because they are not.
Thus said Jehovah: Withhold thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears, For there is a reward for thy work, An affirmation of Jehovah, And they have turned back from the land of the enemy.
And there is hope for thy latter end, An affirmation of Jehovah, And the sons have turned back [to] their border.
I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, 'Thou hast chastised me, And I am chastised, as a heifer not taught, Turn me back, and I turn back, For thou [art] Jehovah my God.
For after my turning back I repented, And after my being instructed I struck on the thigh, I have been ashamed, I have also blushed, For I have borne the reproach of my youth.
A precious son is Ephraim to Me? A child of delights? For since My speaking against him, I do thoroughly remember him still, Therefore have My bowels been moved for him, I do greatly love him, An affirmation of Jehovah.
Set up for thee signs, make for thee heaps, Set thy heart to the highway, the way thou wentest, Turn back, O virgin of Israel, Turn back unto these thy cities.
Till when dost thou withdraw thyself, O backsliding daughter? For Jehovah hath prepared a new thing in the land, Woman doth compass man.
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, Still they say this word in the land of Judah, And in its cities, In My turning back [to] their captivity, Jehovah doth bless thee, habitation of righteousness, Mountain of holiness.
And dwelt in Judah have husbandmen, and in all its cities together, And they have journeyed in order.
For I have satiated the weary soul, And every grieved soul I have filled.'
On this I have awaked, and I behold, and my sleep hath been sweet to me.
Lo, days are coming, an affirmation of Jehovah, And I have sown the house of Israel, And the house of Judah, With seed of man, and seed of beast.
And it hath been, as I watched over them to pluck up, And to break down, and to throw down, And to destroy, and to afflict; So do I watch over them to build, and to plant, An affirmation of Jehovah.
In those days they do not say any more: Fathers have eaten unripe fruit, And the sons' teeth are blunted.
But — each for his own iniquity doth die, Every man who is eating the unripe fruit, Blunted are his teeth.
Lo, days are coming, an affirmation of Jehovah, And I have made with the house of Israel And with the house of Judah a new covenant,
Not like the covenant that I made with their fathers, In the day of My laying hold on their hand, To bring them out of the land of Egypt, In that they made void My covenant, And I ruled over them — an affirmation of Jehovah.
For this [is] the covenant that I make, With the house of Israel, after those days, An affirmation of Jehovah, I have given My law in their inward part, And on their heart I do write it, And I have been to them for God, And they are to me for a people.
And they do not teach any more Each his neighbour, and each his brother, Saying, Know ye Jehovah, For they all know Me, from their least unto their greatest, An affirmation of Jehovah; For I pardon their iniquity, And of their sin I make mention no more.
Thus said Jehovah, Who is giving the sun for a light by day, The statutes of moon and stars for a light by night, Quieting the sea when its billows roar, Jehovah of Hosts [is] His name:
If these statutes depart from before Me, An affirmation of Jehovah, Even the seed of Israel doth cease From being a nation before Me all the days.
Thus said Jehovah: If the heavens above be measured, And the foundations of earth below searched, Even I kick against all the seed of Israel, For all that they have done, An affirmation of Jehovah.
Lo, days [are coming], an affirmation of Jehovah, And the city hath been built to Jehovah, From the tower of Hananeel to the gate of the corner.
And gone out again hath the measuring line Over-against it, unto the height of Gareb, And it hath compassed to Goah.
And all the valley of the carcases and of the ashes, And all the fields unto the brook Kidron, Unto the corner of the horse-gate eastward, [Are] holy to Jehovah, it is not plucked up, Nor is it thrown down any more to the age!
The word that hath been unto Jeremiah from Jehovah, in the tenth year of Zedekiah king of Judah — it [is] the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar,
And then the forces of the king of Babylon are laying siege against Jerusalem, and Jeremiah the prophet hath been shut up in the court of the prison that [is] in the house of the king of Judah,
Where Zedekiah king of Judah hath shut him up, saying, 'Wherefore art thou prophesying, saying, Thus said Jehovah, Lo, I am giving this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he hath captured it;
And Zedekiah king of Judah doth not escape out of the hand of the Chaldeans, but is certainly given into the hand of the king of Babylon, and his mouth hath spoken with his mouth, and his eyes see his eyes,
And [to] Babylon he leadeth Zedekiah, and there he is till My inspecting him, — an affirmation of Jehovah — because ye fight with the Chaldeans, ye do not prosper.'
And Jeremiah saith, 'A word of Jehovah hath been unto me saying,
Lo, Hanameel son of Shallum, thine uncle, is coming unto thee, saying, Buy for thee my field that [is] in Anathoth, for thine [is] the right of redemption — to buy.
And Hanameel, my uncle's son, cometh in unto me, according to the word of Jehovah, unto the court of the prison, and saith unto me, 'Buy, I pray thee, my field that [is] in Anathoth, that [is] in the land of Benjamin, for thine [is] the right of possession, and thine of redemption — buy for thee.' And I know that it [is] the word of Jehovah,
And I buy the field, that [is] in Anathoth, from Hanameel, my uncle's son, and I weigh to him the money — seventeen shekels of silver.
And I write in a book, and seal, and cause witnesses to testify, and weigh the silver in balances;
And I take the purchase-book, the sealed one, according to law and custom, and the open one.
And I give the purchase-book unto Baruch son of Neriah, son of Maaseiah, before the eyes of Hanameel, my uncle's son, and before the eyes of the witnesses, those writing in the purchase-book, before the eyes of all the Jews who are sitting in the court of the prison.
And I charge Baruch before their eyes, saying,
'Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, Take these books, this purchase-book, both the sealed one and the open one, and thou hast put them in an earthen vessel, that they may remain many days;
For thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, Again are houses and fields and vineyards bought in this land.'
And I pray unto Jehovah — after my giving the purchase-book unto Baruch son of Neriah — saying,
'Ah, Lord Jehovah, lo, Thou hast made the heavens and the earth by Thy great power, and by Thy stretched-out arm; there is nothing too wonderful for Thee:
Doing kindness to thousands, and recompensing iniquity of fathers into the bosom of their sons after them; God, the great, the mighty, Jehovah of Hosts [is] His name,
Great in counsel, and mighty in act, in that Thine eyes are open on all the ways of the sons of Adam, to give to each according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings:
In that thou hast done signs and wonders in the land of Egypt unto this day, and in Israel, and among men, and Thou dost make for Thee a name as [at] this day.
'And Thou bringest forth Thy people Israel from the land of Egypt, with signs and with wonders, and by a strong hand, and by a stretched-out arm, and by great fear,
And thou givest to them this land that thou didst swear to their fathers to give to them, a land flowing with milk and honey,
And they come in, and possess it, and they have not hearkened to Thy voice, and in Thy law have not walked, all that which Thou didst lay a charge on them to do they have not done, and Thou dost proclaim [to] them all this evil.
'Lo, the mounts — they have come in to the city to capture it, and the city hath been given into the hand of the Chaldeans who are fighting against it, because of the sword, and the famine, and the pestilence; and that which Thou hast spoken hath come to pass, and lo, Thou art seeing;
Yet Thou hast said unto me, O Lord Jehovah, Buy for thee the field with money, and cause witnesses to testify — and the city hath been given into the hand of the Chaldeans!'
And the word of Jehovah is unto Jeremiah, saying:
'Lo, I [am] Jehovah, God of all flesh: For Me is anything too wonderful?
'Therefore, thus said Jehovah, Lo, I am giving this city into the hand of the Chaldeans, and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and he hath captured it;
And come in have the Chaldeans who are fighting against this city, and they have set this city on fire, and have burned it, and the houses on whose roofs they made perfume to Baal, and poured out libations to other gods, so as to provoke Me to anger.
For the sons of Israel and the sons of Judah have been only doing evil in Mine eyes, from their youth; for the sons of Israel are only provoking Me with the work of their hands — an affirmation of Jehovah.
'For a cause of Mine anger, and a cause of My fury, hath this city been to Me, even from the day that they built it, and unto this day — to turn it aside from before My face,
Because of all the evil of the sons of Israel, and of the sons of Judah that they have done, so as to provoke Me — they, their kings, their heads, their priests, and their prophets, and the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
And they turn unto Me the neck, and not the face, and teaching them, rising early and teaching, and they are not hearkening to accept instruction.
'And they set their abominations in the house over which My name is called, so as to defile it;
And they build the high places of Baal, that [are] in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to cause their sons and their daughters to pass through to Molech, which I did not command them, nor did it come up on my heart to do this abomination, so as to cause Judah to sin.
'And now, therefore, thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, concerning this city, of which ye are saying, It hath been given into the hand of the king of Babylon by sword, and by famine, and by pestilence,
Lo, I am gathering them out of all the lands whither I have driven them in Mine anger, and in My fury, and in great wrath, and I have brought them back unto this place, and have caused them to dwell confidently;
and they have been to Me for a people, and I am to them for God;
and I have given to them one heart, and one way, to fear Me all the days, for good to them, and to their sons after them:
and I have made for them a covenant age-during, in that I turn not back from after them for My doing them good, and My fear I put in their heart, so as not to turn aside from me;
and I have rejoiced over them to do them good, and have planted them in this land in truth, with all my heart, and with all My soul.
'For thus said Jehovah: As I brought in unto this people all this great evil, so I am bringing in on them all the good that I am speaking concerning them;
and bought hath been the field in this land of which ye are saying, A desolation it [is], without man and beast, it hath been given into the hand of the Chaldeans.
Fields with money they buy, so as to write in a book, and to seal, and to cause witnesses to testify, in the land of Benjamin, and in suburbs of Jerusalem, and in cities of Judah, and in cities of the hill-country, and in cities of the low country, and in cities of the south, for I turn back their captivity — an affirmation of Jehovah.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto Jeremiah a second time — and he [is] yet detained in the court of the prison — saying:
Thus said Jehovah its maker, Jehovah its former, at establishing it, Jehovah [is] His name:
Call unto Me, and I do answer thee, yea, I declare to thee great and fenced things — thou hast not known them.
For thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, concerning the houses of this city, and concerning the houses of the kings of Judah, that are broken down for the mounts, and for the tool;
they are coming in to fight with the Chaldeans, and to fill them with the carcases of men, whom I have smitten in Mine anger, and in My fury, and [for] whom I have hidden My face from this city, because of all their evil:
Lo, I am increasing to it health and cure, And have healed them, and revealed to them The abundance of peace and truth.
And I have turned back the captivity of Judah, And the captivity of Israel, And I have built them as at the first,
And cleansed them from all their iniquity, That they have sinned against Me, And I have pardoned all their iniquities, That they have sinned against Me, And that they transgressed against Me.
And it hath been to Me for a name of joy, For praise, and for beauty, to all nations of the earth, Who hear of all the good that I am doing them, And they have feared, And they have trembled for all the good, And for all the peace, that I am doing to it.
Thus said Jehovah: Again heard in this place of which ye are saying, Waste it [is], without man and without beast, In cities of Judah, and in streets of Jerusalem, That are desolated, without man, And without inhabitant, and without beast,
Is a voice of joy and a voice of gladness, Voice of bridegroom, and voice of bride, The voice of those saying, Thank Jehovah of Hosts, for Jehovah [is] good, For His kindness [is] to the age, Who are bringing in thanksgiving to the house of Jehovah, For I turn back the captivity of the land, As at the first, said Jehovah.
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Again there is in this place — that is waste, Without man and beast, And in all its cities — a habitation of shepherds, Causing the flock to lie down.
In the cities of the hill-country, In the cities of the low country, And in the cities of the south, And in the land of Benjamin, And in the suburbs of Jerusalem, And in the cities of Judah, Again doth the flock pass by under the hands of the numberer, said Jehovah.
Lo, days are coming, an affirmation of Jehovah, And I have established the good word That I spake unto the house of Israel, And concerning the house of Judah.
In those days, and at that time, I cause to shoot up to David a shoot of righteousness, And he hath done judgment and righteousness in the earth.
In those days is Judah saved, And Jerusalem doth dwell confidently, And this [is] he whom Jehovah proclaimeth to her: 'Our Righteousness.'
For thus said Jehovah: 'Not cut off to David is one sitting on the throne of the house of Israel,
And to the priests — the Levites, Not cut off from before Me is one, Causing a burnt-offering to ascend, And perfuming a present, and making sacrifice — all the days.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto Jeremiah, saying,
'Thus said Jehovah: If ye do break My covenant of the day, And My covenant of the night, So that they are not daily and nightly in their season,
Also My covenant is broken with David My servant, So that he hath not a son reigning on his throne, And with the Levites the priests, My ministers.
As the host of the heavens is not numbered, Nor the sand of the sea measured, So I multiply the seed of David My servant, And the Levites My ministers.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto Jeremiah, saying:
'Hast thou not considered what this people have spoken, saying: The two families on which Jehovah fixed, He doth reject them, And my people they despise — So that they are no more a people before them!
Thus said Jehovah: If My covenant [is] not daily and nightly, The statutes of heaven and earth I have not appointed —
Also the seed of Jacob, and David My servant, I reject, Against taking from his seed rulers For the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, For I turn back [to] their captivity, and have pitied them.'
The word that hath been unto Jeremiah from Jehovah — and Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and all his force, and all kingdoms of the land of the dominion of his hand, and all the peoples are fighting against Jerusalem, and against all its cities — saying:
'Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel: Go, and thou hast spoken unto Zedekiah king of Judah, and hast said unto him, Thus said Jehovah: Lo, I am giving this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he hath burned it with fire,
and thou, thou dost not escape out of his hand, for thou art certainly caught, and into his hand thou art given, and thine eyes see the eyes of the king of Babylon, and his mouth with thy mouth speaketh, and Babylon thou enterest.
'Only, hear a word of Jehovah, O Zedekiah king of Judah, Thus said Jehovah unto thee: Thou dost not die by sword,
in peace thou diest, and with the burnings of thy fathers, the former kings who have been before thee, so they make a burning for thee; and Ah, lord, they lament for thee, for the word I have spoken — an affirmation of Jehovah.'
And Jeremiah the prophet speaketh unto Zedekiah king of Judah all these words in Jerusalem,
and the forces of the king of Babylon are fighting against Jerusalem, and against all the cities of Judah that are left — against Lachish, and against Azekah, for these have been left among the cities of Judah, cities of fortresses.
The word that hath been unto Jeremiah from Jehovah, after the making by the king Zedekiah of a covenant with all the people who [are] in Jerusalem, to proclaim to them liberty,
to send out each his man-servant, and each his maid-servant — the Hebrew and the Hebrewess — free, so as not to lay service on them, any on a Jew his brother;
and hearken do all the heads, and all the people who have come in to the covenant to send forth each his man-servant and each his maid-servant free, so as not to lay service on them any more, yea, they hearken, and send them away;
and they turn afterwards, and cause the men-servants and the maid-servants to return, whom they had sent forth free, and they subdue them for men-servants and for maid-servants.
And there is a word of Jehovah unto Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
'Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, I — I made a covenant with your fathers in the day of My bringing them forth from the land of Egypt, from a house of servants, saying,
At the end of seven years ye do send forth each his brother, the Hebrew, who is sold to thee, and hath served thee six years, yea, thou hast sent him forth free from thee: and your fathers hearkened not unto Me, nor inclined their ear.
'And ye turn back, ye to-day, and ye do that which is right in Mine eyes, to proclaim liberty each to his neighbour, and ye make a covenant before Me in the house over which My name is called.
And — ye turn back, and pollute My name, and ye cause each his man-servant and each his maid-servant, whom he had sent forth free, (at their pleasure,) to return, and ye subdue them to be to you for men-servants and for maid-servants.
'Therefore, thus said Jehovah: Ye have not hearkened unto Me to proclaim freedom, each to his brother, and each to his neighbour; lo, I am proclaiming to you liberty — an affirmation of Jehovah — unto the sword, unto the pestilence, and unto the famine, and I have given you for a trembling to all kingdoms of the earth.
'And I have given the men who are transgressing My covenant, who have not established the words of the covenant that they have made before Me, by the calf, that they have cut in two, and pass through between its pieces —
heads of Judah, and heads of Jerusalem, the officers, and the priests, and all the people of the land those passing through between the pieces of the calf —
yea, I have given them into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those seeking their soul, and their carcase hath been for food to the fowl of the heavens, and to the beast of the earth.
'And Zedekiah king of Judah, and his heads, I give into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those seeking their soul, and into the hand of the forces of the king of Babylon, that are going up from off you.
Lo, I am commanding — an affirmation of Jehovah — and have brought them back unto this city, and they have fought against it, and captured it, and burned it with fire, and the cities of Judah I do make a desolation — without inhabitant.'
The word that hath been unto Jeremiah from Jehovah, in the days of Jehoiakim son of Josiah king of Judah, saying:
'Go unto the house of the Rechabites, and thou hast spoken with them, and brought them into the house of Jehovah, unto one of the chambers, and caused them to drink wine.'
And I take Jaazaniah son of Jeremiah, son of Habazziniah, and his brethren, and all his sons, and all the house of the Rechabites,
and bring them into the house of Jehovah, unto the chamber of the sons of Hanan son of Igdaliah, a man of God, that [is] near to the chamber of the princes, that [is] above the chamber of Maaseiah son of Shallum, keeper of the threshold;
and I put before the sons of the house of the Rechabites goblets full of wine, and cups, and I say unto them, Drink ye wine.
And they say, 'We do not drink wine: for Jonadab son of Rechab, our father, charged us, saying, Ye do not drink wine, ye and your sons — unto the age;
and a house ye do not build, and seed ye do not sow, and a vineyard ye do not plant, nor have ye any; for in tents do ye dwell all your days, that ye may live many days on the face of the ground whither ye are sojourning.
'And we hearken to the voice of Jonadab son of Rechab, our father, to all that he commanded us, not to drink wine all our days, we, our wives, our sons, and our daughters;
nor to build houses for our dwelling; and vineyard, and field, and seed, we have none;
and we dwell in tents, and we hearken, and we do according to all that Jonadab our father commanded us;
and it cometh to pass, in the coming up of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon unto the land, that we say, Come, and we enter Jerusalem, because of the force of the Chaldeans, and because of the force of Aram — and we dwell in Jerusalem.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto Jeremiah, saying: 'Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel:
'Go, and thou hast said to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem: Do ye not receive instruction? — to hearken unto My words — an affirmation of Jehovah.
Performed have been the words of Jonadab son of Rechab, when he commanded his sons not to drink wine, and they have not drunk unto this day, for they have obeyed the command of their father; and I — I have spoken unto you, rising early and speaking, and ye have not hearkened unto Me.
And I send unto you all My servants the prophets, rising early and sending, saying: Turn back, I pray you, each from his evil way, and amend your doings, yea, ye do not walk after other gods, to serve them, and dwell ye on the ground that I have given to you and to your fathers; and ye have not inclined your ear, nor hearkened unto Me.
'Because the sons of Jonadab son of Rechab have performed the command of their father, that he commanded them, and this people have not hearkened unto Me,
therefore thus said Jehovah, God of Hosts, God of Israel: Lo, I am bringing in unto Judah, and unto all inhabitants of Jerusalem, all the evil that I have spoken against them, because I have spoken unto them, and they have not hearkened, yea, I call to them, and they have not answered.'
And to the house of the Rechabites said Jeremiah: 'Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, Because that ye have hearkened unto the command of Jonadab your father, and ye observe all his commands, and do according to all that he commanded you;
therefore, thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, Of Jonadab son of Rechab one standing before me is not cut off all the days.'
And it cometh to pass, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim son of Josiah king of Judah, this word hath been unto Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
'Take to thee a roll of a book, and thou hast written on it all the words that I have spoken unto thee concerning Israel, and concerning Judah, and concerning all the nations, from the day I spake unto thee, from the days of Josiah, even unto this day;
if so be the house of Israel do hear all the evil that I am thinking of doing to them, so that they turn back each from is evil way, and I have been propitious to their iniquity, and to their sin.'
And Jeremiah calleth Baruch son of Neriah, and Baruch writeth from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of Jehovah, that He hath spoken unto him, on a roll of a book.
And Jeremiah commandeth Baruch, saying, 'I am restrained, I am not able to enter the house of Jehovah;
but thou hast entered — and thou hast read in the roll that thou hast written from my mouth, the words of Jehovah, in the ears of the people, in the house of Jehovah, in the day of the fast, and also in the ears of all Judah who are coming in from their cities thou dost read them;
if so be their supplication doth fall before Jehovah, and they turn back each from his evil way, for great [is] the anger and the fury that Jehovah hath spoken concerning this people.'
And Baruch son of Neriah doth according to all that Jeremiah the prophet commanded him, to read in the book the words of Jehovah in the house of Jehovah.
And it cometh to pass, in the fifth year of Jehoiakim son of Josiah king of Judah, in the ninth month, proclaimed a fast before Jehovah have all the people in Jerusalem, and all the people who are coming in from cities of Judah to Jerusalem;
and Baruch readeth in the book the words of Jeremiah in the house of Jehovah, in the chamber of Gemariah son of Shaphan the scribe, in the higher court, at the opening of the new gate of the house of Jehovah, in the ears of all the people.
And Michaiah son of Gemariah, son of Shaphan, heareth all the words of Jehovah from off the book,
and he goeth down [to] the house of the king, unto the chamber of the scribe, and lo, there are all the heads sitting: Elishama the scribe, and Delaiah son of Shemaiah, and Elnathan son of Acbor, and Gemariah son of Shaphan, and Zedekiah son of Hananiah, and all the heads.
And declare to them doth Micaiah all the words that he hath heard, when Baruch readeth in the book in the ears of the people;
and all the heads send unto Baruch, Jehudi son of Nethaniah, son of Shelemiah, son of Cushi, saying, 'The roll in which thou hast read in the ears of the people take in thy hand, and come.' And Baruch son of Neriah taketh the roll in his hand and cometh in unto them,
and they say unto him, 'Sit down, we pray thee, and read it in our ears,' and Baruch readeth in their ears,
and it cometh to pass, when they hear all the words, they have been afraid one at another, and say unto Baruch, 'We do surely declare to the king all these words.'
And they asked Baruch, saying, 'Declare, we pray thee, to us, how didst thou write all these words — from his mouth?'
And Baruch saith to them, 'From his mouth, he pronounceth unto me all these words, and I am writing on the book with ink.'
And the heads say unto Baruch, 'Go, be hidden, thou and Jeremiah, and let no one know where ye [are].'
And they go in unto the king, to the court, and the roll they have laid up in the chamber of Elishama the scribe, and they declare in the ears of the king all the words.
And the king sendeth Jehudi to take the roll, and he taketh it out of the chamber of Elishama the scribe, and Jehudi readeth it in the ears of the king, and in the ears of all the heads who are standing by the king;
and the king is sitting in the winter-house, in the ninth month, and the stove before him is burning,
and it cometh to pass, when Jehudi readeth three or four leaves, he cutteth it out with the scribe's knife, and hath cast unto the fire, that [is] on the stove, till the consumption of all the roll by the fire that [is] on the stove.
And the king and all his servants who are hearing all these words have not been afraid, nor rent their garments.
And also Elnathan, and Delaiah, and Gemariah have interceded with the king not to burn the roll, and he hath not hearkened unto them.
And the king commandeth Jerahmeel son of Hammelek, and Seraiah son of Azriel, and Shelemiah son of Abdeel, to take Baruch the scribe, and Jeremiah the prophet, and Jehovah doth hide them.
And there is a word of Jehovah unto Jeremiah — after the king's burning the roll, even the words that Baruch hath written from the mouth of Jeremiah — saying:
'Turn, take to thee another roll, and write on it all the former words that were on the first roll, that Jehoiakim king of Judah burnt,
and unto Jehoiakim king of Judah thou dost say: Thus said Jehovah, Thou hast burnt this roll, saying, Wherefore hast thou written on it, saying, The king of Babylon surely cometh in, and hath destroyed this land, and caused to cease from it man and beast?
'Therefore, thus said Jehovah, concerning Jehoiakim king of Judah: He hath none sitting on the throne of David, and his carcase is cast out to heat by day, and to cold by night;
and I have charged on him, and on his seed, and on his servants, their iniquity; and I have brought in on them, and on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and unto the men of Judah, all the evil that I have spoken unto them, and they hearkened not.'
And Jeremiah hath taken another roll, and giveth it unto Baruch son of Neriah the scribe, and he writeth on it from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the book that Jehoiakim king of Judah hath burnt in the fire; and again there were added unto them many words like these.
And reign doth king Zedekiah son of Josiah instead of Coniah son of Jehoiakim whom Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon had caused to reign in the land of Judah,
and he hath not hearkened, he, and his servants, and the people of the land, unto the words of Jehovah, that He spake by the hand of Jeremiah the prophet.
And Zedekiah the king sendeth Jehucal son of Shelemiah, and Zephaniah son of Maaseiah the priest, unto Jeremiah the prophet, saying, 'Pray, we beseech thee, for us unto Jehovah our God.'
And Jeremiah is coming in and going out in the midst of the people, (and they have not put him in the prison-house),
and the force of Pharaoh hath come out of Egypt, and the Chaldeans, who are laying siege against Jerusalem, hear their report, and go up from off Jerusalem.
And there is a word of Jehovah unto Jeremiah the prophet, saying:
'Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, Thus do ye say unto the king of Judah, who is sending you unto Me, to seek Me: Lo, the force of Pharaoh that is coming out to you for help hath turned back to its land, to Egypt,
and the Chaldeans have turned back, and fought against this city, and captured it, and burnt it with fire.
'Thus said Jehovah: Lift not up your souls saying, The Chaldeans surely go from off us, for they do not go;
for though ye had smitten all the force of the Chaldeans who are fighting with you, and there were left of them wounded men — each in his tent — they rise, and have burnt this city with fire.'
And it hath come to pass, in the going up of the force of the Chaldeans from off Jerusalem, because of the force of Pharaoh,
that Jeremiah goeth out from Jerusalem to go [to] the land of Benjamin, to receive a portion thence in the midst of the people.
And it cometh to pass, he is at the gate of Benjamin, and there [is] a master of the ward — and his name is Irijah son of Shelemiah, son of Hananiah — and he catcheth Jeremiah the prophet, saying, 'Unto the Chaldeans thou art falling.'
And Jeremiah saith, 'Falsehood — I am not falling unto the Chaldeans;' and he hath not hearkened unto him, and Irijah layeth hold on Jeremiah, and bringeth him in unto the heads,
and the heads are wroth against Jeremiah, and have smitten him, and put him in the prison-house — the house of Jonathan the scribe, for it they had made for a prison-house.
When Jeremiah hath entered into the house of the dungeon, and unto the cells, then Jeremiah dwelleth there many days,
and the king Zedekiah sendeth, and taketh him, and the king asketh him in his house in secret, and saith, 'Is there a word from Jehovah?' And Jeremiah saith, 'There is,' and he saith, 'Into the hand of the king of Babylon thou art given.'
And Jeremiah saith unto the king Zedekiah, 'What have I sinned against thee, and against thy servants, and against this people, that ye have given me unto a prison-house?
And where [are] your prophets who prophesied to you, saying, The king of Babylon doth not come in against you, and against this land?
And now, hearken, I pray thee, my lord, O king, let my supplication fall, I pray thee, before thee, and cause me not to return [to] the house of Jonathan the scribe, that I die not there.'
And the king Zedekiah commandeth, and they commit Jeremiah into the court of the prison, also to give to him a cake of bread daily from the bakers' street, till the consumption of all the bread of the city, and Jeremiah dwelleth in the court of the prison.
And Shephatiah son of Mattan, and Gedaliah son of Pashhur, and Jucal son of Shelemiah, and Pashhur son of Malchiah, hear the words that Jeremiah is speaking unto all the people, saying,
'Thus said Jehovah: He who is remaining in this city dieth, by sword, by famine, and by pestilence, and he who is going forth unto the Chaldeans liveth, and his soul hath been to him for a prey, and he liveth.
Thus said Jehovah: This city is certainly given into the hand of the force of the king of Babylon, and he hath captured it.'
And the heads say unto the king, 'Let, we pray thee, this man be put to death, because that he is making feeble the hands of the men of war, who are left in this city, and the hands of all the people, by speaking unto them according to these words, for this man is not seeking for the peace of this people, but for its evil.'
And the king Zedekiah saith, 'Lo, he [is] in your hand: for the king is not able for you [in] anything.'
And they take Jeremiah, and cast him into the pit of Malchiah son of the king, that [is] in the court of the prison, and they send down Jeremiah with cords; and in the pit there is no water, but mire, and Jeremiah sinketh in the mire.
And Ebed-Melech the Cushite, a eunuch who [is] in the king's house, heareth that they have put Jeremiah into the pit; and the king is sitting at the gate of Benjamin,
and Ebed-Melech goeth forth from the king's house, and speaketh unto the king, saying,
'My lord, O king, these men have done evil [in] all that they have done to Jeremiah the prophet, whom they have cast into the pit, and he dieth in his place because of the famine, for there is no more bread in the city.'
And the king commandeth Ebed-Melech the Cushite, saying, 'Take with thee from this thirty men, and thou hast brought up Jeremiah the prophet from the pit, before he dieth.'
And Ebed-Melech taketh the men with him, and entereth the house of the king, unto the place of the treasury, and taketh thence worn-out clouts, and worn-out rags, and sendeth them unto Jeremiah unto the pit by cords.
And Ebed-Melech the Cushite saith unto Jeremiah, 'Put, I pray thee, the worn-out clouts and rags under thine arm-holes, at the place of the cords,' and Jeremiah doth so,
and they draw out Jeremiah with cords, and bring him up out of the pit, and Jeremiah dwelleth in the court of the prison.
And the king Zedekiah sendeth, and taketh Jeremiah the prophet unto him, unto the third entrance that [is] in the house of Jehovah, and the king saith unto Jeremiah, 'I am asking thee a thing, do not hide from me anything.'
And Jeremiah saith unto Zedekiah, 'When I declare to thee, dost thou not surely put me to death? and when I counsel thee, thou dost not hearken unto me.'
And the king Zedekiah sweareth unto Jeremiah in secret, saying, 'Jehovah liveth, He who made for us this soul, I do not put thee to death, nor give thee unto the hand of these men who are seeking thy soul.'
And Jeremiah saith unto Zedekiah, 'Thus said Jehovah, God of Hosts, God of Israel: If thou dost certainly go forth unto the heads of the king of Babylon, then hath thy soul lived, and this city is not burned with fire, yea, thou hast lived, thou and thy house.
And if thou dost not go forth unto the heads of the king of Babylon, then hath this city been given into the hand of the Chaldeans, and they have burnt it with fire, and thou dost not escape from their hand.'
And the king Zedekiah saith unto Jeremiah, 'I am fearing the Jews who have fallen unto the Chaldeans, lest they give me into their hand, and they have insulted me.'
And Jeremiah saith, 'They do not give thee up; hearken, I pray thee, to the voice of Jehovah, to that which I am speaking unto thee, and it is well for thee, and thy soul doth live.
'And if thou art refusing to go forth, this [is] the thing that Jehovah hath shewn me:
That, lo, all the women who have been left in the house of the king of Judah are brought forth unto the heads of the king of Babylon, and lo, they are saying: Persuaded thee, and prevailed against thee, Have thine allies, Sunk into mire have thy feet, They have been turned backward.
'And all thy wives, and thy sons, are brought forth unto the Chaldeans, and thou dost not escape from their hand, for by the hand of the king of Babylon thou art caught, and this city is burnt with fire.'
And Zedekiah saith unto Jeremiah, 'Let no man know of these words, and thou dost not die;
and when the heads hear that I have spoken with thee, and they have come in unto thee, and have said unto thee, Declare to us, we pray thee, what thou didst speak unto the king, do not hide [it] from us, and we do not put thee to death, and what the king spake unto thee,
then thou hast said unto them, I am causing my supplication to fall before the king, not to cause me to return to the house of Jonathan, to die there.'
And all the heads come in unto Jeremiah, and ask him, and he declareth to them according to all these words that the king commanded, and they keep silent from him, for the matter was not heard;
and Jeremiah dwelleth in the court of the prison till the day that Jerusalem hath been captured, and he was [there] when Jerusalem was captured.
In the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth month, come hath Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and all his force unto Jerusalem, and they lay siege against it;
in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month, in the ninth of the month, hath the city been broken up;
and come in do all the heads of the king of Babylon, and they sit at the middle gate, Nergal-Sharezer, Samgar-Nebo, Sarsechim, chief of the eunuchs, Nergal-Sharezer, chief of the Mages, and all the rest of the heads of the king of Babylon.
And it cometh to pass, when Zedekiah king of Judah, and all the men of war, have seen them, that they flee and go forth by night from the city, the way of the king's garden, through the gate between the two walls, and he goeth forth the way of the plain.
And the forces of the Chaldeans pursue after them, and overtake Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho, and they take him, and bring him up unto Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, to Riblah, in the land of Hamath, and he speaketh with him — judgments.
And the king of Babylon slaughtereth the sons of Zedekiah, in Riblah, before his eyes, yea, all the freemen of Judah hath the king of Babylon slaughtered.
And the eyes of Zedekiah he hath blinded, and he bindeth him with brazen fetters, to bring him in to Babylon.
And the house of the king, and the house of the people, have the Chaldeans burnt with fire, and the walls of Jerusalem they have broken down.
And the remnant of the people who are left in the city, and those falling who have fallen to him, and the remnant of the people who are left, hath Nebuzar-Adan, chief of the executioners, removed [to] Babylon.
And of the poor people, who have nothing, hath Nebuzar-Adan, chief of the executioners, left in the land of Judah, and he giveth to them vineyards and fields on the same day.
And Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon giveth a charge concerning Jeremiah, by the hand of Nebuzar-Adan, chief of the executioners, saying,
'Take him, and place thine eyes upon him, and do no evil thing to him, but as he speaketh unto thee, so do with him.'
And Nebuzar-Adan, chief of the executioners sendeth, and Nebushazban, chief of the eunuchs, and Nergal-Sharezer, chief of the Mages, and all the chiefs of the king of Babylon;
yea, they send and take Jeremiah out of the court of the prison, and give him unto Gedaliah son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan, to carry him home, and he dwelleth in the midst of the people.
And unto Jeremiah hath a word of Jehovah been — in his being detained in the court of the prison — saying:
'Go, and thou hast spoken to Ebed-Melech the Cushite, saying: Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel: Lo, I am bringing in My words unto this city for evil, and not for good, and they have been before thee in that day.
And I have delivered thee in that day — an affirmation of Jehovah — and thou art not given into the hand of the men of whose face thou art afraid,
for I do certainly deliver thee, and by sword thou fallest not, and thy life hath been to thee for a spoil, for thou hast trusted in Me — an affirmation of Jehovah.'
The word that hath been unto Jeremiah from Jehovah, after Nebuzar-Adan, chief of the executioners, hath sent him from Ramah, in his taking him — and he a prisoner in chains — in the midst of all the removal of Jerusalem and of Judah, who are removed to Babylon.
And the chief of the executioners taketh Jeremiah, and saith unto him, 'Jehovah thy God hath spoken this evil concerning this place,
and Jehovah bringeth [it] in, and doth as He spake, because ye have sinned against Jehovah, and have not hearkened to His voice, even this thing hath been to you.
'And now, lo, I have loosed thee to-day from the chains that [are] on thy hand; if good in thine eyes to come with me [to] Babylon, come, and I keep mine eye upon thee: and if evil in thine eyes to come with me to Babylon, forbear; see, all the land [is] before thee, whither [it be] good, and whither [it be] right in thine eyes to go — go.' —
and while he doth not reply — 'Or turn back unto Gedaliah son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan, whom the king of Babylon hath appointed over the cities of Judah, and dwell with him in the midst of the people, or whithersoever it is right in thine eyes to go — go.' And the chief of the executioners giveth to him for the way, and a gift, and sendeth him away,
and Jeremiah cometh in unto Gedaliah son of Ahikam, to Mizpah, and dwelleth with him, in the midst of the people who are left in the land.
And all the heads of the forces that [are] in the field hear, they and their men, that the king of Babylon hath appointed Gedaliah son of Ahikam over the land, and that he hath charged him [with] men, and women, and infants, and of the poor of the land, of those who have not been removed to Babylon;
and they come in unto Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael son of Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jonathan sons of Kareah, and Seraiah son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the Netophathite, and Jezaniah son of the Maachathite, they and their men.
And swear to them doth Gedaliah son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan, and to their men, saying, 'Be not afraid of serving the Chaldeans, abide in the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it is well for you;
and I, lo, I am dwelling in Mizpah, to stand before the Chaldeans who are come in unto us, and ye, gather ye wine, and summer fruit, and oil, and put in your vessels, and dwell in your cities that ye have taken.'
And also all the Jews who [are] in Moab, and among the sons of Ammon, and in Edom, and who [are] in all the lands, have heard that the king of Babylon hath given a remnant to Judah, and that he hath appointed over them Gedaliah son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan,
and all the Jews from all the places whither they have been driven, turn back and enter the land of Judah, unto Gedaliah, to Mizpah, and they gather wine and summer fruit — very much.
And Johanan son of Kareah, and all the heads of the forces that [are] in the field, have come in unto Gedaliah to Mizpah,
and they say unto him, 'Dost thou really know that Baalis king of the sons of Ammon hath sent Ishmael son of Nethaniah to smite thy soul?' And Gedaliah son of Ahikam hath not given to them credence.
And Johanan son of Kareah hath spoken unto Gedaliah in secret, in Mizpah, saying, 'Let me go, I pray thee, and I smite Ishmael son of Nethaniah, and no one doth know; why doth he smite thy soul? and scattered have been all Judah who are gathered unto thee, and perished hath the remnant of Judah.'
And Gedaliah son of Ahikam saith unto Johanan son of Kareah, 'Thou dost not do this thing, for falsehood thou art speaking concerning Ishmael.'
And it cometh to pass, in the seventh month, come hath Ishmael son of Nethaniah, son of Elishama, of the seed royal, and of the chiefs of the king, and ten men with him, unto Gedaliah son of Ahikam, to Mizpah, and they eat there bread together in Mizpah.
And Ishmael son of Nethaniah riseth, and the ten men who have been with him, and they smite Gedaliah son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan, with the sword, and he putteth him to death whom the king of Babylon hath appointed over the land.
And all the Jews who have been with him, with Gedaliah, in Mizpah, and the Chaldeans who have been found there — the men of war — hath Ishmael smitten.
And it cometh to pass, on the second day of the putting of Gedaliah to death, (and no one hath known,)
that men come in from Shechem, from Shiloh, and from Samaria — eighty men — with shaven beards, and rent garments, and cutting themselves, and an offering and frankincense in their hand, to bring in to the house of Jehovah.
And Ishmael son of Nethaniah goeth forth to meet them, from Mizpah, going on and weeping, and it cometh to pass, at meeting them, that he saith unto them, 'Come in unto Gedaliah son of Ahikam.'
And it cometh to pass, at their coming in unto the midst of the city, that Ishmael son of Nethaniah doth slaughter them, at the midst of the pit, he and the men who [are] with him.
And ten men have been found among them, and they say unto Ishmael, 'Do not put us to death, for we have things hidden in the field — wheat, and barley, and oil, and honey.' And he forbeareth, and hath not put them to death in the midst of their brethren.
And the pit whither Ishmael hath cast all the carcases of the men whom he hath smitten along with Gedaliah, is that which the king Asa made because of Baasha king of Israel — it hath Ishmael son of Nethaniah filled with the pierced.
And Ishmael taketh captive all the remnant of the people who [are] in Mizpah, the daughters of the king, and all the people who are left in Mizpah, whom Nebuzar-Adan, chief of the executioners, hath committed [to] Gedaliah son of Ahikam, and Ishmael son of Nethaniah taketh them captive, and goeth to pass over unto the sons of Ammon.
And hear doth Johanan son of Kareah, and all the heads of the forces that [are] with him, of all the evil that Ishmael son of Nethaniah hath done,
and they take all the men, and go to fight with Ishmael son of Nethaniah, and they find him at the great waters that [are] in Gibeon.
And it cometh to pass, when all the people who [are] with Ishmael see Johanan son of Kareah, and all the heads of the forces who [are] with him, that they rejoice.
And all the people whom Ishmael hath taken captive from Mizpah turn round, yea, they turn back, and go unto Johanan son of Kareah.
And Ishmael son of Nethaniah hath escaped, with eight men, from the presence of Johanan, and he goeth unto the sons of Ammon.
And Johanan son of Kareah, and all the heads of the forces who [are] with him, take all the remnant of the people whom he hath brought back from Ishmael son of Nethaniah, from Mizpah — after he had smitten Gedaliah son of Ahikam — mighty ones, men of war, and women, and infants, and eunuchs, whom he had brought back from Gibeon,
and they go and abide in the habitations of Chimham, that [are] near Beth-Lehem, to go to enter Egypt,
from the presence of the Chaldeans, for they have been afraid of them, for Ishmael son of Nethaniah had smitten Gedaliah son of Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon had appointed over the land.
And they come nigh — all the heads of the forces, and Johanan son of Kareah, and Jezaniah son of Hoshaiah, and all the people from the least even unto the greatest —
and they say unto Jeremiah the prophet, 'Let, we pray thee, our supplication fall before thee, and pray for us unto Jehovah thy God, for all this remnant; for we have been left a few out of many, as thine eyes do see us;
and Jehovah thy God doth declare to us the way in which we walk, and the thing that we do.'
And Jeremiah the prophet saith unto them, 'I have heard: lo, I am praying unto Jehovah your God according to your words, and it hath come to pass, the whole word that Jehovah answereth you, I declare to you — I do not withhold from you a word.'
And they have said to Jeremiah, 'Jehovah is against us for a witness true and faithful, if — according to all the word with which Jehovah thy God doth send thee unto us — we do not so.
Whether good or evil, to the voice of Jehovah our God, to whom we are sending thee, we do hearken; because it is good for us when we hearken to the voice of Jehovah our God.'
And it cometh to pass, at the end of ten days, that there is a word of Jehovah unto Jeremiah,
and he calleth unto Johanan son of Kareah, and unto all the heads of the forces that [are] with him, and to all the people, from the least even unto the greatest,
and he saith unto them, 'Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, unto whom ye sent me, to cause your supplication to fall before Him:
'If ye do certainly dwell in this land, then I have builded you up, and I throw not down; and I have planted you, and I pluck not up; for I have repented concerning the evil that I have done to you.
Be not afraid of the king of Babylon, whom ye are afraid of; be not afraid of him — an affirmation of Jehovah — for with you [am] I, to save you, and to deliver you from his hand.
And I give to you mercies, and he hath pitied you, and caused you to turn back unto your own ground.
'And if ye are saying, We do not dwell in this land — not to hearken to the voice of Jehovah your God,
saying, No; but the land of Egypt we enter, that we see no war, and the sound of a trumpet do not hear, and for bread be not hungry; and there do we dwell.
And now, therefore, hear ye a word of Jehovah, O remnant of Judah: Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel: If ye really set your faces to enter Egypt, and have gone in to sojourn there,
then it hath come to pass, the sword that ye are afraid of, doth there overtake you, in the land of Egypt; and the hunger, because of which ye are sorrowful, doth there cleave after you in Egypt, and there ye die.
'Thus are all the men who have set their faces to enter Egypt to sojourn there; they die — by sword, by hunger, and by pestilence, and there is not to them a remnant and an escaped one, because of the evil that I am bringing in upon them;
for thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel: As poured out hath been Mine anger and My fury on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so poured out is My fury upon you in your entering Egypt, and ye have been for an execration, and for an astonishment, and for a reviling, and for a reproach, and ye do not see any more this place.
'Jehovah hath spoken against you, O remnant of Judah, do not enter Egypt: know certainly that I have testified against you to-day;
for ye have shewed yourselves perverse in your souls, for ye sent me unto Jehovah your God, saying, Pray for us unto Jehovah our God, and according to all that Jehovah our God saith, so declare to us, and we have done [it];
and I declare to you to-day, and ye have not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah your God, and to anything with which He hath sent me unto you.
And now, know ye certainly that by sword, by famine, and by pestilence ye die, in the place that ye have desired to go in to sojourn there.'
And it cometh to pass, when Jeremiah doth finish to speak unto all the people all the words of Jehovah their God, with which Jehovah their God hath sent him unto them — all these words —
that Azariah son of Hoshaiah, and Johanan son of Kareah, and all the proud men, speak unto Jeremiah, saying, 'Falsehood thou art speaking; Jehovah our God hath not sent thee to say, Do not enter Egypt to sojourn there;
for Baruch son of Neriah is moving thee against us, in order to give us up into the hand of the Chaldeans, to put us to death, and to remove us to Babylon.'
And Johanan son of Kareah, and all the heads of the forces, and all the people, have not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah, to dwell in the land of Judah;
and Johanan son of Kareah, and all the heads of the forces, take all the remnant of Judah who have turned from all the nations whither they were driven to sojourn in the land of Judah,
the men, and the women, and the infant, and the daughters of the king, and every person that Nebuzar-Adan, chief of the executioners, had left with Gedaliah son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan, and Jeremiah the prophet, and Baruch son of Neriah,
and they enter the land of Egypt, for they have not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah, and they enter unto Tahpanhes.
And there is a word of Jehovah unto Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying,
'Take in thy hand great stones, and thou hast hidden them, in the clay, in the brick-kiln, that [is] at the opening of the house of Pharaoh in Tahpanhes, before the eyes of the men of Judah,
and thou hast said unto them: Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel: 'Lo, I am sending, and I have taken Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, My servant, and I have set his throne above these stones that I have hid, and he hath stretched out his pavilion over them,
and he hath come, and smitten the land of Egypt — those who [are] for death to death, and those who [are] for captivity to captivity, and those who [are] for the sword to the sword.
And I have kindled a fire in the houses of the gods of Egypt, and it hath burned them, and he hath taken them captive, and covered himself with the land of Egypt, as cover himself doth the shepherd with his garment, and he hath gone forth thence in peace;
and he hath broken the standing pillars of the house of the sun, that [is] in the land of Egypt, and the houses of the gods of Egypt he doth burn with fire.'
The word that hath been unto Jeremiah concerning all the Jews who are dwelling in the land of Egypt — who are dwelling in Migdol, and in Tahpanhes, and in Noph, and in the land of Pathros — saying,
'Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel: Ye — ye have seen all the evil that I have brought in on Jerusalem, and on all the cities of Judah, and lo, they [are] a waste this day, and there is none dwelling in them,
because of their wickedness that they have done, by provoking Me to anger, by going to make perfume, by serving other gods, that they knew not, they, ye, and your fathers.
'And I send unto you all my servants, the prophets, rising early and sending, saying: I pray you, do not this abomination that I have hated —
and they have not hearkened nor inclined their ear, to turn back from their wickedness, not to make perfume to other gods,
and poured out is My fury, and Mine anger, and it burneth in cities of Judah, and in streets of Jerusalem, and they are for a waste, for a desolation, as [at] this day.
'And, now, thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel: Why are ye doing great evil unto your own souls, to cut off to you man and woman, infant and suckling, from the midst of Judah, so as not to leave to you a remnant:
by provoking Me to anger by the works of your hands, by making perfume to other gods in the land of Egypt, whither ye are going in to sojourn, so as to cut yourselves off, and so as to your being for a reviling and for a reproach among all nations of the earth?
'Have ye forgotten the wickedness of your fathers, and the wickedness of the kings of Judah, and the wickedness of their wives, and your own wickedness, and the wickedness of your wives, that they have done in the land of Judah, and in streets of Jerusalem?
They have not been humbled unto this day, nor have they been afraid, nor have they walked in My law, and in My statutes, that I have set before you and before your fathers.
'Therefore, thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel: Lo, I am setting my face against you for evil, even to cut off all Judah,
and I have taken the remnant of Judah, who have set their faces to enter the land of Egypt to sojourn there, and they have all been consumed in the land of Egypt; they fall by sword, by famine they are consumed, from the least even unto the greatest, by sword and by famine they die, and they have been for an execration, for an astonishment, and for a reviling, and for a reproach.
'And I have seen after those dwelling in the land of Egypt, as I saw after Jerusalem, with sword, with famine, and with pestilence,
and there is not an escaped and remaining one of the remnant of Judah, who are entering into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, even to turn back to the land of Judah, whither they are lifting up their soul to return to dwell, for they do not turn back, except those escaping.'
And they answer Jeremiah — all the men who are knowing that their wives are making perfume to other gods, and all the women who are remaining, a great assembly, even all the people who are dwelling in the land of Egypt, in Pathros — saying:
'The word that thou hast spoken unto us in the name of Jehovah — we are not hearkening unto thee;
for we certainly do everything that hath gone out of our mouth, to make perfume to the queen of the heavens, and to pour out to her libations, as we have done, we, and our fathers, our kings, and our heads, in cities of Judah, and in streets of Jerusalem, and — we are satisfied with bread, and we are well, and evil we have not seen.
'And from the time we have ceased to make perfume to the queen of the heavens, and to pour out to her libations, we have lacked all, and by sword and by famine we have been consumed,
and when we are making perfume to the queen of the heavens, and pouring out to her libations — without our husbands have we made for her cakes to idolize her, and to pour out to her libations?'
And Jeremiah saith unto all the people, concerning the men and concerning the women, and concerning all the people who are answering him, saying:
'The perfume that ye made in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, ye, and your fathers, your kings, and your heads, and the people of the land, hath not Jehovah remembered it? yea, it cometh up on His heart.
And Jehovah is not able any more to accept [you], because of the evil of your doings, because of the abominations that ye have done, and your land is for a waste, and for an astonishment, and for a reviling, without inhabitant, as [at] this day.
'Because that ye have made perfume, and because ye have sinned against Jehovah, and have not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah, and in His law, and in His statutes, and in His testimonies ye have not walked, therefore hath this evil met you as [at] this day.'
And Jeremiah saith unto all the people, and unto all the women, 'Hear ye a word of Jehovah, all Judah who [are] in the land of Egypt,
Thus spake Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, saying: Ye and your wives both speak with your mouth, and with your hands have fulfilled, saying: We certainly execute our vows that we have vowed, to make perfume to the queen of the heavens, and to pour out to her libations, ye do certainly establish your vows, and certainly execute your vows.
'Therefore, hear ye a word of Jehovah, all Judah who are dwelling in the land of Egypt: Lo, I — I have sworn by My great name, said Jehovah, My name is no more proclaimed by the mouth of any man of Judah, saying, Live doth the Lord Jehovah — in all the land of Egypt.
Lo, I am watching over them for evil, and not for good, and consumed have been all the men of Judah who [are] in the land of Egypt, by sword and by famine, till their consumption.
'And the escaped of the sword turn back out of the land of Egypt to the land of Judah, few in number, and known have all the remnant of Judah who are coming into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, whose word is established, Mine or theirs.
'And this [is] to you the sign — an affirmation of Jehovah — that I am seeing after you in this place, so that ye know that My words are certainly established against you for evil;
Thus said Jehovah, Lo, I am giving Pharaoh-Hophra king of Egypt into the hand of his enemies, and into the hand of those seeking his life, as I have given Zedekiah king of Judah into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, his enemy, and who is seeking his life.'
The word that Jeremiah the prophet hath spoken unto Baruch son of Neriah, in his writing these words on a book from the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim son of Josiah king of Judah, saying:
'Thus said Jehovah, God of Israel, concerning thee, O Baruch:
'Thou hast said, Woe to me, now, for Jehovah hath added sorrow to my pain, I have been wearied with my sighing, and rest I have not found.
Thus dost thou say unto him: Thus said Jehovah: Lo, that which I have built I am throwing down, and that which I have planted I am plucking up, even the whole land itself.
And thou — thou seekest for thee great things — do not seek, for lo, I am bringing in evil on all flesh — an affirmation of Jehovah — and I have given to thee thy life for a spoil, in all places whither thou goest.'
That which hath been the word of Jehovah unto Jeremiah the prophet concerning the nations,
For Egypt, concerning the force of Pharaoh-Necho king of Egypt, that hath been by the river Phrat, in Carchemish, that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath smitten, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim son of Josiah king of Judah:
'Set ye in array shield and buckler, And draw nigh to battle.
Gird the horses, and go up, ye horsemen, And station yourselves with helmets, Polish the javelins, put on the coats of mail.
Wherefore have I seen them dismayed — They are turned backward, And their mighty ones are beaten down, And [to] a refuge they have fled, and not turned the face? Fear [is] round about — an affirmation of Jehovah.
The swift do not flee, nor do the mighty escape, Northward, by the side of the river Phrat, They have stumbled and fallen.
Who is this? as a flood he cometh up, As rivers do his waters shake themselves!
Egypt, as a flood cometh up, And as rivers the waters shake themselves. And he saith, I go up; I cover the land, I destroy the city and the inhabitants in it.
Go up, ye horses; and boast yourselves, ye chariots, And go forth, ye mighty, Cush and Phut handling the shield, And Lud handling — treading the bow.
And that day [is] to the Lord Jehovah of Hosts A day of vengeance, To be avenged of His adversaries, And the sword hath devoured, and been satisfied, And it hath been watered from their blood, For a sacrifice [is] to the Lord Jehovah of Hosts, In the land of the north, by the river Phrat.
Go up to Gilead, and take balm, O virgin daughter of Egypt, In vain thou hast multiplied medicines, Healing there is none for thee.
Nations have heard of thy shame, And thy cry hath filled the land, For the mighty on the mighty did stumble, Together they have fallen — both of them!'
The word that Jehovah hath spoken unto Jeremiah the prophet concerning the coming in of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, to smite the land of Egypt:
'Declare ye in Egypt, and sound in Migdol, Yea, sound in Noph, and in Tahpanhes say: Station thyself, yea, prepare for thee, For a sword hath devoured around thee,
Wherefore hath thy bull been swept away? He hath not stood, because Jehovah thrust him away.
He hath multiplied the stumbling, Yea one hath fallen upon his neighbour, And they say: Rise, and we turn back to our people, And unto the land of our birth, Because of the oppressing sword.
They have cried there: Pharaoh king of Egypt [is] a desolation, Passed by hath the appointed time.
I live — an affirmation of the King, Jehovah of Hosts [is] His name, Surely as Tabor [is] among mountains, And as Carmel by the sea — he cometh in,
Goods for removal make for thee, O inhabitant, daughter of Egypt, For Noph becometh a desolation, And hath been burnt up, without inhabitant.
A heifer very fair [is] Egypt, Rending from the north doth come into her.
Even her hired ones in her midst [are] as calves of the stall, For even they have turned, They have fled together, they have not stood, For the day of their calamity hath come on them, The time of their inspection.
Its voice as a serpent goeth on, For with a force they go, And with axes they have come in to her, As hewers of trees.
They have cut down her forest, An affirmation of Jehovah — for it is not searched, For they have been more than the grasshopper, And they have no numbering.
Ashamed hath been the daughter of Egypt, She hath been given into the hand of the people of the north.
Said hath Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel: Lo, I am seeing after Amon of No, And after Pharaoh, and after Egypt, And after her gods, and after her kings, And after Pharaoh, and after those trusting in him,
And I have given them into the hand of those seeking their life, And into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, And into the hand of his servants, And afterwards it is inhabited, As [in] days of old — an affirmation of Jehovah.
And thou, thou dost not fear, my servant Jacob, Nor [art] thou dismayed, O Israel, For lo, I am saving thee from afar, And thy seed from the land of their captivity, And Jacob hath turned back, And hath been at rest, and been at ease, And there is none disturbing.
Thou, thou dost not fear, My servant Jacob, An affirmation of Jehovah — for with thee I [am], For I make an end of all the nations Whither I have driven thee, And of thee I do not make an end, And I have reproved thee in judgment, And do not entirely acquit thee!'
That which hath been the word of Jehovah unto Jeremiah concerning the Philistines, before Pharaoh smiteth Gaza:
'Thus said Jehovah: Lo, waters are coming up from the north, And have been for an overflowing stream, And they overflow the land and its fulness, The city, and the inhabitants in it, And men have cried out, And howled hath every inhabitant of the land.
From the sound of the stamping of the hoofs of his mighty ones, From the rushing of his chariot, the noise of his wheels, Fathers have not turned unto sons, From feebleness of hands,
Because of the day that hath come to spoil all the Philistines, To cut off to Tyre and to Zidon every helping remnant. For Jehovah is spoiling the Philistines, The remnant of the isle of Caphtor.
Come hath baldness unto Gaza, Cut off hath been Ashkelon, O remnant of their valley, Till when dost thou cut thyself?
Ho, sword of Jehovah, till when art thou not quiet? Be removed unto thy sheath, rest and cease.
How shall it be quiet, And Jehovah hath given a charge to it, Against Ashkelon, and against the sea shore? There hath He appointed it!'
Concerning Moab: 'Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel: Woe unto Nebo, for it is spoiled, Put to shame, captured hath been Kiriathaim, Put to shame hath been the high tower, Yea, it hath been broken down.
There is no more praise of Moab, In Heshbon they devised against it evil: Come, and we cut it off from [being] a nation, Also, O Madmen, thou art cut off, After thee goeth a sword.
A voice of a cry [is] from Horonaim, Spoiling and great destruction.
Destroyed hath been Moab, Caused a cry to be heard have her little ones.
For the ascent of Luhith with weeping, Go up doth weeping, For in the descent of Horonaim Adversaries a cry of desolation have heard.
Flee ye, deliver yourselves, Ye are as a naked thing in a wilderness.
For, because of thy trusting in thy works, And in thy treasures, even thou art captured, And gone out hath Chemosh in a removal, His priests and his heads together.
And come in doth a spoiler unto every city, And no city doth escape, And perished hath the valley, And destroyed been the plain, as Jehovah said.
Give wings to Moab, for she utterly goeth out, And her cities are for a desolation, Without an inhabitant in them.
Cursed [is] he who is doing the work of Jehovah slothfully, And cursed [is] he Who is withholding his sword from blood.
Secure is Moab from his youth, And at rest [is] he for his preserved things, And he hath not been emptied out from vessel unto vessel, And into captivity he hath not gone, Therefore hath his taste remained in him, And his fragrance hath not been changed.
Therefore, lo, days are coming, An affirmation of Jehovah, And I have sent to him wanderers, And they have caused him to wander, And his vessels they empty out, And his bottles they dash in pieces.
And ashamed hath been Moab because of Chemosh, As the house of Israel have been ashamed Because of Beth-El their confidence.
How do ye say, We [are] mighty, And men of strength for battle?
Spoiled is Moab, and her cities hath one gone up, And the choice of its young men Have gone down to slaughter, An affirmation of the King, Jehovah of Hosts [is] His name.
Near is the calamity of Moab to come, And his affliction hath hasted exceedingly.
Bemoan for him, all ye round about him, And all knowing his name, say ye: How hath it been broken, the staff of strength, The rod of beauty.
Come down from honour, sit in thirst, O inhabitant, daughter of Dibon, For a spoiler of Moab hath come up to thee, He hath destroyed thy fenced places.
On the way stand, and watch, O inhabitant of Aroer, Ask the fugitive and escaped, Say, What hath happened?
Put to shame hath been Moab, For it hath been broken down, Howl and cry, declare ye in Arnon, For spoiled is Moab,
And judgment hath come in unto the land of the plain — unto Holon, And unto Jahazah, and on Mephaath,
And on Dibon, and on Nebo, And on Beth-Diblathaim, and on Kirathaim,
And on Beth-Gamul, and on Beth-Meon,
And on Kerioth, and on Bozrah, And on all cities of the land of Moab, The far off and the near.
Cut down hath been the horn of Moab, And his arm hath been broken, An affirmation of Jehovah.
Declare ye him drunk, For against Jehovah he made himself great And Moab hath stricken in his vomit, And he hath been for a derision — even he.
And was not Israel the derision to thee? Among thieves was he found? For since thy words concerning him, Thou dost bemoan thyself.
Forsake cities, and dwell in a rock, Ye inhabitants of Moab, And be as a dove making a nest in the passages of a pit's mouth.
We have heard of the arrogance of Moab, Exceeding proud! His haughtiness, and his arrogance, And his pride, and the height of his heart,
I — I have known, an affirmation of Jehovah, His wrath, and [it is] not right, His devices — not right they have done.
Therefore for Moab I howl, even for Moab — all of it, I cry for men of Kir-Heres, it doth mourn,
With the weeping of Jazer, I weep for thee, O vine of Sibmah, Thy branches have passed over a sea, Unto the sea of Jazer they have come, On thy summer fruits, and on thy harvest, A spoiler hath fallen.
And removed hath been joy and gladness From the fruitful field, Even from the land of Moab, And wine from wine-presses I have caused to cease, Shouting doth not proceed, The shouting [is] no shouting!
Because of the cry of Heshbon unto Elealeh, Unto Jahaz they have given their voice, From Zoar unto Horonaim, A heifer of the third [year], For even waters of Nimrim become desolations.
And I have caused to cease to Moab, An affirmation of Jehovah, Him who is offering in a high place, And him who is making perfume to his god.
Therefore my heart for Moab as pipes doth sound, And my heart for men of Kir-Heres As pipes doth sound, Therefore the abundance he made did perish.
For every head [is] bald, and every beard diminished, On all hands cuttings, and on the loins — sackcloth.
On all roofs of Moab, and in her broad-places, All of it — [is] lamentation, For I have broken Moab as a vessel in which there is no pleasure, An affirmation of Jehovah.
How hath it been broken down! they have howled, How hath Moab turned the neck ashamed, And Moab hath been for a derision. And for a terror to all round about her.
For thus said Jehovah: Lo, as an eagle he doth flee, And hath spread his wings unto Moab.
Captured have been the cities, And the strongholds are caught, And the heart of the mighty of Moab Hath been in that day as the heart of a distressed woman.
And Moab hath been destroyed from [being] a people, For against Jehovah he exerted himself.
Fear, and a snare, and a gin, [are] for thee, O inhabitant of Moab — an affirmation of Jehovah,
Whoso is fleeing because of the fear falleth into the snare, And whoso is coming up from the snare is captured by the gin, For I bring in unto her — unto Moab — The year of their inspection, An affirmation of Jehovah.
In the shadow of Heshbon stood powerless have fugitives, For fire hath gone forth from Heshbon, And a flame from within Sihon, And it consumeth the corner of Moab, And the crown of the sons of Shaon.
Woe to thee, O Moab, Perished hath the people of Chemosh, For thy sons were taken with the captives, And thy daughters with the captivity.
And I have turned back [to] the captivity of Moab, In the latter end of the days, An affirmation of Jehovah! Hitherto [is] the judgment of Moab.
Concerning the sons of Ammon: 'Thus said Jehovah: Sons — hath Israel none? heir — hath he none? Wherefore hath Malcam possessed Gad? And his people in its cities have dwelt?
Therefore, lo, days are coming, An affirmation of Jehovah, And I have sounded unto Rabbah of the sons of Ammon a shout of battle, And it hath been for a heap — a desolation, And her daughters with fire are burnt, And Israel hath succeeded its heirs, Said hath Jehovah.
Howl, Heshbon, for spoiled is Ai, Cry, daughters of Rabbah, gird on sackcloth, Lament, and go to and fro by the hedges, For Malcam into captivity doth go, His priests and his princes together.
What — dost thou boast thyself in valleys? Flowed hath thy valley, O backsliding daughter, Who is trusting in her treasures: Who doth come in unto me?
Lo, I am bringing in upon thee a fear, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah of Hosts, From all round about thee, And ye have been driven out each before it, And there is no gatherer of the wandering.
And after this I turn back the captivity of the sons of Ammon, An affirmation of Jehovah.'
Concerning Edom: 'Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Is wisdom no more in Teman? Perished hath counsel from the intelligent? Vanished hath their wisdom?
Flee, turn, go deep to dwell, ye inhabitants of Dedan, For the calamity of Esau I brought in upon him, The time I inspected him.
If gatherers have come in to thee, They do not leave gleanings, If thieves in the night, They have destroyed their sufficiency!
For I — I have made Esau bare, I have uncovered his secret places, And to be hidden he is not able, Spoiled [is] his seed, and his brethren, And his neighbours, and he is not.
Leave thine orphans — I do keep alive, And thy widows — on Me trust ye,
For thus said Jehovah: They whose judgment is not to drink of the cup, Do certainly drink, And thou [art] he that is entirely acquitted! Thou art not acquitted, for thou certainly drinkest.
For, by Myself, I have sworn, An affirmation of Jehovah, That for a desolation, for a reproach, For a waste, and for a reviling — is Bozrah, And all her cities are for wastes age-during.
A report I have heard from Jehovah, And an ambassador among nations is sent, Gather yourselves and come in against her, And rise ye for battle.
For, lo, little I have made thee among nations, Despised among men.
Thy terribleness hath lifted thee up, The pride of thy heart, O dweller in clefts of the rock, Holding the high place of the height, For thou makest high as an eagle thy nest, From thence I bring thee down, An affirmation of Jehovah.
And Edom hath been for a desolation, Every passer by her is astonished, And doth hiss because of all her plagues.
As the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, And its neighbours, said Jehovah, No one doth dwell there, Nor sojourn in her doth a son of man.
Lo, as a lion he cometh up, Because of the rising of the Jordan, Unto the enduring habitation, But I cause to rest, I cause him to run from off her, And who is chosen? concerning her I lay a charge, For who is like Me? and who conveneth Me? And who [is] this shepherd who standeth before Me?
Therefore, hear ye the counsel of Jehovah, That He hath counselled concerning Edom, And His devices that He hath devised Concerning the inhabitants of Teman: Drag them out do not little ones of the flock, Make desolate over them doth he not their habitation?
From the noise of their fall hath the earth shaken, The cry — at the sea of Suph is its voice heard.
Lo, as an eagle he cometh up, and flieth, And he spreadeth his wings over Bozrah, And the heart of the mighty of Edom hath been in that day, As the heart of a distressed woman!'
Concerning Damascus: Ashamed hath been Hamath and Arpad, For an evil report they have heard, They have been melted, in the sea [is] sorrow, To be quiet it is not able.
Feeble hath been Damascus, She turned to flee, and fear strengthened her, Distress and pangs have seized her, as a travailing woman.
How is it not left — the city of praise, The city of my joy!
Therefore fall do her young men in her broad places, And all the men of war are cut off in that day, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts.
And I have kindled a fire against the wall of Damascus, And it consumed palaces of Ben-Hadad!'
Concerning Kedar, and concerning the kingdoms of Hazor, that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath smitten: 'Thus said Jehovah: Arise ye, go ye up unto Kedar, And spoil the sons of the east.
Their tents and their flock they do take, Their curtains, and all their vessels, And their camels, they bear away for themselves, And they called concerning them, Fear [is] round about.
Flee, bemoan mightily, go deep to dwell, Ye inhabitants of Hazor — an affirmation of Jehovah, For given counsel against you hath Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, Yea, he deviseth against them a device.
Rise ye, go up unto a nation at rest, Dwelling confidently, an affirmation of Jehovah, It hath no two-leaved doors nor bar, Alone they do dwell.
And their camels have been for a prey, And the multitude of their cattle for a spoil, And I have scattered them to every wind, Who cut off the corner [of the beard], And from all its passages I bring in their calamity, An affirmation of Jehovah.
And Hazor hath been for a habitation of dragons, A desolation — unto the age, No one doth dwell there, nor sojourn in it doth a son of man!'
That which hath been the word of Jehovah unto Jeremiah the prophet concerning Elam, in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, saying:
'Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Lo, I am breaking the bow of Elam, The beginning of their might.
And I have brought in to Elam four winds, From the four ends of the heavens, And have scattered them to all these winds, And there is no nation whither outcasts of Elam come not in.
And I have affrighted Elam before their enemies, And before those seeking their life, And I have brought in against them evil, The heat of Mine anger, An affirmation of Jehovah, And I have sent after them the sword, Till I have consumed them;
And I have set My throne in Elam, And I have destroyed thence King and princes — an affirmation of Jehovah.
And it hath come to pass, in the latter end of the days, I turn back [to] the captivity of Elam, An affirmation of Jehovah!'
The word that Jehovah hath spoken concerning Babylon, concerning the land of the Chaldeans, by the hand of Jeremiah the prophet:
'Declare ye among nations, and sound, And lift up an ensign, sound, do not hide, Say ye: Captured hath been Babylon, Put to shame hath been Bel, Broken hath been Merodach, Put to shame have been her grievous things, Broken have been her idols.
For come up against her hath a nation from the north, It maketh her land become a desolation, And there is not an inhabitant in it. From man even unto beast, They have moved, they have gone.
In those days, and at that time, An affirmation of Jehovah, Come in do sons of Israel, They and sons of Judah together, Going on and weeping they go, And Jehovah their God they seek.
[To] Zion they ask the way, Thitherward [are] their faces: Come in, and we are joined unto Jehovah, A covenant age-during — not forgotten.
A perishing flock hath My people been, Their shepherds have caused them to err, [To] the mountains causing them to go back, From mountain unto hill they have gone, They have forgotten their crouching-place.
All finding them have devoured them, And their adversaries have said: We are not guilty, Because that they sinned against Jehovah, The habitation of righteousness, And the hope of their fathers — Jehovah.
Move ye from the midst of Babylon, And from the land of the Chaldeans go out. And be as he-goats before a flock.
For, lo, I am stirring up, And am causing to come up against Babylon, An assembly of great nations from a land of the north, And they have set in array against her, From thence she is captured, Its arrow — as a skilful hero — returneth not empty,
And Chaldea hath been for a spoil, All her spoilers are satisfied, An affirmation of Jehovah.
Because thou rejoicest, because thou exultest, O spoilers of Mine inheritance, Because thou increasest as a heifer [at] the tender grass, And dost cry aloud as bulls,
Ashamed hath been your mother greatly, Confounded hath she been that bare you, Lo, the hindermost of nations [is] a wilderness, A dry land, and a desert.
Because of the wrath of Jehovah it is not inhabited, And it hath been a desolation — all of it. Every passer by at Babylon is astonished, And doth hiss because of all her plagues.
Set yourselves in array against Babylon round about, All ye treading a bow, Shoot at her, have no pity on the arrow, For against Jehovah she hath sinned.
Shout against her round about, She hath given forth her hand, Fallen have her foundations, Thrown down have been her walls, For it [is] the vengeance of Jehovah, Be avenged of her, as she did — do ye to her.
Cut off the sower from Babylon, And him handling the sickle in the time of harvest, Because of the oppressing sword, Each unto his people — they turn, And each to his land — they flee.
A scattered sheep is Israel, lions have driven away, At first, devour him did the king of Asshur, And now, at last, broken his bone Hath Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon.
Therefore thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel: Lo, I am seeing after the king of Babylon, And after his land, As I have seen after the king of Asshur;
And I have brought back Israel unto his habitation, And he hath fed on Carmel, and on Bashan. And in mount Ephraim, and on Gilead is his soul satisfied.
In those days, and at that time, An affirmation of Jehovah, Sought is the iniquity of Israel, and it is not, And the sin of Judah, and it is not found, For I am propitious to those whom I leave!
Against the land of Merathaim: Go up against it, and unto the inhabitants of Pekod, Waste and devote their posterity, An affirmation of Jehovah, And do according to all that I have commanded thee.
A noise of battle [is] in the land, and of great destruction.
How hath it been cut and broken, The hammer of the whole earth! How hath Babylon been for a desolation among nations!
I have laid a snare for thee, And also — thou art captured, O Babylon, And thou — thou hast known, Thou hast been found, and also art caught, For against Jehovah thou hast stirred thyself up.
Jehovah hath opened His treasury, And He bringeth out the weapons of His indignation, For a work [is] to the Lord Jehovah of Hosts, In the land of the Chaldeans.
Come ye in to her from the extremity, Open ye her storehouses, Raise her up as heaps, and devote her, Let her have no remnant.
Slay all her kine, they go down to slaughter, Woe [is] on them, for come hath their day, The time of their inspection.
A voice of fugitives and escaped ones [Is] from the land of Babylon, To declare in Zion the vengeance of Jehovah our God, The vengeance of His temple.
Summon unto Babylon archers, all treading the bow, Encamp against her round about, Let [her] have no escape; Recompense to her according to her work, According to all that she did — do to her, For unto Jehovah she hath been proud, Unto the Holy One of Israel.
Therefore fall do her young men in her broad places, And all her men of war are cut off in that day, An affirmation of Jehovah.
Lo, I [am] against thee, O pride, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah of Hosts, For thy day hath come, the time of thy inspection.
And stumbled hath pride, And he hath fallen, and hath no raiser up, And I have kindled a fire in his cities, And it hath devoured all round about him.
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Oppressed are the sons of Israel, And the sons of Judah together, And all their captors have kept hold on them, They have refused to send them away.
Their Redeemer [is] strong, Jehovah of Hosts [is] His name, He doth thoroughly plead their cause, So as to cause the land to rest, And He hath given trouble to the inhabitants of Babylon.
A sword [is] for the Chaldeans, An affirmation of Jehovah, And it [is] on the inhabitants of Babylon, And on her heads, and on her wise men;
A sword [is] on the princes, And they have become foolish; A sword [is] on her mighty ones, And they have been broken down;
A sword [is] on his horses and on his chariot, And on all the rabble who [are] in her midst, And they have become women; A sword [is] on her treasuries, And they have been spoiled;
A sword [is] on her waters, and they have been dried up, For it [is] a land of graven images, And in idols they do boast themselves.
Therefore dwell do Ziim with Iim, Yea, dwelt in her have daughters of the ostrich, And it is not inhabited any more for ever, Nor dwelt in unto all generations.
As overthrown by God with Sodom, And with Gomorrah, and with its neighbours, An affirmation of Jehovah, none doth dwell there, Nor sojourn in her doth a son of man.
Lo, a people hath come from the north, Even a great nation, And many kings are stirred up from the sides of the earth.
Bow and halbert they seize, Cruel [are] they, and they have no mercy, Their voice as a sea soundeth, and on horses they ride, Set in array as a man for battle, Against thee, O daughter of Babylon.
Heard hath the king of Babylon their report, And feeble have been his hands, Distress hath seized him; pain as a travailing woman.
Lo, as a lion he cometh up, Because of the rising of the Jordan, Unto the enduring habitation, But I cause to rest, I cause them to run from off her. And who is chosen? on her I lay a charge, For who [is] like Me? And who doth convene Me? And who [is] this shepherd who standeth before Me?
Therefore, hear ye the counsel of Jehovah, That He counselled concerning Babylon, And His devices that He hath devised Concerning the land of the Chaldeans; Drag them out do not little ones of the flock, Doth He not make desolate over them the habitation?
From the voice: Captured was Babylon, Hath the earth been shaken, And a cry among nations hath been heard!
Thus said Jehovah: Lo, I am stirring up against Babylon, And the inhabitants of Leb — My withstanders, A destroying wind,
And I have sent to Babylon fanners, And they have fanned it, and they empty its land, For they have been against it, Round about — in the day of evil.
Let not the treader tread his bow, Nor lift himself up in his coat of mail, Nor have ye pity on her young men, Devote ye to destruction all her host.
And fallen have the wounded in the land of the Chaldeans, And the pierced-through in her streets.
For, not forsaken is Israel and Judah, By its God — by Jehovah of Hosts, For their land hath been full of guilt, Against the Holy One of Israel.
Flee ye from the midst of Babylon, And deliver ye each his soul, Be not cut off in its iniquity, For a time of vengeance it [is] to Jehovah, Recompence He is rendering to her.
A golden cup [is] Babylon in the hand of Jehovah, Making drunk all the earth, Of its wine drunk have nations, Therefore boast themselves do nations.
Suddenly hath Babylon fallen, Yea, it is broken, howl ye for it, Take balm for her pain, if so be it may be healed.
We healed Babylon, and she was not healed, Forsake her, and we go, each to his land, For come unto the heavens hath its judgment, And it hath been lifted up unto the clouds.
Jehovah hath brought forth our righteousnesses, Come, and we recount in Zion the work of Jehovah our God.
Cleanse ye the arrows, fill the shields, Stirred up hath Jehovah the spirit of the kings of Madia, For against Babylon His device [is] to destroy it, For the vengeance of Jehovah it [is], The vengeance of His temple.
Unto the walls of Babylon lift up an ensign, Strengthen the watch, Establish the watchers, prepare the ambush, For Jehovah hath both devised and done that which He spake, Concerning the inhabitants of Babylon.
O dweller on many waters, abundant in treasures, Come in hath thine end, the measure of thy dishonest gain.
Sworn hath Jehovah of Hosts by Himself, That, Surely I have filled thee [with] men as the cankerworm, And they have cried against thee — shouting.
The maker of earth by His power, The establisher of the world by His wisdom, Who by His understanding stretched out the heavens,
At the voice He giveth forth, A multitude of waters [are] in the heavens, And He causeth vapours to come up from the end of the earth, Lightnings for rain He hath made, And He bringeth out wind from His treasures.
Brutish hath been every man by knowledge, Put to shame hath been every refiner by a graven image, For false [is] his molten image, And there is no breath in them.
Vanity [are] they — work of errors, In the time of their inspection they perish.
Not like these [is] the portion of Jacob, For He [is] former of all things, And [Israel is] the rod of His inheritance, Jehovah of Hosts [is] His name.
An axe [art] thou to me — weapons of war, And I have broken in pieces by thee nations, And I have destroyed by thee kingdoms,
And I have broken in pieces by thee horse and its rider, And I have broken in pieces by thee chariot and its charioteer,
And I have broken in pieces by thee man and woman, And I have broken in pieces by thee old and young, And I have broken in pieces by thee young man and virgin,
And I have broken in pieces by thee shepherd and his drove, And I have broken in pieces by thee husbandman and his team, And I have broken in pieces by thee governors and prefects.
And I have recompensed to Babylon, And to all inhabitants of Chaldea, All the evil that they have done in Zion, Before your eyes — an affirmation of Jehovah.
Lo, I [am] against thee, O destroying mount, An affirmation of Jehovah, That is destroying all the earth, And I have stretched out My hand against thee, And I have rolled thee from the rocks, And given thee for a burnt mountain.
And they take not out of thee a stone for a corner, And a stone for foundations, For desolations age-during art thou, An affirmation of Jehovah.
Lift ye up an ensign in the land, Blow a trumpet among nations, Sanctify against it nations, Summon against it the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashkenaz, Appoint against it an infant head, Cause the horse to ascend as the rough cankerworm.
Sanctify against it the nations with the kings of Media, Its governors and all its prefects, And all the land of its dominion.
And shake doth the land, and it is pained, For stood against Babylon have the purposes of Jehovah, To make the land of Babylon a desolation without inhabitant.
Ceased have the mighty of Babylon to fight, They have remained in strongholds, Failed hath their might, they have become woman, They have burnt her tabernacles, Broken have been her bars.
Runner to meet runner doth run, And announcer to meet announcer, To announce to the king of Babylon, For, captured hath been his city — at the extremity.
And the passages have been captured, And the reeds they have burnt with fire, And the men of war have been troubled.
For thus said Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, The daughter of Babylon [is] as a threshing-floor, The time of her threshing — yet a little, And come hath the time of her harvest.
Devoured us, crushed us, hath Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, He hath set us [as] an empty vessel, He hath swallowed us as a dragon, He hath filled his belly with my dainties, He hath driven us away.
My wrong, and [that of] my flesh [is] on Babylon, Say doth the inhabitant of Zion, And my blood [is] on the inhabitants of Chaldea, Say doth Jerusalem.
Therefore, thus said Jehovah: Lo, I am pleading thy cause, And I have avenged thy vengeance, And dried up its sea, and made its fountains dry.
And Babylon hath been for heaps, A habitation of dragons, An astonishment, and a hissing, without inhabitant.
Together as young lions they roar, They have shaken themselves as lions' whelps.
In their heat I make their banquets, And I have caused them to drink, so that they exult, And have slept a sleep age-during, And awake not — an affirmation of Jehovah.
I cause them to go down as lambs to slaughter, As rams with he-goats.
How hath Sheshach been captured, Yea, caught is the praise of the whole earth, How hath Babylon been for an astonishment among nations.
Come up against Babylon hath the sea, With a multitude of its billows it hath been covered.
Its cities have been for a desolation, A dry land, and a wilderness, A land — none doth dwell in them, Nor pass over into them doth a son of man.
And I have seen after Bel in Babylon, And I have brought forth that which he swallowed — from his mouth, And flow no more unto him do nations, Also the wall of Babylon hath fallen.
Go forth from its midst, O My people, And deliver ye, each his soul, Because of the fierceness of the anger of Jehovah,
And lest your heart be tender, And ye be afraid of the report that is heard in the land, And come in a year hath the report, And after it in a year the report, And violence [is] in the land, ruler against ruler;
Therefore, lo, days are coming, And I have seen after the graven images of Babylon. And all its land is ashamed, And all its pierced ones do fall in its midst.
And cried aloud against Babylon Have heavens and earth, and all that [is] in them, For, from the north come to it do the spoilers, An affirmation of Jehovah.
Even Babylon [is] to fall, ye pierced of Israel, Even they of Babylon have fallen, Ye pierced of all the earth.
Ye escaped of the sword, go on, stand not, Remember ye from afar Jehovah, And let Jerusalem come up on your heart.
We have been ashamed, for we heard reproach, Covered hath shame our faces, For come in have strangers, against the sanctuaries of the house of Jehovah.
Therefore, lo, days are coming, An affirmation of Jehovah, And I have seen after its graven images, And in all its land groan doth the wounded.
Because Babylon goeth up to the heavens, And because it fenceth the high place of its strength, From Me come into it do spoilers, An affirmation of Jehovah.
A voice of a cry [is] from Babylon, And of great destruction from the land of the Chaldean.
For Jehovah is spoiling Babylon, And hath destroyed out of it a great voice, And sounded have its billows as many waters, Given forth a noise hath their voice.
For come in against it — against Babylon — hath a spoiler, And captured have been its mighty ones, Broken have been their bows, For the God of recompences — Jehovah — doth certainly repay.
And I have caused its princes to drink, And its wise men, its governors, And its prefects, and its mighty ones, And they have slept a sleep age-during, And they awake not — an affirmation of the king, Jehovah of Hosts [is] His name.
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, the wall of Babylon — The broad one — is utterly made bare, And her high gates with fire are burnt, And peoples labour in vain, And nations in fire, and have been weary!
The word that Jeremiah the prophet hath commanded Seraiah son of Neriah, son of Maaseiah, in his going with Zedekiah king of Judah to Babylon, in the fourth year of his reign — and Seraiah [is] a quiet prince;
and Jeremiah writeth all the evil that cometh unto Babylon on one book — all these words that are written concerning Babylon.
And Jeremiah saith unto Seraiah, 'When thou dost enter Babylon, then thou hast seen, and hast read all these words,
and hast said: Jehovah, Thou, Thou hast spoken concerning this place, to cut it off, that there is none dwelling in it, from man even unto cattle, for it is a desolation age-during.
And it hath come to pass, when thou dost finish reading this book, thou dost bind to it a stone, and hast cast it into the midst of Phrat,
and said, Thus sink doth Babylon, and it doth not arise, because of the evil that I am bringing in against it, and they have been weary.' Hitherto [are] words of Jeremiah.
A son of twenty and one years [is] Zedekiah in his reigning, and eleven years he hath reigned in Jerusalem, and the name of his mother [is] Hamutal daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.
and he doth the evil thing in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that Jehoiakim hath done,
for, because of the anger of Jehovah, it hath been in Jerusalem and Judah till He hath cast them from before His face, and Zedekiah doth rebel against the king of Babylon.
And it cometh to pass, in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth of the month, come hath Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon — he and all his force — against Jerusalem, and they encamp against it, and build against it a fortification round about;
and the city cometh into siege till the eleventh year of king Zedekiah.
In the fourth month, in the ninth of the month, when the famine is severe in the city, and there hath been no bread for the people of the land,
then is the city broken up, and all the men of war flee, and go forth from the city by night, the way of the gate between the two walls, that [is] by the king's garden — and the Chaldeans [are] by the city round about — and they go the way of the plain.
And the forces of the Chaldeans pursue after the king, and overtake Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho, and all his forces have been scattered from him,
and they capture the king, and bring him up unto the king of Babylon to Riblah, in the land of Hamath, and he speaketh with him — judgments.
And the king of Babylon slaughtereth the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, and also all the princes of Judah hath he slaughtered in Riblah;
and the eyes of Zedekiah he hath blinded, and he bindeth him in brazen fetters, and the king of Babylon bringeth him to Babylon, and putteth him in the house of inspection unto the day of his death.
And in the fifth month, in the tenth of the month — it [is] the nineteenth year of king Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon — come hath Nebuzar-Adan, chief of the executioners; he hath stood before the king of Babylon in Jerusalem,
and he burneth the house of Jehovah, and the house of the king, and all the houses of Jerusalem, even every great house he hath burned with fire,
and all the walls of Jerusalem round about broken down have all the forces of the Chaldeans that [are] with the chief of the executioners.
And of the poor of the people, and the remnant of the people who are left in the city, and those who are falling away, who have fallen unto the king of Babylon, and the remnant of the multitude, hath Nebuzar-Adan chief of the executioners, removed;
and of the poor of the land hath Nebuzar-Adan, chief of the executioners, left for vine-dressers and for husbandmen.
And the pillars of brass that [are] to the house of Jehovah, and the bases, and the brasen sea that [is] in the house of Jehovah, have the Chaldeans broken, and they bear away all the brass of them to Babylon;
and the pots, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the bowls, and the spoons, and all the vessels of brass with which they minister, they have taken away;
and the basins, and the fire-pans, and the bowls, and the pots, and the candlesticks, and the spoons, and the cups, the gold of that which [is] gold, and the silver of that which [is] silver, hath the chief of the executioners taken.
The two pillars, the one sea, and the twelve brazen oxen that [are] beneath the bases, that king Solomon made for the house of Jehovah, there was no weighing of the brass of all these vessels.
As to the pillars, eighteen cubits [is] the height of the one pillar, and a cord of twelve cubits doth compass it, and its thickness [is] four fingers hollow.
And the chapiter upon it [is] of brass, and the height of the one chapiter [is] five cubits, and net-work and pomegranates [are] on the chapiter round about, the whole [is] of brass; and like these have the second pillar, and pomegranates.
And the pomegranates are ninety and six on a side, all the pomegranates [are] a hundred on the net-work round about.
And the chief of the executioners taketh Seraiah the head priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers of the threshold,
and out of the city he hath taken a certain eunuch, who hath been inspector over the men of war, and seven men of those seeing the king's face, who have been found in the city, and the head scribe of the host, who mustereth the people of the land, and sixty men of the people of the land, who are found in the midst of the city;
and Nebuzar-Adan, chief of the executioners, taketh them, and bringeth them unto the king of Babylon to Riblah,
and the king of Babylon smiteth them, and putteth them to death in Riblah, in the land of Hamath, and he removeth Judah from off its own ground.
This [is] the people whom Nebuchadrezzar hath removed: in the seventh year, of Jews, three thousand and twenty and three;
in the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar — from Jerusalem, souls, eight hundred thirty and two;
in the three and twentieth year of Nebuchadrezzar, hath Nebuzar-Adan chief of the guard removed of Jewish souls, seven hundred forty and five; all the souls [are] four thousand and six hundred.
And it cometh to pass, in the thirty and seventh year of the removal of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, in the twenty and fifth of the month, hath Evil-Merodach king of Babylon lifted up, in the year of his reign, the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah, and bringeth him out from the house of restraint,
and speaketh with him good things, and setteth his throne above the throne of the kings who [are] with him in Babylon,
and he hath changed his prison garments, and he hath eaten bread before him continually, all the days of his life.
And his allowance — a continual allowance — hath been given to him by the king of Babylon, the matter of a day in its day, till the day of his death — all days of his life.
How hath she sat alone, The city abounding with people! She hath been as a widow, The mighty among nations! Princes among provinces, She hath become tributary!
She weepeth sore in the night, And her tear [is] on her cheeks, There is no comforter for her out of all her lovers, All her friends dealt treacherously by her, They have been to her for enemies.
Removed hath Judah because of affliction, And because of the abundance of her service; She hath dwelt among nations, She hath not found rest, All her pursuers have overtaken her between the straits.
The ways of Zion are mourning, Without any coming at the appointed time, All her gates are desolate, her priests sigh, Her virgins are afflicted — and she hath bitterness.
Her adversaries have become chief, Her enemies have been at ease, For Jehovah hath afflicted her, For the abundance of her transgressions, Her infants have gone captive before the adversary.
And go out from the daughter of Zion doth all her honour, Her princes have been as harts — They have not found pasture, And they go powerless before a pursuer.
Remembered hath Jerusalem [In] the days of her affliction and her mournings, all her desirable things that were from the days of old, In the falling of her people into the hand of an adversary, And she hath no helper; Seen her have adversaries, They have laughed at her cessation.
A sin hath Jerusalem sinned, Therefore impure she hath become, All who honoured her have esteemed her lightly, For they have seen her nakedness, Yea, she herself hath sighed and turneth backward.
Her uncleanness [is] in her skirts, She hath not remembered her latter end, And she cometh down wonderfully, There is no comforter for her. See, O Jehovah, mine affliction, For exerted himself hath an enemy.
His hand spread out hath an adversary On all her desirable things, For she hath seen — Nations have entered her sanctuary, Concerning which Thou didst command, 'They do not come into the assembly to thee.'
All her people are sighing — seeking bread, They have given their desirable things For food to refresh the body; See, O Jehovah, and behold attentively, For I have been lightly esteemed.
[Is it] nothing to you, all ye passing by the way? Look attentively, and see, If there is any pain like my pain, That He is rolling to me? Whom Jehovah hath afflicted In the day of the fierceness of His anger.
From above He hath sent fire into my bone, And it subdueth it, He hath spread a net for my feet, He hath turned me backward, He hath made me desolate — all the day sick.
Bound hath been the yoke of my transgressions by His hand, They are wrapped together, They have gone up on my neck, He hath caused my power to stumble, The Lord hath given me into hands, I am not able to rise.
Trodden down all my mighty ones hath the Lord in my midst, He proclaimed against me an appointed time, To destroy my young men, A wine-press hath the Lord trodden, To the virgin daughter of Judah.
For these I am weeping, My eye, my eye, is running down with waters, For, far from me hath been a comforter, Refreshing my soul, My sons have been desolate, For mighty hath been an enemy.
Spread forth hath Zion her hands, There is no comforter for her, Jehovah hath charged concerning Jacob, His neighbours [are] his adversaries, Jerusalem hath become impure among them.
Righteous is Jehovah, For His mouth I have provoked. Hear, I pray you, all ye peoples, and see my pain, My virgins and my young men have gone into captivity.
I called for my lovers, they — they have deceived me, My priests and my elders in the city have expired; When they have sought food for themselves, Then they give back their soul.
See, O Jehovah, for distress [is] to me, My bowels have been troubled, Turned hath been my heart in my midst, For I have greatly provoked, From without bereaved hath the sword, In the house [it is] as death.
They have heard that I have sighed, There is no comforter for me, All my enemies have heard of my calamity, They have rejoiced that Thou hast done [it], Thou hast brought in the day Thou hast called, And they are like to me.
Come in doth all their evil before Thee, And one is doing to them as Thou hast done to me, For all my transgressions, For many [are] my sighs, and my heart [is] sick!
How doth the Lord cloud in His anger the daughter of Zion, He hath cast from heaven [to] earth the beauty of Israel, And hath not remembered His footstool in the day of His anger.
Swallowed up hath the Lord, He hath not pitied any of the pleasant places of Jacob, He hath broken down in His wrath The fortresses of the daughter of Judah, He hath caused to come to the earth, He polluted the kingdom and its princes.
He hath cut off in the heat of anger every horn of Israel, He hath turned backward His right hand From the face of the enemy, And He burneth against Jacob as a flaming fire, It hath devoured round about.
He hath trodden His bow as an enemy, Stood hath His right hand as an adversary, And He slayeth all the desirable ones of the eye, In the tent of the daughter of Zion, He hath poured out as fire His fury.
The Lord hath been as an enemy, He hath swallowed up Israel, He hath swallowed up all her palaces, He hath destroyed His fortresses, And He multiplieth in the daughter of Judah Mourning and moaning.
And He shaketh as a garden His tabernacle, He hath destroyed His appointed place, Jehovah hath forgotten in Zion the appointed time and sabbath, And despiseth, in the indignation of His anger, king and priest.
The Lord hath cast off His altar, He hath rejected His sanctuary, He hath shut up into the hand of the enemy The walls of her palaces, A noise they have made in the house of Jehovah Like a day of appointment.
Devised hath Jehovah to destroy the wall of the daughter of Zion, He hath stretched out a line, He hath not turned His hand from destroying, And He causeth bulwark and wall to mourn, Together — they have been weak.
Sunk into the earth have her gates, He hath destroyed and broken her bars, Her king and her princes [are] among the nations, There is no law, also her prophets Have not found vision from Jehovah.
Sit on the earth — keep silent do the elders of the daughter of Zion, They have caused dust to go up on their head, They have girded on sackcloth, Put down to the earth their head have the virgins of Jerusalem.
Consumed by tears have been my eyes, Troubled have been my bowels, Poured out to the earth hath been my liver, For the breach of the daughter of my people; In infant and suckling being feeble, In the broad places of the city,
To their mothers they say, 'Where [are] corn and wine?' In their becoming feeble as a pierced one In the broad places of the city, In their soul pouring itself out into the bosom of their mothers.
What do I testify [to] thee, what do I liken to thee, O daughter of Jerusalem? What do I equal to thee, and I comfort thee, O virgin daughter of Zion? For great as a sea [is] thy breach, Who doth give healing to thee?
Thy prophets have seen for thee a false and insipid thing, And have not revealed concerning thine iniquity, To turn back thy captivity, And they see for thee false burdens and causes of expulsion.
Clapped hands at thee have all passing by the way, They have hissed — and they shake the head At the daughter of Jerusalem: 'Is this the city of which they said: The perfection of beauty, a joy to all the land?'
Opened against thee their mouth have all thine enemies, They have hissed, yea, they gnash the teeth, They have said: 'We have swallowed [her] up, Surely this [is] the day that we looked for, We have found — we have seen.'
Jehovah hath done that which He devised, He hath fulfilled His saying That He commanded from the days of old, He hath broken down and hath not pitied, And causeth an enemy to rejoice over thee, He lifted up the horn of thine adversaries.
Cried hath their heart unto the Lord; O wall of the daughter of Zion, Cause to go down as a stream tears daily and nightly, Give not rest to thyself, Let not the daughter of thine eye stand still.
Arise, cry aloud in the night, At the beginning of the watches. Pour out as water thy heart, Over against the face of the Lord, Lift up unto Him thy hands, for the soul of thine infants, Who are feeble with hunger at the head of all out-places.
See, O Jehovah, and look attentively, To whom Thou hast acted thus, Do women eat their fruit, infants of a handbreadth? Slain in the sanctuary of the Lord are priest and prophet?
Lain on the earth [in] out-places have young and old, My virgins and my young men have fallen by the sword, Thou hast slain in a day of Thine anger, Thou hast slaughtered — Thou hast not pitied.
Thou dost call as [at] a day of appointment, My fears from round about, And there hath not been in the day of the anger of Jehovah, An escaped and remaining one, They whom I stretched out and nourished, My enemy hath consumed!
I [am] the man [who] hath seen affliction By the rod of His wrath.
Me He hath led, and causeth to go [in] darkness, and without light.
Surely against me He turneth back, He turneth His hand all the day.
He hath worn out my flesh and my skin. He hath broken my bones.
He hath built up against me, And setteth round poverty and weariness.
In dark places He hath caused me to dwell, As the dead of old.
He hath hedged me about, and I go not out, He hath made heavy my fetter.
Also when I call and cry out, He hath shut out my prayer.
He hath hedged my ways with hewn work, My paths He hath made crooked.
A bear lying in wait He [is] to me, A lion in secret hiding-places.
My ways He is turning aside, and He pulleth me in pieces, He hath made me a desolation.
He hath trodden His bow, And setteth me up as a mark for an arrow.
He hath caused to enter into my reins The sons of His quiver.
I have been a derision to all my people, Their song all the day.
He hath filled me with bitter things, He hath filled me [with] wormwood.
And He breaketh with gravel my teeth, He hath covered me with ashes.
And Thou castest off from peace my soul, I have forgotten prosperity.
And I say, Perished hath my strength and my hope from Jehovah.
Remember my affliction and my mourning, Wormwood and gall!
Remember well, and bow down doth my soul in me.
This I turn to my heart — therefore I hope.
The kindnesses of Jehovah! For we have not been consumed, For not ended have His mercies.
New every morning, abundant [is] thy faithfulness.
My portion [is] Jehovah, hath my soul said, Therefore I hope for Him.
Good [is] Jehovah to those waiting for Him, To the soul [that] seeketh Him.
Good! when one doth stay and stand still For the salvation of Jehovah.
Good for a man that he beareth a yoke in his youth.
He sitteth alone, and is silent, For He hath laid [it] upon him.
He putteth in the dust his mouth, if so be there is hope.
He giveth to his smiter the cheek, He is filled with reproach.
For the Lord doth not cast off to the age.
For though He afflicted, yet He hath pitied, According to the abundance of His kindness.
For He hath not afflicted with His heart, Nor doth He grieve the sons of men.
To bruise under one's feet any bound ones of earth,
To turn aside the judgment of a man, Over-against the face of the Most High,
To subvert a man in his cause, the Lord hath not approved.
Who [is] this — he hath said, and it is, [And] the Lord hath not commanded [it]?
From the mouth of the Most High Go not forth the evils and the good.
What — sigh habitually doth a living man, A man for his sin?
We search our ways, and investigate, And turn back unto Jehovah.
We lift up our heart on the hands unto God in the heavens.
We — we have transgressed and rebelled, Thou — Thou hast not forgiven.
Thou hast covered Thyself with anger, And dost pursue us; Thou hast slain — Thou hast not pitied.
Thou hast covered Thyself with a cloud, So that prayer doth not pass through.
Offscouring and refuse Thou dost make us In the midst of the peoples.
Opened against us their mouth have all our enemies.
Fear and a snare hath been for us, Desolation and destruction.
Rivulets of water go down my eye, For the destruction of the daughter of my people.
Mine eye is poured out, And doth not cease without intermission,
Till Jehovah looketh and seeth from the heavens,
My eye affecteth my soul, Because of all the daughters of my city.
Hunted me sore as a bird have my enemies without cause.
They have cut off in a pit my life, And they cast a stone against me.
Flowed have waters over my head, I have said, I have been cut off.
I called Thy name, O Jehovah, from the lower pit.
My voice Thou hast heard, Hide not Thine ear at my breathing — at my cry.
Thou hast drawn near in the day I call Thee, Thou hast said, Fear not.
Thou hast pleaded, O Lord, the pleadings of my soul, Thou hast redeemed my life.
Thou hast seen, O Jehovah, my overthrow, Judge Thou my cause.
Thou hast seen all their vengeance, All their thoughts of me.
Thou hast heard their reproach, O Jehovah, All their thoughts against me,
The lips of my withstanders, Even their meditation against me all the day.
Their sitting down, and their rising up, Behold attentively, I [am] their song.
Thou returnest to them the deed, O Jehovah, According to the work of their hands.
Thou givest to them a covered heart, Thy curse to them.
Thou pursuest in anger, and destroyest them, From under the heavens of Jehovah!
How is the gold become dim, Changed the best — the pure gold? Poured out are stones of the sanctuary At the head of all out-places.
The precious sons of Zion, Who are comparable with fine gold, How have they been reckoned earthen bottles, Work of the hands of a potter.
Even dragons have drawn out the breast, They have suckled their young ones, The daughter of my people is become cruel, Like the ostriches in a wilderness.
Cleaved hath the tongue of a suckling unto his palate with thirst, Infants asked bread, a dealer out they have none.
Those eating of dainties have been desolate in out-places, Those supported on scarlet have embraced dunghills.
And greater is the iniquity of the daughter of my people, Than the sin of Sodom, That was overturned as [in] a moment, And no hands were stayed on her.
Purer were her Nazarites than snow, Whiter than milk, ruddier of body than rubies, Of sapphire their form.
Darker than blackness hath been their visage, They have not been known in out-places, Cleaved hath their skin unto their bone, It hath withered — it hath been as wood.
Better have been the pierced of a sword Than the pierced of famine, For these flow away, pierced through, Without the increase of the field.
The hands of merciful women have boiled their own children, They have been for food to them, In the destruction of the daughter of my people.
Completed hath Jehovah His fury, He hath poured out the fierceness of His anger, And he kindleth a fire in Zion, And it devoureth her foundations.
Believe not did the kings of earth, And any of the inhabitants of the world, That come would an adversary and enemy Into the gates of Jerusalem.
Because of the sins of her prophets, The iniquities of her priests, Who are shedding in her midst the blood of the righteous,
They have wandered naked in out-places, They have been polluted with blood, Without [any] being able to touch their clothing,
'Turn aside — unclean,' they called to them, 'Turn aside, turn aside, touch not,' For they fled — yea, they have wandered, They have said among nations: 'They do not add to sojourn.'
The face of Jehovah hath divided them, He doth not add to behold them, The face of priests they have not lifted up, Elders they have not favoured.
While we exist — consumed are our eyes for our vain help, In our watch-tower we have watched for a nation [that] saveth not.
They have hunted our steps from going in our broad-places, Near hath been our end, fulfilled our days, For come hath our end.
Swifter have been our pursuers, Than the eagles of the heavens, On the mountains they have burned [after] us, In the wilderness they have laid wait for us.
The breath of our nostrils — the anointed of Jehovah, Hath been captured in their pits, of whom we said: 'In his shadow we do live among nations.'
Joy and rejoice, O daughter of Edom, Dwelling in the land of Uz, Even unto thee pass over doth a cup, Thou art drunk, and makest thyself naked.
Completed [is] thy iniquity, daughter of Zion, He doth not add to remove thee, He hath inspected thy iniquity, O daughter of Edom, He hath removed [thee] because of thy sins!
Remember, O Jehovah, what hath befallen us, Look attentively, and see our reproach.
Our inheritance hath been turned to strangers, Our houses to foreigners.
Orphans we have been — without a father, our mothers [are] as widows.
Our water for money we have drunk, Our wood for a price doth come.
For our neck we have been pursued, We have laboured — there hath been no rest for us.
[To] Egypt we have given a hand, [To] Asshur, to be satisfied with bread.
Our fathers have sinned — they are not, We their iniquities have borne.
Servants have ruled over us, A deliverer there is none from their hand.
With our lives we bring in our bread, Because of the sword of the wilderness.
Our skin as an oven hath been burning, Because of the raging of the famine.
Wives in Zion they have humbled, Virgins — in cities of Judah.
Princes by their hand have been hanged, The faces of elders have not been honoured.
Young men to grind they have taken, And youths with wood have stumbled.
The aged from the gate have ceased, Young men from their song.
Ceased hath the joy of our heart, Turned to mourning hath been our dancing.
Fallen hath the crown [from] our head, Woe [is] now to us, for we have sinned.
For this hath our heart been sick, For these have our eyes been dim.
For the mount of Zion — that is desolate, Foxes have gone up on it.
Thou, O Jehovah, to the age remainest, Thy throne to generation and generation.
Why for ever dost Thou forget us? Thou forsakest us for length of days!
Turn us back, O Jehovah, unto Thee, And we turn back, renew our days as of old.
For hast Thou utterly rejected us? Thou hast been wroth against us — exceedingly?
And it cometh to pass, in the thirtieth year, in the fourth [month], in the fifth of the month, and I [am] in the midst of the Removed by the river Chebar, the heavens have been opened, and I see visions of God.
In the fifth of the month — it is the fifth year of the removal of the king Jehoiachin —
hath the word of Jehovah certainly been unto Ezekiel son of Buzi the priest, in the land of the Chaldeans, by the river Chebar, and there is on him there a hand of Jehovah.
And I look, and lo, a tempestuous wind is coming from the north, a great cloud, and fire catching itself, and brightness to it round about, and out of its midst as the colour of copper, out of the midst of the fire.
And out of its midst [is] a likeness of four living creatures, and this [is] their appearance; a likeness of man [is] to them,
and four faces [are] to each, and four wings [are] to each of them,
and their feet [are] straight feet, and the sole of their feet [is] as a sole of a calf's foot, and they are sparkling as the colour of bright brass;
and hands of man under their wings — on their four sides, and their faces and their wings — [are] to them four;
joining one unto another [are] their wings, they turn not round in their going, each straight forward they go.
As to the likeness of their faces, the face of a man, and the face of a lion, toward the right [are] to them four, and the face of an ox on the left [are] to them four, and the face of an eagle [are] to them four.
And their faces and their wings are separate from above, to each [are] two joining together, and two are covering their bodies.
And each straight forward they go, whither the spirit is to go, they go, they turn not round in their going.
As to the likeness of the living creatures, their appearances [are] as coals of fire — burning as the appearance of lamps; it is going up and down between the living creatures, and brightness [is] to the fire, and out of the fire is going forth lightning.
And the living creatures are running, and turning back, as the appearance of the flash.
And I see the living creatures, and lo, one wheel [is] in the earth, near the living creatures, at its four faces.
The appearance of the wheels and their works [is] as the colour of beryl, and one likeness [is] to them four, and their appearances and their works [are] as it were the wheel in the midst of the wheel.
On their four sides, in their going they go, they turn not round in their going.
As to their rings, they are both high and fearful, and their rings [are] full of eyes round about them four.
And in the going of the living creatures, the wheels go beside them, and in the living creatures being lifted up from off the earth, lifted up are the wheels.
Whither the spirit is to go, they go, thither the spirit [is] to go, and the wheels are lifted up over-against them, for a living spirit [is] in the wheels.
In their going, they go; and in their standing, they stand; and in their being lifted up from off the earth, lifted up are the wheels over-against them; for a living spirit [is] in the wheels.
And a likeness [is] over the heads of the living creatures of an expanse, as the colour of the fearful ice, stretched out over their heads from above.
And under the expanse their wings [are] straight, one toward the other, to each are two covering on this side, and to each are two covering on that side — their bodies.
And I hear the noise of their wings, as the noise of many waters, as the noise of the Mighty One, in their going — the noise of tumult, as the noise of a camp, in their standing they let fall their wings.
And there is a voice from above the expanse, that [is] above their head: in their standing they let fall their wings.
And above the expanse that [is] over their head, as an appearance of a sapphire stone, [is] the likeness of a throne, and on the likeness of the throne a likeness, as the appearance of man upon it from above.
And I see as the colour of copper, as the appearance of fire within it round about, from the appearance of his loins and upward, and from the appearance of his loins and downward, I have seen as the appearance of fire, and brightness [is] to it round about.
As the appearance of the bow that is in a cloud in a day of rain, so [is] the appearance of the brightness round about.
It [is] the appearance of the likeness of the honour of Jehovah, and I see, and fall on my face, and I hear a voice speaking, and He saith unto me, 'Son of man, stand on thy feet, and I speak with thee.'
And there doth come into me a spirit, when He hath spoken unto me, and it causeth me to stand on my feet, and I hear Him who is speaking unto me.
And He saith unto Me, 'Son of man, I am sending thee unto the sons of Israel, unto nations who are rebels, who have rebelled against Me; they and their fathers have transgressed against Me, unto this self-same day.
And the sons [are] brazen-faced and hard-hearted to whom I am sending thee, and thou hast said unto them: Thus said the Lord Jehovah:
and they — whether they hear, or whether they forbear, for a rebellious house they [are] — have known that a prophet hath been in their midst.
'And thou, son of man, thou art not afraid of them, yea, of their words thou art not afraid, for briers and thorns are with thee, and near scorpions thou art dwelling, of their words thou art not afraid, and of their faces thou art not affrighted, for they [are] a rebellious house,
And thou hast spoken My words unto them, whether they hear or whether they forbear, for they [are] rebellious.
'And thou, son of man, hear that which I am speaking unto thee: Thou art not rebellious like the rebellious house, open thy mouth, and eat that which I am giving unto thee.'
And I look, and lo, a hand [is] sent forth unto me, and lo, in it a roll of a book,
and He spreadeth it before me, and it is written in front and behind, and written on it [are] lamentations, and mourning, and woe!
And He saith unto me, 'Son of man, that which thou findest eat, eat this roll, and go, speak unto the house of Israel.'
And I open my mouth, and He causeth me to eat this roll.
And He saith unto me, 'Son of man, thy belly thou dost feed, and thy bowels thou dost fill with this roll that I am giving unto thee;' and I eat it, and it is in my mouth as honey for sweetness.
And He saith unto me, 'Son of man, go, enter in unto the house of Israel, and thou hast spoken with My words unto them.
For, not unto a people deep of lip and heavy of tongue [art] thou sent — unto the house of Israel;
not unto many peoples, deep of lip and heavy of tongue, whose words thou dost not understand. If I had not sent thee unto them — they, they do hearken unto thee,
but the house of Israel are not willing to hearken unto thee, for they are not willing to hearken unto Me, for all the house of Israel are brazen-faced and strong-hearted.
'Lo, I have made thy face strong against their face, and thy forehead strong against their forehead.
As an adamant harder than a rock I have made thy forehead; thou dost not fear them, nor art thou affrighted before them, for a rebellious house [are] they.'
And He saith unto me, 'Son of man, all My words, that I speak unto thee, receive with thy heart, and with thine ears hear;
and go, enter in unto the Removed, unto the sons of thy people, and thou hast spoken unto them, and hast said unto them: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: whether they hear, or whether they forbear.'
And lift me up doth a spirit, and I hear behind me a noise, a great rushing — 'Blessed [is] the honour of Jehovah from His place!' —
even a noise of the wings of the living creatures touching one another, and a noise of the wheels over-against them, even a noise of a great rushing.
And a spirit hath lifted me up, and doth take me away, and I go bitterly, in the heat of my spirit, and the hand of Jehovah on me [is] strong.
And I come in unto the Removed, at Tel-Ahib, who are dwelling at the river Chebar, and where they are dwelling I also dwell seven days, causing astonishment in their midst.
And it cometh to pass, at the end of seven days,
that there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying, 'Son of man, a watchman I have given thee to the house of Israel, and thou hast heard from My mouth a word, and hast warned them from Me.
In My saying to the wicked: Thou dost surely die; and thou hast not warned him, nor hast spoken to warn the wicked from his wicked way, so that he doth live; he — the wicked — in his iniquity dieth, and his blood from thy hand I require.
And thou, because thou hast warned the wicked, and he hath not turned back from his wickedness, and from his wicked way, he in his iniquity dieth, and thou thy soul hast delivered.
'And in the turning back of the righteous from his righteousness, and he hath done perversity, and I have put a stumbling-block before him, he dieth; because thou hast not warned him, in his sin he dieth, and not remembered is his righteousness that he hath done, and his blood from thy hand I require.
And thou, because thou hast warned him — the righteous — that the righteous sin not, and he hath not sinned, he surely liveth, because he hath been warned; and thou thy soul hast delivered.'
And there is on me there a hand of Jehovah, and He saith to me, 'Rise, go forth to the valley, and there I do speak with thee.'
And I rise and go forth unto the valley, and lo, there the honour of Jehovah is standing as the honour that I had seen by the river Chebar, and I fall on my face.
And come into me doth a spirit, and causeth me to stand on my feet, and He speaketh with me, and saith unto me, 'Go in, be shut up in the midst of thy house.
'And thou, son of man, lo, they have put on thee thick bands, and have bound thee with them, and thou goest not forth in their midst;
and thy tongue I cause to cleave unto thy palate, and thou hast been dumb, and art not to them for a reprover, for a rebellious house [are] they.
And in My speaking with thee, I do open thy mouth, and thou hast said unto them: Thus said the Lord Jehovah; the hearer doth hear, and the forbearer doth forbear; for a rebellious house [are] they.
'And thou, son of man, take to thee a brick, and thou hast put it before thee, and hast graven on it a city — Jerusalem,
and hast placed against it a siege, and builded against it a fortification, and poured out against it a mount, and placed against it camps, yea, set thou against it battering-rams round about.
And thou, take to thee an iron pan, and thou hast made it a wall of iron between thee and the city; and thou hast prepared thy face against it, and it hath been in a siege, yea, thou hast laid siege against it. A sign it [is] to the house of Israel.
'And thou, lie on thy left side, and thou hast placed the iniquity of the house of Israel on it; the number of the days that thou liest on it, thou bearest their iniquity.
And I — I have laid on thee the years of their iniquity, the number of days, three hundred and ninety days; and thou hast borne the iniquity of the house of Israel.
And thou hast completed these, and hast lain on thy right side, a second time, and hast borne the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days — a day for a year — a day for a year I have appointed to thee.
'And unto the siege of Jerusalem thou dost prepare thy face, and thine arm [is] uncovered, and thou hast prophesied concerning it.
And lo, I have put on thee thick bands, and thou dost not turn from side to side till thy completing the days of thy siege.
'And thou, take to thee wheat, and barley, and beans, and lentiles, and millet, and spelt, and thou hast put them in one vessel, and made them to thee for bread; the number of the days that thou art lying on thy side — three hundred and ninety days — thou dost eat it.
And thy food that thou dost eat [is] by weight, twenty shekels daily; from time to time thou dost eat it.
'And water by measure thou dost drink, a sixth part of the hin; from time to time thou dost drink [it].
A barley-cake thou dost eat it, and it with dung — the filth of man — thou dost bake before their eyes.
And Jehovah saith, 'Thus do the sons of Israel eat their defiled bread among the nations whither I drive them.'
And I say, 'Ah, Lord Jehovah, lo, my soul is not defiled, and carcase, and torn thing, I have not eaten from my youth, even till now; nor come into my mouth hath abominable flesh.'
And He saith unto me, 'See, I have given to thee bullock's dung instead of man's dung, and thou hast made thy bread by it.'
And He saith unto me, 'Son of man, lo, I am breaking the staff of bread in Jerusalem, and they have eaten bread by weight and with fear; and water by measure and with astonishment, they do drink;
so that they lack bread and water, and have been astonished one with another, and been consumed in their iniquity.
'And thou, son of man, take to thee a sharp weapon, the barber's razor thou dost take to thee, and thou hast caused [it] to pass over thy head, and over thy beard, and thou hast taken to thee weighing scales, and apportioned them.
A third part with fire thou dost burn in the midst of the city, at the fulness of the days of the siege; and thou hast taken the third part, thou dost smite with a weapon round about it; and the third part thou dost scatter to the wind, and a weapon I draw out after them.
And thou hast taken thence a few in number — and hast bound them in thy skirts;
and of them thou dost take again, and hast cast them unto the midst of the fire, and hast burned them in the fire — out of it cometh forth a fire unto all the house of Israel.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: this [is] Jerusalem, In the midst of the nations I have set her, And round about her [are] the lands.
And she changeth My judgments into wickedness more than the nations, And My statutes more than the lands that [are] round about her, For against My judgments they have kicked, And My statutes — they have not walked in them.
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Because of your multiplying above the nations that [are] around you, In My statutes ye have not walked, And My judgments ye have not done, According to the judgments of the nations That [are] round about you ye have not done.
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I [am] against thee, even I, And I have done in thy midst judgments, Before the eyes of the nations.
And I have done in thee that which I have not done, And that which I do not its like again, Because of all thine abominations.
Therefore fathers do eat sons in thy midst, And sons eat their fathers, And I have done in thee judgments, And have scattered all thy remnant to every wind.
Therefore, I live — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah: Because My sanctuary thou hast defiled, With all thy detestable things, And with all thine abominations, Mine eye pitieth not, and I also spare not. Do not even I also diminish?
Thy third part — by pestilence they die, And by famine are consumed in thy midst, And the third part, by sword they fall round about thee, And the third part, to every wind I scatter, And a sword I draw out after them.
And completed hath been Mine anger, And I have caused My fury to rest on them, And I have been comforted, And they have known that I, Jehovah, have spoken in My zeal, In My completing My fury on them.
And I give thee for a waste, And for a reproach among nations that [are] round about thee, Before the eyes of every passer by.
And it hath been a reproach and a reviling, An instruction and an astonishment, To nations that [are] round about thee, In My doing in thee judgments, In anger and fury, and in furious reproofs, I, Jehovah, have spoken.
In My sending the evil arrows of famine among them, That have been for destruction, That I send to destroy you, And famine I am adding upon you, And I have broken to you the staff of bread.
And I have sent on you famine and evil beasts, And they have bereaved thee, And pestilence and blood pass over on thee, And a sword I do bring in against thee, I, Jehovah, have spoken!'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying:
'Son of man, set thy face unto mountains of Israel, and prophesy concerning them:
And thou hast said: Mountains of Israel, Hear ye a word of the Lord Jehovah: Thus said the Lord Jehovah To the mountains, and to the hills, To the streams, and to the valleys, Lo, I, I am bringing in against you a sword, And I have destroyed your high places.
And desolated have been your altars, And broken your images, And I have caused your wounded to fall before your idols,
And put the carcases of the sons of Israel before their idols, And scattered your bones round about your altars.
In all your dwellings the cities are laid waste, And the high places are desolate, So that waste and desolate are your altars, And broken and ceased have your idols, And cut down have been your images, And blotted out have been your works.
And fallen hath the wounded in your midst, And ye have known that I [am] Jehovah.
And I have caused [some] to remain, In their being to you the escaped of the sword among nations, In your being scattered through lands.
And remembered Me have your escaped among nations, Whither they have been taken captive, Because I have been broken with their heart that is going a-whoring, That hath turned aside from off Me, And with their eyes they are going a-whoring after their idols, And they have been loathsome in their own faces, For the evils that they have done — all their abominations.
And they have known that I [am] Jehovah, Not for nought have I spoken to do to them this evil.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: 'Smite with thy palm, and stamp with thy foot, And say: Alas, for all the evil abominations of the house of Israel, Who by sword, by famine, and by pestilence do fall.
The far-off by pestilence dieth, And the near by sword falleth, And the left and the besieged by famine dieth, And I have completed my fury upon them.
And ye have known that I [am] Jehovah, In their wounded being in the midst of their idols, Round about their altars, On every high hill, on all tops of mountains, And under every green tree, and under every thick oak, The place where they gave sweet fragrance to all their idols.
And I have stretched out my hand against them, And have made the land a desolation, Even a desolation from the wilderness to Diblath, In all their dwellings, And they have known that I [am] Jehovah!'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying, 'And thou, son of man, Thus said the Lord Jehovah to the ground of Israel:
An end, come hath the end on the four corners of the land.
Now [is] the end unto thee, And I have sent Mine anger upon thee, And judged thee according to thy ways, And set against thee all thine abominations.
And no pity on thee hath Mine eye, nor do I spare, For thy ways against thee I do set, And thine abominations are in thy midst, And ye have known that I [am] Jehovah.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Evil, a single evil, lo, it hath come.
An end hath come, come hath the end, It hath waked for thee, lo, it hath come.
Come hath the morning unto thee, O inhabitant of the land! Come hath the time, near [is] a day of trouble, And not the shouting of mountains.
Now, shortly I pour out My fury on thee, And have completed Mine anger against thee, And judged thee according to thy ways, And set against thee all thine abominations.
And not pity doth Mine eye, nor do I spare, According to thy ways unto thee I give, And thine abominations are in thy midst, And ye have known that I [am] Jehovah the smiter.
Lo, the day, lo, it hath come, Gone forth hath the morning, Blossomed hath the rod, flourished the pride.
The violence hath risen to a rod of wickedness, There is none of them, nor of their multitude, Nor of their noise, nor is there wailing for them.
Come hath the time, arrived hath the day, The buyer doth not rejoice, And the seller doth not become a mourner, For wrath [is] unto all its multitude.
For the seller to the sold thing turneth not, And yet among the living [is] their life, For the vision [is] unto all its multitude, It doth not turn back, And none by his iniquity doth strengthen his life.
They have blown with a trumpet to prepare the whole, And none is going to battle, For My wrath [is] unto all its multitude.
The sword [is] without, And the pestilence and the famine within, He who is in a field by sword dieth, And he who is in a city, Famine and pestilence devour him.
And escaped away have their fugitives, And they have been on the mountains As doves of the valleys, All of them make a noising — each for his iniquity.
All the hands are feeble, and all knees go — waters.
And they have girded on sackcloth, And covered them hath trembling, And unto all faces [is] shame, And on all their heads — baldness.
Their silver into out-places they cast, And their gold impurity becometh. Their silver and their gold is not able to deliver them, In a day of the wrath of Jehovah, Their soul they do not satisfy, And their bowels they do not fill, For the stumbling-block of their iniquity it hath been.
As to the beauty of his ornament, For excellency He set it, And the images of their abominations, Their detestable things — they made in it, Therefore I have given it to them for impurity,
And I have given it into the hand of the strangers for a prey, And to the wicked of the land for a spoil, And they have polluted it.
And I have turned My face from them, And they have polluted My hidden place, Yea, come into it have destroyers, and polluted it.
Make the chain; for the land Hath been full of bloody judgments, And the city hath been full of violence.
And I have brought in the wicked of the nations, And they have possessed their houses, And I have caused to cease the excellency of the strong, And polluted have been those sanctifying them.
Destruction hath come, And they have sought peace, and there is none.
Mischief on mischief cometh, and report is on report, And they have sought a vision from a prophet, And law doth perish from the priest, And counsel from the elders,
The king doth become a mourner, And a prince putteth on desolation, And the hands of the people of the land are troubled, From their own way I deal with them, And with their own judgments I judge them, And they have known that I [am] Jehovah!'
And it cometh to pass, in the sixth year, in the sixth [month], in the fifth of the month, I am sitting in my house, and elders of Judah are sitting before me, and fall on me there doth a hand of the Lord Jehovah,
and I look, and lo, a likeness as the appearance of fire, from the appearance of His loins and downward — fire, and from His loins and upward, as the appearance of brightness, as the colour of copper.
And He putteth forth a form of a hand, and taketh me by a lock of my head, and lift me up doth a spirit between the earth and the heavens, and it bringeth me in to Jerusalem in visions of God, unto the opening of the inner gate that is facing the north, where [is] the seat of the figure of jealousy that is making jealous,
and lo, there the honour of the God of Israel, as the appearance that I saw in the valley.
And He saith unto me, 'Son of man, lift up, I pray thee, thine eyes the way of the north.' And I lift up mine eyes the way of the north, and lo, on the north of the gate of the altar this figure of jealousy, at the entrance.
And He saith unto me, 'Son of man, art thou seeing what they are doing? the great abominations that the house of Israel are doing here, to keep far off from My sanctuary; and again thou dost turn, thou dost see great abominations.'
And He bringeth me in unto an opening of the court, and I look, and lo, a hole in the wall;
and He saith unto me, 'Son of man, dig, I pray thee, through the wall;' and I dig through the wall, and lo, an opening.
And He saith to me, 'Go in, and see the evil abominations that they are doing here.'
And I go in, and look, and lo, every form of creeping thing, and detestable beast — and all the Idols of the house of Israel — graved on the wall, all round about,
and seventy men of the elders of the house of Israel — and Jaazaniah son of Shaphan standing in their midst — are standing before them, and each his censer in his hand, and the abundance of the cloud of perfume is going up.
And He saith unto me, 'Hast thou seen, son of man, that which elders of the house of Israel are doing in darkness, each in the inner chambers of his imagery, for they are saying, Jehovah is not seeing us, Jehovah hath forsaken the land?'
And He saith unto me, 'Again thou dost turn, thou dost see great abominations that they are doing.'
And He bringeth me in unto the opening of the gate of the house of Jehovah that [is] at the north, and lo, there the women are sitting weeping for Tammuz.
And He saith unto me, 'Hast thou seen, son of man? again thou dost turn, thou dost see greater abominations than these.'
And He bringeth me in unto the inner court of the house of Jehovah, and lo, at the opening of the temple of Jehovah, between the porch and the altar, about twenty-five men, their backs toward the temple of Jehovah, and their faces eastward, and they are bowing themselves eastward to the sun.
And He saith unto me, 'Hast thou seen, son of man? hath it been a light thing to the house of Judah to do the abomination that they have done here, that they have filled the land with violence, and turn back to provoke Me to anger? and lo, they are putting forth the branch unto their nose!
And I also deal in fury, Mine eye doth not pity, nor do I spare, and they have cried in Mine ears — a loud voice — and I do not hear them.'
And He crieth in mine ears — a loud voice — saying, 'Drawn near have inspectors of the city, and each his destroying weapon in his hand.'
And lo, six men are coming from the way of the upper gate, that is facing the north, and each his slaughter-weapon in his hand, and one man in their midst is clothed with linen, and a scribe's inkhorn at his loins, and they come in, and stand near the brazen altar.
And the honour of the God of Israel hath gone up from off the cherub, on which it hath been, unto the threshold of the house.
And He calleth unto the man who is clothed with linen, who hath the scribe's inkhorn at his loins, and Jehovah saith unto him, 'Pass on into the midst of the city, into the midst of Jerusalem, and thou hast made a mark on the foreheads of the men who are sighing and who are groaning for all the abominations that are done in its midst.'
And to the others he said in mine ears, 'Pass on into the city after him, and smite; your eye doth not pity, nor do ye spare;
aged, young man, and virgin, and infant, and women, ye do slay — to destruction; and against any man on whom [is] the mark ye do not go nigh, and from My sanctuary ye begin.'
And they begin among the aged men who [are] before the house, and He saith unto them, 'Defile the house, and fill the courts with the wounded, go forth.' And they have gone forth and have smitten in the city.
And it cometh to pass, as they are smiting, and I — I am left — that I fall on my face, and cry, and say, 'Ah, Lord Jehovah, art Thou destroying all the remnant of Israel, in Thy pouring out Thy wrath on Jerusalem?'
And He saith unto me, 'The iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah [is] very very great, and the land is full of blood, and the city hath been full of perverseness, for they have said: Jehovah hath forsaken the land, and Jehovah is not seeing.
And I also, Mine eye doth not pity, nor do I spare; their way on their own head I have put.'
And lo, the man clothed with linen, at whose loins [is] the inkhorn, is bringing back word, saying, 'I have done as Thou hast commanded me.'
And I look, and lo, on the expanse that [is] above the head of the cherubs, as a sapphire stone, as the appearance of the likeness of a throne, He hath been seen over them.
And He speaketh unto the man clothed with linen, and saith, 'Go in unto the midst of the wheel, unto the place of the cherub, and fill thy hands with coals of fire from between the cherubs, and scatter over the city.' And he goeth in before mine eyes.
And the cherubs are standing on the right side of the house, at the going in of the man, and the cloud hath filled the inner court,
and become high doth the honour of Jehovah above the cherub, over the threshold of the house, and the house is filled with the cloud, and the court hath been filled with the brightness of the honour of Jehovah.
And a noise of the wings of the cherubs hath been heard unto the outer court, as the voice of God — the Mighty One — in His speaking.
And it cometh to pass, in His commanding the man clothed with linen, saying, 'Take fire from between the wheel, from between the cherubs,' and he goeth in and standeth near the wheel,
that the [one] cherub putteth forth his hand from between the cherubs unto the fire that [is] between the cherubs, and lifteth up, and giveth into the hands of him who is clothed with linen, and he receiveth, and cometh forth.
And there appeareth in the cherubs the form of a hand of man under their wings,
and I look, and lo, four wheels near the cherubs, one wheel near the one cherub, and another wheel near the other cherub, and the appearance of the wheels [is] as the colour of a beryl stone.
As to their appearances, one likeness [is] to them four, as it were the wheel in the midst of the wheel.
In their going, on their four sides they go; they turn not round in their going, for to the place whither the head turneth, after it they go, they turn not round in their going.
And all their flesh, and their backs, and their hands, and their wings, and the wheels, are full of eyes round about; to them four [are] their wheels.
To the wheels — to them is one calling in mine ears, 'O wheel!'
And four faces [are] to each; the face of the one [is] the face of the cherub, and the face of the second the face of man, and of the third the face of a lion, and of the fourth the face of an eagle.
And the cherubs are lifted up, it [is] the living creature that I saw by the river Chebar.
And in the going of the cherubs, the wheels go beside them; and in the cherubs lifting up their wings to be high above the earth, the wheels turn not round, even they, from being beside them.
In their standing they stand, and in their exaltation they are exalted with them: for the living spirit [is] in them.
And go forth doth the honour of Jehovah from off the threshold of the house, and standeth over the cherubs,
and the cherubs lift up their wings, and are lifted up from the earth before mine eyes; in their going forth, the wheels also [are] over-against them, and he standeth at the opening of the east gate of the house of Jehovah, and the honour of the God of Israel [is] over them from above.
It [is] the living creature that I saw under the God of Israel by the river Chebar, and I know that they are cherubs.
Four faces [are] to each, and four wings to each, and the likeness of the hands of man [is] under their wings.
As to the likeness of their faces, they [are] the faces that I saw by the river Chebar, their appearances and themselves; each straight forward they go.
And lift me up doth a spirit, and it bringeth me in unto the east gate of the house of Jehovah, that is facing the east, and lo, at the opening of the gate twenty and five men, and I see in their midst Jaazaniah son of Azzur, and Pelatiah son of Benaiah, heads of the people.
And He saith unto me, 'Son of man, these [are] the men who are devising iniquity, and who are giving evil counsel in this city;
who are saying, It [is] not near — to build houses, it [is] the pot, and we the flesh.
Therefore prophesy concerning them, prophesy, son of man.'
And fall upon me doth the Spirit of Jehovah, and He saith unto me, 'Say: Thus said Jehovah: Rightly ye have said, O house of Israel, And the steps of your spirit I have known.
Ye multiplied your wounded in this city, And filled its out-places with the wounded.
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Your wounded whom ye placed in its midst, They [are] the flesh, and it [is] the pot, And you he hath brought out from its midst.
A sword ye have feared, And a sword I bring in against you, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
And I have brought you out of its midst, And given you into the hand of strangers, And I have done among you judgments.
By the sword ye do fall, On the border of Israel I do judge you, And ye have known that I [am] Jehovah.
It is not to you for a pot, Nor are ye in its midst for flesh, At the border of Israel I do judge you.
And ye have known that I [am] Jehovah, For in My statutes ye have not walked, And My Judgments ye have not done, And according to the judgments of the nations Who are round about you — ye have done!'
And it cometh to pass, at my prophesying, that Pelatiah son of Benaiah is dying, and I fall on my face, and cry — a loud voice — and say, 'Ah, Lord Jehovah, an end Thou art making of the remnant of Israel.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Son of man, thy brethren, thy brethren, men of thy kindred, and all the house of Israel — all of it, [are] they to whom inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, Keep far off from Jehovah;
it [is] ours, the land hath been given for an inheritance; therefore say: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Because I put them afar off among nations, And because I scattered them through lands, I also am to them for a little sanctuary, In lands whither they have gone in.
Therefore say: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: And I have assembled you from the peoples, And I have gathered you from the lands, Into which ye have been scattered, And I have given to you the ground of Israel.
And they have gone in thither. And turned aside all its detestable things, And all its abominations — out of it.
And I have given to them one heart, And a new spirit I do give in your midst, And I have turned the heart of stone out of their flesh, And I have given to them a heart of flesh.
So that in My statutes they walk, And My judgments they keep, and have done them, And they have been to me for a people, And I am to them for God.
As to those whose heart is going unto the heart Of their detestable and their abominable things, Their way on their head I have put, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.'
And the cherubs lift up their wings, and the wheels [are] over-against them, and the honour of the God of Israel [is] over them above.
And the honour of Jehovah goeth up from off the midst of the city, and standeth on the mountain, that [is] on the east of the city.
And a spirit hath lifted me up, and bringeth me in to Chaldea, unto the Removed, in a vision, by the Spirit of God, and go up from off me doth the vision that I have seen;
and I speak unto the Removed all the matters of Jehovah that He hath shewed me.
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Son of man, in the midst of the rebellious house thou art dwelling, that have eyes to see, and they have not seen; ears they have to hear, and they have not heard; for a rebellious house [are] they.
And thou, son of man, make to thee vessels of removal, and remove by day before their eyes, and thou hast removed from thy place unto another place before their eyes, it may be they consider, for a rebellious house they [are].
And thou hast brought forth thy vessels as vessels of removal by day before their eyes, and thou, thou dost go forth at even before their eyes, as the goings forth of a removal.
Before their eyes dig for thee through the wall, and thou hast brought forth by it.
Before their eyes on the shoulder thou dost bear, in the darkness thou dost bring forth, thy face thou dost cover, and thou dost not see the earth, for a type I have given thee to the house of Israel.'
And I do so, as I have been commanded; my vessels I have brought forth as vessels of removal by day, and at even I have dug for me through the wall with the hand; in the darkness I have brought forth, on the shoulder I have borne away, before their eyes.
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, in the morning, saying,
'Son of man, have they not said unto thee — the house of Israel — the rebellious house — What art thou doing?
say unto them, Thus said the Lord Jehovah: 'The prince [is] this burden in Jerusalem, and all the house of Israel who are in their midst.
Say: I [am] your type; as I have done so it is done to them, into a removal, into a captivity, they do go.
As to the prince who [is] in their midst, on the shoulder he beareth in the darkness, and he goeth forth, through the wall they dig to bring forth by it, his face he covereth, that he may not look on the very surface of the land.
And I have spread My net for him, and he hath been caught in My snare, and I have brought him in to Babylon, the land of the Chaldeans, and it he doth not see — and there doth he die.
'And all who are round about him to help him, and all his bands, I do scatter to every wind, and a sword I draw out after them.
And they have known that I [am] Jehovah, in My scattering them among nations, and I have spread them through lands;
and I have left of them, a few in number, from the sword, from the famine, and from the pestilence, so that they recount all their abominations among the nations whither they have come, and they have known that I [am] Jehovah.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Son of man, thy bread in haste thou dost eat, and thy water with trembling and with fear thou dost drink;
and thou hast said unto the people of the land, Thus said the Lord Jehovah concerning the inhabitants of Jerusalem, concerning the land of Israel: Their bread with fear they do eat, and their water with astonishment drink, because its land is desolate, because of its fulness, because of the violence of all who are dwelling in it.
And the cities that are inhabited are laid waste, and the land is a desolation, and ye have known that I [am] Jehovah.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Son of man, what [is] this simile to you, concerning the land of Israel, saying, Prolonged are the days, and perished hath every vision?
therefore say unto them: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: I have caused this simile to cease, And they use it not as a simile again in Israel, But speak to them: Drawn near have the days, And spoken hath every vision.
For there is no more any vain vision, and flattering divination, In the midst of the house of Israel.
For I [am] Jehovah, I speak, The word that I speak — it is done, It is not prolonged any more, For, in your days, O rebellious house, I speak a word, and I have done it, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying:
'Son of man, lo, the house of Israel are saying, The vision that he is seeing [is] for many days, and of times far off he is prophesying,
therefore say unto them: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: None of my words are prolonged any more, When I speak a word — it is done, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah!'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Son of man, prophesy concerning the prophets of Israel who are prophesying, and thou hast said to those prophesying from their own heart: Hear ye a word of Jehovah:
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Woe unto the prophets who are foolish, Who are going after their own spirit, And they have seen nothing.
As foxes in the wastes, Thy prophets, O Israel, have been.
Ye have not gone up into breaches, Nor do ye make a fence for the house of Israel, To stand in battle in a day of Jehovah.
They have seen vanity, and lying divination, Who are saying: An affirmation of Jehovah, And Jehovah hath not sent them, And they have hoped to establish a word.
A vain vision have ye not seen, And a lying divination spoken, When ye say: An affirmation of Jehovah, And I have not spoken?
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Because ye have spoken vanity, and seen a lie, Therefore, lo, I [am] against you, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
And My hand hath been on the prophets, Who are seeing vanity, and who are divining a lie, In the assembly of My people they are not, And in the writing of the house of Israel they are not written, And unto the ground of Israel they come not, And ye have known that I [am] the Lord Jehovah.
Because, even because, they did cause My people to err, Saying, Peace! and there is no peace, And that one is building a wall, And lo, they are daubing it with chalk.
Say to those daubing with chalk — It falleth, There hath been an overflowing shower, And ye, O hailstones, do fall, And a tempestuous wind doth rend,
And lo, fallen hath the wall! Doth not one say unto you, Where [is] the daubing that ye daubed?
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: I have rent with a tempestuous wind in My fury, And an overflowing shower is in Mine anger, And hailstones in My fury — to consume.
And I have broken down the wall that ye daubed with chalk, And have caused it to come unto the earth, And revealed hath been its foundation, And it hath fallen, And ye have been consumed in its midst, And ye have known that I [am] Jehovah.
And I have completed My wrath on the wall, And on those daubing it with chalk, And I say to you: The wall is not, And those daubing it are not;
The prophets of Israel who are prophesying concerning Jerusalem, And who are seeing for her a vision of peace, And there is no peace, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
And thou, son of man, set thy face against the daughters of thy people, who are prophesying out of their own heart, and prophesy concerning them,
And thou hast said: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Woe to those sowing pillows for all joints of the arm, And to those making the kerchiefs For the head of every stature — to hunt souls, The souls do ye hunt of My people? And the souls ye have do ye keep alive?
Yea, ye pierce Me concerning My people, For handfuls of barley, And for pieces of bread, to put to death Souls that should not die, And to keep alive souls that should not live, By your lying to My people — hearkening to lies.
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I [am] against your pillows, With which ye are hunting there the souls of the flourishing, And I have rent them from off your arms, And have sent away the souls that ye are hunting, The souls of the flourishing.
And I have torn your kerchiefs, And delivered My people out of your hand, And they are no more in your hand for a prey, And ye have known that I [am] Jehovah.
Because of paining the heart of the righteous with falsehood, And I have not pained it, And strengthening the hands of the wicked, So as not to turn back from his evil way, To keep him alive,
Therefore, vanity ye do not see, And divination ye do not divine again, And I have delivered My people out of your hand, And ye have known that I [am] Jehovah!'
And come in unto me do certain of the elders of Israel, and sit before me.
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Son of man, these men have caused their idols to go up on their heart, and the stumbling-block of their iniquity they have put over-against their faces; am I inquired of at all by them?
'Therefore, speak with them, and thou hast said unto them: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Every one of the house of Israel who causeth his idols to go up unto his heart, and the stumbling-block of his iniquity setteth over-against his face, and hath gone in unto the prophet — I Jehovah have given an answer to him for this, for the abundance of his idols,
in order to catch the house of Israel by their heart, in that they have become estranged from off me by their idols — all of them.
'Therefore say unto the house of Israel: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Turn ye back, yea, turn ye back from your idols, and from all your abominations turn back your faces,
for every one of the house of Israel, and of the sojourners who doth sojourn in Israel, who is separated from after Me, and doth cause his idols to go up unto his heart, and the stumbling-block of his iniquity setteth over-against his face, and hath come in unto the prophet to inquire of him concerning Me, I, Jehovah, have answered him for Myself;
and I have set My face against that man, and made him for a sign, and for similes, and I have cut him off from the midst of My people, and ye have known that I [am] Jehovah.
'And the prophet, when he is enticed, and hath spoken a word — I, Jehovah, I have enticed that prophet, and have stretched out My hand against him, and have destroyed him from the midst of My people Israel.
And they have borne their iniquity: as the iniquity of the inquirer, so is the iniquity of the prophet;
so that the house of Israel do not wander any more from after Me, nor are defiled any more with all their transgressions, and they have been to Me for a people, and I am to them for God — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Son of man, the land — when it sinneth against Me to commit a trespass, and I have stretched out My hand against it, and broken for it the staff of bread, and sent into it famine, and cut off from it man and beast —
and these three men have been in its midst, Noah, Daniel, and Job — they by their righteousness deliver their own soul — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
'If an evil beast I cause to pass through the land, and it hath bereaved, and it hath been a desolation, without any passing through because of the beast —
these three men in its midst: I live — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah — neither sons nor daughters do they deliver; they alone are delivered, and the land is a desolation.
'Or — a sword I bring in against that land, and I have said: Sword, thou dost pass over through the land, and I have cut off from it man and beast —
and these three men in its midst: I live — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah — they deliver not sons and daughters, for they alone are delivered.
'Or — pestilence I send unto that land, and I have poured out My fury against it in blood, to cut off from it man and beast —
and Noah, Daniel, and Job, in its midst: I live — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah — neither son nor daughter do they deliver; they, by their righteousness, deliver their own soul.
'For thus said the Lord Jehovah: Although My four sore judgments — sword, and famine, and wild beast, and pestilence — I have sent unto Jerusalem, to cut off from it man and beast,
yet, lo, there hath been left in it an escape, who are brought forth, sons and daughters, lo, they are coming forth unto you, and ye have seen their way, and their doings, and have been comforted concerning the evil that I have brought in against Jerusalem, all that which I have brought in against it.
And they have comforted you, for ye see their way and their doings, and ye have known that not for nought have I done all that which I have done in her — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying:
'Son of man, What is the vine-tree more than any tree? The vine-branch that hath been, Among trees of the forest?
Is wood taken from it to use for work? Do they take of it a pin to hang any vessel on it?
Lo, to the fire it hath been given for fuel, Its two ends hath the fire eaten, And its midst hath been scorched! Is it profitable for work?
Lo, in its being perfect it is not used for work, How much less, when fire hath eaten of it, And it is scorched, Hath it been used yet for work?
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: As the vine-tree among trees of the forest, That I have given to the fire for fuel, So I have given the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
And I have set My face against them, From the fire they have gone forth, And the fire doth consume them, And ye have known that I [am] Jehovah, In My setting My face against them.
And I have made the land a desolation, Because they have committed a trespass, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah!'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations, and thou hast said:
Thus said the Lord Jehovah to Jerusalem: Thy birth and thy nativity [Are] of the land of the Canaanite, Thy father the Amorite, and thy mother a Hittite.
As to thy nativity, in the day thou wast born, Thou — thy navel hath not been cut, And in water thou wast not washed for ease, And thou hast not been salted at all, And thou hast not been swaddled at all.
No eye hath had pity on thee, to do to thee any of these, To have compassion on thee, And thou art cast on the face of the field, With loathing of thy person. In the day thou hast been born — thou!
And I do pass over by thee, And I see thee trodden down in thy blood, And I say to thee in thy blood, Live, And I say to thee in thy blood, Live.
A myriad — as the shoot of the field I have made thee, And thou art multiplied, and art great, And comest in with an excellent adornment, Breasts have been formed, and thy hair hath grown — And thou, naked and bare!
And I pass over by thee, and I see thee, And lo, thy time [is] a time of loves, And I spread My skirt over thee, And I cover thy nakedness, And I swear to thee, and come in to a covenant with thee, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, And thou dost become Mine.
And I do wash thee with water, And I wash away thy blood from off thee, And I anoint thee with perfume.
And I clothe thee with embroidery, And I shoe thee with badger's skin, And I gird thee with fine linen, And I cover thee with figured silk.
And I adorn thee with adornments, And I give bracelets for thy hands, And a chain for thy neck.
And I give a ring for thy nose, And rings for thine ears, And a crown of beauty on thy head.
And thou dost put on gold and silver, And thy clothing [is] fine linen, And figured silk and embroidery, Fine flour, and honey, and oil thou hast eaten, And thou art very very beautiful, And dost go prosperously to the kingdom.
And go forth doth thy name among nations, Because of thy beauty — for it [is] complete, In My honour that I have set upon thee, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
And thou dost trust in thy beauty, And goest a-whoring because of thy renown, And dost pour out thy whoredoms On every passer by — to him it is.
And thou dost take of thy garments, And dost make to thee spotted high-places, And dost go a-whoring upon them, They are not coming in — nor shall it be!
And thou dost take thy beauteous vessels Of My gold and My silver that I gave to thee, And dost make to thee images of a male, And dost go a-whoring with them,
And dost take the garments of thy embroidery, And thou dost cover them, And My oil and My perfume thou hast set before them.
And My bread, that I gave to thee, Fine flour, and oil, and honey, that I caused thee to eat. Thou hast even set it before them, For a sweet fragrance — thus it is, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
And thou dost take thy sons and thy daughters Whom thou hast born to Me, And dost sacrifice them to them for food. Is it a little thing because of thy whoredoms,
That thou dost slaughter My sons, And dost give them up in causing them to pass over to them?
And with all thine abominations and thy whoredoms, Thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, When thou wast naked and bare, Trodden down in thy blood thou wast!
And it cometh to pass, after all thy wickedness, (Woe, woe, to thee — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah),
That thou dost build to thee an arch, And dost make to thee a high place in every broad place.
At every head of the way thou hast built thy high place, And thou dost make thy beauty abominable, And dost open wide thy feet to every passer by, And dost multiply thy whoredoms,
And dost go a-whoring unto sons of Egypt, Thy neighbours — great of appetite! And thou dost multiply thy whoredoms, To provoke Me to anger.
And lo, I have stretched out My hand against thee, And I diminish thy portion, And give thee to the desire of those hating thee, The daughters of the Philistines, Who are ashamed of thy wicked way.
And thou goest a-whoring unto sons of Asshur, Without thy being satisfied, And thou dost go a-whoring with them, And also — thou hast not been satisfied.
And thou dost multiply thy whoredoms On the land of Canaan — toward Chaldea, And even with this thou hast not been satisfied.
How weak [is] thy heart, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, In thy doing all these, The work of a domineering whorish woman.
In thy building thine arch at the head of every way, Thy high place thou hast made in every broad place, And — hast not been as a whore deriding a gift.
The wife who committeth adultery — Under her husband — doth receive strangers.
To all whores they give a gift, And — thou hast given thy gifts to all thy lovers, And dost bribe them to come in unto thee, From round about — in thy whoredoms.
And the contrary is in thee from women in thy whoredoms, That after thee none doth go a-whoring; And in thy giving a gift, And a gift hath not been given to thee; And thou art become contrary.
Therefore, O whore, hear a word of Jehovah,
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Because of thy brass being poured forth, And thy nakedness is revealed in thy whoredoms near thy lovers, And near all the idols of thy abominations, And according to the blood of thy sons, Whom thou hast given to them;
Therefore, lo, I am assembling all thy lovers, To whom thou hast been sweet, And all whom thou hast loved, Besides all whom thou hast hated; And I have assembled them by thee round about, And have revealed thy nakedness to them, And they have seen all thy nakedness.
And I have judged thee — judgments of adulteresses, And of women shedding blood, And have given thee blood, fury, and jealousy.
And I have given thee into their hand, And they have thrown down thine arch, And they have broken down thy high places, And they have stript thee of thy garments, And they have taken thy beauteous vessels, And they have left thee naked and bare.
And have caused an assembly to come up against thee, And stoned thee with stones, And thrust thee through with their swords,
And burnt thy houses with fire, And done in thee judgments before the eyes of many women, And I have caused thee to cease from going a-whoring, And also a gift thou givest no more.
And I have caused My fury against thee to rest, And My jealousy hath turned aside from thee, And I have been quiet, and I am not angry any more.
Because thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, And dost give trouble to Me in all these, Lo, even I also thy way at first gave up, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, And I did not this thought for all thine abominations.
Lo, every one using a simile, Doth use a simile concerning thee, saying: As the mother — her daughter!
Thy mother's daughter thou [art], Loathing her husband and her sons, And thy sisters' sister thou [art], Who loathed their husbands and their sons, Your mother [is] a Hittite, and your father an Amorite.
And thine elder sister [is] Samaria, she and her daughters, Who is dwelling at thy left hand, And thy younger sister, who is dwelling on thy right hand, [is] Sodom and her daughters.
And — in their ways thou hast not walked, And according to their abominations done, As a little thing it hath been loathed, And thou dost more corruptly than they in all thy ways.
I live — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, Sodom thy sister hath not done — she and her daughters — As thou hast done — thou and thy daughters.
Lo, this hath been the iniquity of Sodom thy sister, Arrogancy, fulness of bread, and quiet ease, Have been to her and to her daughters, And the hand of the afflicted and needy She hath not strengthened.
And they are haughty and do abomination before Me, And I turn them aside when I have seen.
As to Samaria, as the half of thy sins — she hath not sinned, And thou dost multiply thine abominations more than they, And dost justify thy sisters by all thy abominations that thou hast done.
Thou also — bear thy shame, That thou hast adjudged to thy sisters, Because of thy sins that thou hast done more abominably than they, They are more righteous than thou, And thou, also, be ashamed and bear thy shame, In thy justifying thy sisters.
And I have turned back [to] their captivity, The captivity of Sodom and her daughters, And the captivity of Samaria and her daughters, And the captivity of thy captives in their midst,
So that thou dost bear thy shame, And hast been ashamed of all that thou hast done, In thy comforting them.
And thy sisters, Sodom and her daughters, Do turn back to their former state, And Samaria and her daughters Do turn back to their former state, And thou and thy daughters do turn back to your former state.
And thy sister Sodom hath not been for a report in thy mouth, In the day of thine arrogancy,
Before thy wickedness is revealed, As [at] the time of the reproach of the daughters of Aram, And of all her neighbours, the daughters of the Philistines, Who are despising thee round about.
Thy devices and thine abominations, Thou hast borne them, an affirmation of Jehovah.
For thus said the Lord Jehovah: I have dealt with thee as thou hast done, In that thou hast despised an oath — to break covenant.
And I — I have remembered My covenant with thee, In the days of thy youth, And I have established for thee a covenant age-during.
And thou hast remembered thy ways, And thou hast been ashamed, In thy receiving thy sisters — Thine elder with thy younger, And I have given them to thee for daughters, And not by thy covenant.
And I — I have established My covenant with thee, And thou hast known that I [am] Jehovah.
So that thou dost remember, And thou hast been ashamed, And there is not to thee any more an opening of the mouth because of thy shame, In My receiving atonement for thee, For all that thou hast done, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah!'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Son of man, put forth a riddle, and use a simile unto the house of Israel,
and thou hast said: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: The great eagle, great-winged, long-pinioned, Full of feathers, that hath diverse colours, Hath come in unto Lebanon, And it taketh the foliage of the cedar,
The top of its tender twigs it hath cropped, And it bringeth it in to the land of Canaan. In a city of merchants it hath placed it.
And it taketh of the seed of the land, And doth put it in a field of seed, To take by many waters, In a conspicuous place it hath set it.
And it springeth up, and becometh a spreading vine, humble of stature, To turn its thin shoots toward itself, And its roots are under it, And it becometh a vine, and maketh boughs, And sendeth forth beauteous branches.
And there is another great eagle, Great-winged, and abounding with feathers, And lo, this vine hath bent its roots toward him, And its thin shoots it hath sent out toward him, To water it from the furrows of its planting,
On a good field, by many waters, it is planted, To make branches, and to bear fruit, To be for an goodly vine.
Say: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: It prospereth — its roots doth he not draw out, And its fruit cut off, and it is withered? [In] all the leaves of its springing it withereth, And not by great strength, and by a numerous people, To lift it up by its roots.
And lo, the planted thing — doth it prosper? When come against it doth the east wind, Doth it not utterly wither? On the furrows of its springing it withereth.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying:
'Say, I pray thee, to the rebellious house, Have ye not known what these [are]? Say, Lo, come hath the king of Babylon to Jerusalem, And he taketh its king, and its princes, And bringeth them to himself to Babylon.
And he taketh of the seed of the kingdom, And maketh with him a covenant, And bringeth him in to an oath, And the mighty of the land he hath taken,
That the kingdom may be humble, That it may not lift itself up, To keep his covenant — that it may stand.
And he rebelleth against him, To send his messengers to Egypt, To give to him horses, and much people, Doth he prosper? doth he escape who is doing these things? And hath he broken covenant and escaped?
I live — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, Doth he not — in the place of the king who is causing him to reign, Whose oath he hath despised, And whose covenant he hath broken, With him — in the midst of Babylon — die?
And not with a great force, and with a numerous assembly, Doth Pharaoh maintain him in battle, By pouring out a mount, and in building a fortification, To cut off many souls.
And he despised the oath — to break covenant, And lo, he hath given his hand, And all these he hath done, he escapeth not.
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: I live — Mine oath that he hath despised, And My covenant that he hath broken, Have I not put it on his head?
And I have spread out for him My snare, And he hath been caught in My net, And I have brought him in to Babylon, And pleaded with him there his trespass, That he hath trespassed against Me.
And all his fugitives, with all his bands, By sword do fall, and those remaining, To every wind they are spread out, And ye have known that I, Jehovah, have spoken.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: I have taken of the foliage of the high cedar, And I have set [it], From the top of its tender shoots a tender one I crop, And I — I have planted [it] on a mountain high and lofty.
In a mountain — the high place of Israel, I plant it, And it hath borne boughs, and yielded fruit, And become a goodly cedar, And dwelt under it have all birds of every wing, In the shade of its thin shoots they dwell.
And known have all trees of the field That I, Jehovah, have made low the high tree, I have set on high the low tree, I have dried up the moist tree, And I have caused the dry tree to flourish, I, Jehovah, have spoken, and have done [it]!'
'And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying:
'What — to you, ye — using this simile Concerning the ground of Israel, saying: Fathers do eat unripe fruit, And the sons' teeth are blunted?
I live — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, Ye have no more the use of this simile in Israel.
Lo, all the souls are Mine, As the soul of the father, So also the soul of the son — they are Mine, The soul that is sinning — it doth die.
And a man, when he is righteous, And hath done judgment and righteousness,
On the mountains he hath not eaten, And his eyes he hath not lifted up Unto idols of the house of Israel, And the wife of his neighbour defiled not, And to a separated woman cometh not near,
A man — he doth not oppress, His pledge to the debtor he doth return, Plunder he doth not take away, His bread to the hungry he doth give, And the naked doth cover with a garment,
In usury he doth not give, and increase taketh not, From perversity he turneth back his hand, True judgment he doth between man and man.
In My statutes he doth walk, And My judgments he hath kept — to deal truly, Righteous [is] he, he surely liveth, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
And — he hath begotten a son, A burglar — a shedder of blood, And he hath made a brother of one of these,
And he all those hath not done, For even on the mountains he hath eaten, And the wife of his neighbour he hath defiled,
The afflicted and needy he hath oppressed, Plunder he hath taken violently away, A pledge he doth not return, And unto the idols he hath lifted up his eyes, Abomination he hath done!
In usury he hath given, and increase taken, And he liveth: he doth not live, All these abominations he hath done, He doth surely die, his blood is on him.
And — lo, he hath begotten a son, And he seeth all the sins of his father, That he hath done, and he feareth, And doth not do like them,
On the mountains he hath not eaten, And his eyes he hath not lifted up Unto idols of the house of Israel, The wife of his neighbour he hath not defiled,
A man — he hath not oppressed, A pledge he hath not bound, And plunder he hath not taken away, His bread to the hungry he hath given, And the naked he covered with a garment,
From the afflicted he hath turned back his hand, Usury and increase he hath not taken, My judgments he hath done, In My statutes he hath walked, He doth not die for the iniquity of his father, He doth surely live.
His father — because he used oppression, Did violently Plunder a brother, And that which [is] not good did in the midst of his people, And lo, he is dying in his iniquity.
And ye have said, Wherefore hath not the son, Borne of the iniquity of the father? And — the son judgment and righteousness hath done, All My statutes he hath kept, And he doeth them, he surely liveth.
The soul that doth sin — it doth die. A son doth not bear of the iniquity of the father, And a father doth not bear of the iniquity of the son, The righteousness of the righteous is on him, And the wickedness of the wicked is on him.
And the wicked — when he turneth back From all his sins that he hath done, And he hath kept all My statutes, And hath done judgment and righteousness, He doth surely live, he doth not die.
All his transgressions that he hath done Are not remembered to him, In his righteousness that he hath done he liveth.
Do I at all desire the death of the wicked? An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, Is it not in his turning back from his way — And he hath lived?
And in the turning back of the righteous from his righteousness, And he hath done perversity, According to all the abominations That the wicked hath done, he doth — thus he liveth, All his righteousnesses that he hath done are not remembered, For his trespass that he hath trespassed, And for his sin that he hath sinned, For them he doth die.
And ye have said, Not pondered is the way of the Lord. Hear, I pray you, O house of Israel, My way — is it not pondered? Are not your ways unpondered?
In the turning back of the righteous from his righteousness, And he hath done perversity, And he is dying by them, for his perversity That he hath done he dieth.
And in the turning back of the wicked From his wickedness that he hath done, And he doth judgment and righteousness, He his soul doth keep alive.
And he seeth and turneth back, From all his transgressions that he hath done, He doth surely live, he doth not die,
And the house of Israel have said, Not pondered is the way of the Lord, My ways — are they not pondered? O house of Israel — are not your ways unpondered?
Therefore, each according to his ways I judge you, O house of Israel? An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, Turn ye back, yea, turn yourselves back, From all your transgressions, And iniquity is not to you for a stumbling-block,
Cast from off you all your transgressions, By which ye have transgressed, And make to you a new heart, and a new spirit, And why do ye die, O house of Israel?
For I have no pleasure in the death of the dying, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, And turn ye back and live!
And thou, lift up a lamentation unto princes of Israel,
and thou hast said: What [is] thy mother? — a lioness, Among lions she hath crouched down, In the midst of young lions she hath multiplied her whelps.
And she bringeth up one of her whelps, A young lion it hath been, And it learneth to tear prey, man it hath devoured.
And hear of it do nations, In their pit it hath been caught, And they bring it in with chains unto the land of Egypt.
And she seeth, that stayed — perished hath her hope, And she taketh one of her whelps, A young lion she hath made it.
And it goeth up and down in the midst of lions, A young lion it hath been, And it learneth to tear prey, man it hath devoured.
And it knoweth his forsaken habitations, And their cities it hath laid waste, And desolate is the land and its fulness, Because of the voice of his roaring.
And set against it do nations Round about from the provinces. And they spread out for it their net, In their pit it hath been caught.
And they put it in prison — in chains, And they bring it unto the king of Babylon, They bring it in unto bulwarks, So that its voice is not heard any more On mountains of Israel.
Thy mother [is] as a vine in thy blood by waters planted, Fruitful and full of boughs it hath been, Because of many waters.
And it hath strong rods for sceptres of rulers, And high is its stature above thick branches, And it appeareth in its height In the multitude of its thin shoots.
And it is plucked up in fury, To the earth it hath been cast, And the east wind hath dried up its fruit, Broken and withered hath been the rod of its strength, Fire hath consumed it.
And now — it is planted in a wilderness, In a land dry and thirsty.
And go forth doth fire from a rod of its boughs, Its fruit it hath devoured, And it hath no rod of strength — a sceptre to rule, Lamentation it [is] — and it is for a lamentation!'
And it cometh to pass, in the seventh year, in the fifth [month], in the tenth of the month, come in have certain of the elders of Israel to seek Jehovah, and they sit before me;
and there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Son of man, speak with the elders of Israel, and thou hast said unto them, Thus said the Lord Jehovah: To seek Me are ye coming in? I live — I am not sought by you — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
Dost thou judge them? Dost thou judge, son of man? The abominations of their fathers cause them to know,
and thou hast said unto them: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: In the day of My fixing on Israel, I lift up My hand, To the seed of the house of Jacob, And am known to them in the land of Egypt, And I lift up My hand to them, Saying, I [am] Jehovah your God.
In that day I did lift up My hand to them, To bring them forth from the land of Egypt, Unto a land that I spied out for them, Flowing with milk and honey, A beauty it [is] to all the lands,
And I say unto them, Let each cast away the detestable things of his eyes, And with the idols of Egypt be not defiled, I [am] Jehovah your God.
And — they rebel against Me, And have not been willing to hearken to Me, Each, the detestable things of their eyes, They have not cast away, And the idols of Egypt have not forsaken, And I say — to pour out My fury on them, To complete Mine anger against them, In the midst of the land of Egypt.
And I do [it] for My name's sake, Not to pollute [it] before the eyes of the nations, In whose midst they [are], Before whose eyes I became known to them, To bring them out from the land of Egypt.
And I bring them out of the land of Egypt, And I bring them in unto the wilderness,
And I give to them My statutes, And my judgments I caused them to know, Which the man who doth — liveth by them.
And also My sabbaths I have given to them, To be for a sign between Me and them, To know that I [am] Jehovah their sanctifier.
And — rebel against me do the house of Israel in the wilderness, In My statutes they have not walked, And My judgments they have despised, Which the man who doth — liveth by them. And My sabbaths they have greatly polluted, And I say to pour out My fury on them in the wilderness, to consume them.
And I do [it] for My name's sake, Not to pollute [it] before the eyes of the nations, Before whose eyes I brought them forth.
And also, I, I have lifted up My hand to them in the wilderness, Not to bring them in to the land that I had given, Flowing with milk and honey, A beauty it [is] to all the lands,
Because against My judgments they did kick, And in My statutes they have not walked, And My sabbaths they have polluted, For after their idols their heart is going.
And Mine eye hath pity on them — against destroying them, And I have not made of them an end in the wilderness.
And I say to their sons in the wilderness: In the statutes of your fathers ye walk not, And their judgments ye do not observe, And with their idols ye are not defiled.
I [am] Jehovah your God, in My statutes walk, And My judgments observe, and do them,
And My sabbaths sanctify, And they have been for a sign between Me and you, To know that I, Jehovah, [am] your God.
And — the sons rebel against Me, In My statutes they have not walked, And My judgments they have not observed — to do them, Which the man who doth — liveth by them. My sabbaths they have polluted, And I say to pour out My fury upon them, To complete Mine anger against them in the wilderness.
And I have turned back My hand, And I do [it] for My name's sake, Not to pollute [it] before the eyes of the nations, Before whose eyes I brought them out.
I also, I have lifted up My hand to them in the wilderness, To scatter them among nations, And to spread them through lands.
Because My judgments they have not done, And My statutes they have despised, And My sabbaths they have polluted, And after idols of their fathers have their eyes been.
And I also, I have given to them statutes not good, And judgments by which they do not live.
And I defile them by their own gifts, By causing to pass away every opener of a womb, So that I make them desolate, So that they know that I [am] Jehovah.
Therefore, speak unto the house of Israel, son of man, and thou hast said unto them, Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Still in this have your fathers reviled Me, In their committing against Me a trespass.
And I bring them in unto the land, That I did lift up My hand to give to them, And they see every high hill, and every thick tree, And they sacrifice there their sacrifices, And give there the provocation of their offering, And make there their sweet fragrance, And they pour out there their libations.
And I say unto them: What [is] the high place whither ye are going in? And its name is called 'high place' to this day.
Therefore, say unto the house of Israel: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: In the way of your fathers are ye defiled? And after their detestable things go a-whoring?
And in the offering of your gifts, In causing your sons to pass through fire, Ye are defiled by all your idols to this day, And I am sought by you, O house of Israel! I live — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, I am not sought by you.
And that which is going up on your mind, It is not at all — in that ye are saying: We will be as the nations, as the families of the lands, To serve wood and stone.
I live — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, Do not I, with a strong hand, And with a stretched-out arm, And with fury poured out — rule over you?
And I have brought you forth from the peoples, And assembled you from the lands In which ye have been scattered, With a strong hand and with a stretched-out arm, And with fury poured out.
And I have brought you in unto the wilderness of the peoples, And have been judged with you there face to face.
As I was judged with your fathers, In the wilderness of the land of Egypt, So I am judged with you, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
And I have caused you to pass under the rod, And brought you into the bond of the covenant,
And cleared out from you the rebels, And them transgressing against Me, From the land of their sojournings I bring them out, And unto the land of Israel they come not, And ye have known that I [am] Jehovah.
And ye, O house of Israel, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Each his idols — go — serve ye, And, afterwards, if ye are not hearkening to me, And My holy name ye do not pollute any more by your gifts, and by your idols.
For, in My holy mountain, In the mountain of the height of Israel, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, There serve Me do all the house of Israel, All of it, in the land — there I accept them, And there I do seek your heave-offerings, And with the first-fruit of your gifts, With all your holy things.
With sweet fragrance I do accept you, In My bringing you out from the peoples, And I have assembled you from the lands In which ye have been scattered, And I have been sanctified in you Before the eyes of the nations.
And ye have known that I [am] Jehovah, In My bringing you to the ground of Israel, Unto the land that I did lift up My hand To give it to your fathers,
And ye have remembered there your ways, And all your doings, In which ye have been defiled, And ye have been loathsome in your own faces, For all your evils that ye have done.
And ye have known that I [am] Jehovah, In My dealing with you for My name's sake, Not according to your evil ways, And according to your corrupt doings, O house of Israel, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
Son of man, set thy face the way of Teman, and prophesy unto the south, and prophesy unto the forest of the field — the south;
and thou hast said to the forest of the south: Hear a word of Jehovah: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I am kindling in thee a fire, And it hath devoured in thee every moist tree, and every dry tree, Not quenched is the glowing flames, And burnt by it have been all faces from south to north.
And seen have all flesh, that I, Jehovah, have kindled it — it is not quenched.'
And I say, 'Ah, Lord Jehovah, They are saying of me, Is he not using similes?
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Son of man, set thy face unto Jerusalem, and prophesy unto the holy places, and prophesy unto the ground of Israel;
and thou hast said unto the ground of Israel: Thus said Jehovah: Lo, I [am] against thee, And have brought out My sword from its scabbard, And have cut off from thee righteous and wicked.
Because that I have cut off from thee righteous and wicked, Therefore go out doth My sword from its scabbard, Unto all flesh, from south to north.
And known have all flesh that I, Jehovah, Have brought out My sword from its scabbard, It doth not turn back any more.
And thou, son of man, sigh with breaking of loins, yea, with bitterness thou dost sigh before their eyes,
and it hath come to pass, when they say unto thee, For what art thou sighing? that thou hast said: Because of the report, for it is coming, And melted hath every heart, And feeble hath been all hands, And weak is every spirit, And all knees go — waters, Lo, it is coming, yea, it hath been, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Son of man, prophesy, and thou hast said, Thus said Jehovah, say: A sword, a sword is sharpened, and also polished.
So as to slaughter a slaughter it is sharpened. So as to have brightness it is polished, Desire hath rejoiced the sceptre of my son, It is despising every tree.
And he giveth it for polishing, For laying hold of by the hand. It is sharpened — the sword — and polished, To give it into the hand of a slayer.
Cry and howl, son of man, For it hath been among My people, It [is] among all the princes of Israel, Cast unto the sword have been My people. Therefore strike on thy thigh,
Because [it is] a trier, And what if even the sceptre it is despising? It shall not be, an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
And thou, son of man, prophesy, And smite hand on hand, And bent is the sword a third time, The sword of the wounded! It [is] the sword of the wounded — the great one, That is entering the inner chamber to them.
To melt the heart, and to multiply the ruins, By all their gates I have set the point of a sword. Ah, it is made for brightness, Wrapped up for slaughter.
Take possession of the right, place thyself at the left, Whither thy face is appointed.
And I also, I smite My hand on my hand, And have caused My fury to rest; I, Jehovah, have spoken.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'And thou, son of man, appoint for thee two ways, for the coming in of the sword of the king of Babylon; from one land they come forth, both of them, and a station prepare thou, at the top of the way of the city prepare [it].
A way appoint for the coming of the sword, Unto Rabbath of the sons of Ammon, And to Judah, in Jerusalem — the fenced.
For stood hath the king of Babylon at the head of the way, At the top of the two ways, to use divination, He hath moved lightly with the arrows, He hath asked at the teraphim, He hath looked on the liver.
At his right hath been the divination — Jerusalem, To place battering-rams, To open the mouth with slaughter, To lift up a voice with shouting, To place battering-rams against the gates, To pour out a mount, to build a fortification.
And it hath been to them as a false divination in their eyes, Who have sworn oaths to them, And he is causing iniquity to be remembered to be caught.
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Because of your causing your iniquity to be remembered, In your transgressions being revealed, For your sins being seen, in all your doings, Because of your being remembered, By the hand ye are caught.
And thou, wounded, wicked one, Prince of Israel, whose day hath come, In the time of the iniquity of the end!
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Turn aside the mitre, and bear away the crown, This — not this — the low make high, And the high make low.
An overturn, overturn, overturn, I make it, Also this hath not been till the coming of Him, Whose [is] the judgment, and I have given it.
And thou, son of man, prophesy, and thou hast said: Thus said the Lord Jehovah concerning the sons of Ammon, and concerning their reproach: and thou hast said: A sword, a sword, open for slaughter, Polished to the utmost for brightness!
In the seeing for thee of a vain thing, In the divining for thee of a lie, To put thee on the necks of the wounded of the wicked, whose day hath come, In the time of the iniquity of the end.
Turn [it] back unto its scabbard, In the place where thou wast produced, In the land of thy birth I do judge thee.
And I have poured on thee Mine indignation, With fire of My wrath I blow against thee, And have given thee into the hand of brutish men — artificers of destruction.
To the fire thou art for fuel, Thy blood is in the midst of the land, Thou art not remembered, For I, Jehovah, have spoken!'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'And thou, son of man, dost thou judge? dost thou judge the city of blood? then thou hast caused it to know all its abominations,
and thou hast said: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: The city is shedding blood in its midst, For the coming in of its time, And it hath made idols on it for defilement.
By thy blood that thou hast shed thou hast been guilty, And by thine idols that thou hast made thou hast been defiled, And thou causest thy days to draw near, And art come in unto thine years, Therefore I have given thee a reproach to nations, And a derision to all the lands.
The near and the far-off from thee scoff at thee, O defiled of name — abounding in trouble.
Lo, princes of Israel — each according to his arm Have been in thee to shed blood.
Father and mother made light of in thee, To a sojourner they dealt oppressively in thy midst, Fatherless and widow they oppressed in thee.
My holy things thou hast despised, And My sabbaths thou hast polluted.
Men of slander have been in thee to shed blood, And on the mountains they have eaten in thee, Wickedness they have done in thy midst.
The nakedness of a father hath one uncovered in thee, The defiled of impurity they humbled in thee.
And each with the wife of his neighbour hath done abomination, And each his daughter-in-law hath defiled through wickedness, And each his sister, his father's daughter, hath humbled in thee.
A bribe they have taken in thee to shed blood, Usury and increase thou hast taken, And cuttest off thy neighbour by oppression, And Me thou hast forgotten, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah!
And lo, I have smitten My hand, Because of thy dishonest gain that thou hast gained, And for thy blood that hath been in thy midst.
Doth thy heart stand — are thy hands strong, For the days that I am dealing with thee? I, Jehovah, have spoken and have done [it].
And I have scattered thee among nations, And have spread thee out among lands, And consumed thy uncleanness out of thee.
And thou hast been polluted in thyself Before the eyes of nations, And thou hast known that I [am] Jehovah.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying, 'Son of man,
The house of Israel hath been to Me for dross, All of them [are] brass, and tin, and iron, and lead, In the midst of a furnace — dross hath silver been,
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Because of your all becoming dross, Therefore, lo, I am gathering you unto the midst of Jerusalem,
A gathering of silver, and brass, and iron, and lead, and tin, Unto the midst of a furnace — to blow on it fire, to melt it, So do I gather in Mine anger and in My fury, And I have let rest, and have melted you.
And I have heaped you up, And blown on you in the fire of My wrath, And ye have been melted in its midst.
As the melting of silver in the midst of a furnace, So are ye melted in its midst, And ye have known that I, Jehovah, I have poured out My fury upon you.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying:
'Son of man, say to it, Thou [art] a land, It [is] not cleansed nor rained on in a day of indignation.
A conspiracy of its prophets [is] in its midst, as a roaring lion tearing prey; The soul they have devoured, Wealth and glory they have taken, Its widows have multiplied in its midst.
Its priests have wronged My law, And they pollute My holy things, Between holy and common they have not made separation, And between the unclean and the clean they have not made known, And from my sabbaths they have hidden their eyes, And I am pierced in their midst.
Its princes in its midst [are] as wolves, Tearing prey, to shed blood, to destroy souls, For the sake of gaining dishonest gain.
And its prophets have daubed for them with chalk, Seeing a vain thing, and divining for them a lie, Saying, 'Thus said the Lord Jehovah:' And Jehovah hath not spoken.
The people of the land have used oppression, And have taken plunder violently away, And humble and needy have oppressed, And the sojourner oppressed — without judgment.
And I seek of them a man making a fence, And standing in the breach before Me, In behalf of the land — not to destroy it, And I have not found.
And I pour out on them mine indignation, By fire of My wrath I have consumed them, Their way on their own head I have put, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah!'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying, 'Son of man,
Two women were daughters of one mother,
And they go a-whoring in Egypt, In their youth they have gone a-whoring, There they have bruised their breasts, And there they have dealt with the loves of their virginity.
And their names [are] Aholah the elder, And Aholibah her sister, And they are Mine, and bear sons and daughters. As to their names — Samaria [is] Aholah, And Jerusalem [is] Aholibah.
And go a-whoring doth Aholah under Me, And she doteth on her lovers, On the neighbouring Assyrians,
Clothed with blue — governors and prefects, Desirable young men all of them, Horsemen, riding on horses,
And she giveth her whoredoms on them, The choice of the sons of Asshur, All of them — even all on whom she doted, By all their idols she hath been defiled.
And her whoredoms out of Egypt she hath not forsaken, For with her they lay in her youth, And they dealt with the loves of her virginity, And they pour out their whoredoms on her.
Therefore I have given her into the hand of her lovers, Into the hand of sons of Asshur on whom she doted.
They have uncovered her nakedness, Her sons and her daughters they have taken, And her by sword they have slain, And she is a name for women, And judgments they have done with her.
And see doth her sister Aholibah, And she maketh her doting love more corrupt than she, And her whoredoms than the whoredoms of her sister.
On sons of Asshur she hath doted, Governors and prefects, Neighbouring ones — clothed in perfection, Horsemen, riding on horses, Desirable young men all of them.
And I see that she hath been defiled, One way [is] to them both.
And she doth add unto her whoredoms, And she seeth graved men on the wall, Pictures of Chaldeans, graved with red lead,
Girded with a girdle on their loins, Dyed attire spread out on their heads, The appearance of rulers — all of them, The likeness of sons of Babylon, Chaldea is the land of their birth.
And she doteth on them at the sight of her eyes, And sendeth messengers to them, to Chaldea.
And come in unto her do sons of Babylon, To the bed of loves, And they defile her with their whoredoms, And she is defiled with them, And her soul is alienated from them.
And she revealeth her whoredoms, And she revealeth her nakedness, And alienated is My soul from off her, As alienated was My soul from off her sister.
And she multiplieth her whoredoms, To remember the days of her youth, When she went a-whoring in the land of Egypt.
And she doteth on their paramours, Whose flesh [is] the flesh of asses, And the issue of horses — their issue.
Thou lookest after the wickedness of thy youth, In dealing out of Egypt thy loves, For the sake of the breasts of thy youth.
Therefore, O Aholibah, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I am stirring up thy lovers against thee, From whom thy soul hath been alienated, And have brought them in against thee from round about.
Sons of Babylon, and of all Chaldea, Pekod, and Shoa, and Koa, All the sons of Asshur with them, Desirable young men, governors and prefects, All of them — rulers and proclaimed ones, Riding on horses, all of them.
And they have come in against thee, With arms, rider, and wheel, And with an assembly of peoples; Target, and shield, and helmet, They do set against thee round about, And I have set before them judgment, They have judged thee in their Judgments.
And I have set My jealousy against thee, And they have dealt with thee in fury, Thy nose and thine ears they turn aside, And thy posterity by sword falleth, They, thy sons and thy daughters do take away, And thy posterity is devoured by fire.
And they have stripped thee of thy garments, And have taken thy beauteous jewels.
And I have caused thy wickedness to cease from thee, And thy whoredoms out of the land of Egypt, And thou liftest not up thine eyes unto them, And Egypt thou dost not remember again.
For thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I am giving thee into a hand that thou hast hated, Into a hand from which thou wast alienated.
And they have dealt with thee in hatred, And they have taken all thy labour, And they have left thee naked and bare, And revealed hath been the nakedness of thy whoredoms, And the wickedness of thy whoredoms.
To do these things to thee, In thy going a-whoring after nations, Because thou hast been defiled with their idols,
In the way of thy sister thou hast walked, And I have given her cup into thy hand.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: The cup of thy sister thou dost drink, The deep and the wide one, (Thou art for laughter and for scorn,) Abundant to contain.
With drunkenness and sorrow thou art filled, A cup of astonishment and desolation, The cup of thy sister Samaria.
And thou hast drunk it, and hast drained [it], And its earthen ware thou dost gnaw, And thine own breasts thou pluckest off, For I have spoken, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah,
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Because thou hast forgotten Me, And thou dost cast Me behind thy back, Even thou also bear thy wickedness and thy whoredoms.'
And Jehovah saith unto me, 'Son of man, Dost thou judge Aholah and Aholibah? Declare then to them their abominations.
For they have committed adultery, And blood [is] in their hands, With their idols they committed adultery, And also their sons whom they bore to Me, They caused to pass over to them for food.
Again, this they have done to Me, They defiled My sanctuary in that day, And My sabbaths they have polluted.
And in their slaughtering their sons to their idols They also come in unto My sanctuary in that day to pollute it, And lo, thus they have done in the midst of My house,
And also that they send to men coming from afar, Unto whom a messenger is sent, And lo, they have come in for whom thou hast washed, Painted thine eyes, and put on adornment.
And thou hast sat on a couch of honour, And a table arrayed before it, And My perfume and My oil placed on it.
And the voice of a multitude at ease [is] with her, And unto men of the common people are brought in Sabeans from the wilderness, And they put bracelets on their hands, And a beauteous crown on their heads.
And I say of the worn-out one in adulteries, Now they commit her whoredoms — she also!
And they come in unto her, As the coming in unto a whorish woman, So they have come in unto Aholah, And unto Aholibah — the wicked women.
As to righteous men, they judge them with the judgment of adulteresses, And the judgment of women shedding blood, For they [are] adulteresses, And blood [is] in their hands.
For thus said the Lord Jehovah: Bring up against them an assembly, And give them to trembling and to spoiling.
And they have cast at them the stone of the assembly, And cut them with their swords, Their sons and their daughters they do slay, And their houses with fire they burn.
And I have caused wickedness to cease from the land, And instructed have been all the women, And they do not according to your wickedness.
And they have put your wickedness on you, And the sins of your idols ye bear, And ye have known that I [am] the Lord Jehovah!
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, in the ninth year, in the tenth month, in the tenth of the month, saying,
'Son of man, write for thee the name of the day — this self-same day leaned hath the king of Babylon toward Jerusalem in this self-same day —
and use unto the rebellious house a simile, and thou hast said unto them: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: To set on the pot, to set [it] on, and also to pour into it water,
To gather its pieces unto it, every good piece, Thigh and shoulder, the choice of the bones to fill in.
The choice of the flock to take, And also to pile of the bones under it, Boil it thoroughly, yea, cook its bones in its midst.
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Woe [to] the city of blood, A pot whose scum [is] in it, And its scum hath not come out of it, By piece of it, by piece of it bring it out, Not fallen on it hath a lot.
For her blood in her midst hath been, On a clear place of a rock she hath set it, She hath not poured it on the earth, To cover it over with dust.
To cause fury to come up to take vengeance, I have put her blood on a clear place of a rock — not to be covered.
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Woe [to] the city of blood, yea, I — I make great the pile.
Make abundant the wood, Kindle the fire, consume the flesh, And make the compound, And let the bones be burnt.
And cause it to stand on its coals empty, So that its brass is hot and burning, Melted hath been in its midst its uncleanness, Consumed is its scum.
[With] sorrows she hath wearied herself, And the abundance of her scum goeth not out of her, In the fire [is] her scum.
In thine uncleanness [is] wickedness, Because I have cleansed thee, And thou hast not been cleansed, From thine uncleanness thou art not cleansed again, Till I have caused My fury to rest on thee.
I, Jehovah, hath spoken, It hath come, and I have done [it], I do not free, nor do I spare, nor do I repent, According to thy ways, and according to thine acts, they have judged thee, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Son of man, lo, I am taking from thee the desire of thine eyes by a stroke, and thou dost not mourn, nor weep, nor let thy tear come.
Cease to groan, [for] the dead thou dost make no mourning, thy bonnet bind on thee, and thy shoes thou dost put on thy feet, and thou dost not cover over the upper lip, and bread of men thou dost not eat.'
And I speak unto the people in the morning, and my wife dieth in the evening, and I do in the morning as I have been commanded.
And the people say unto me, 'Dost thou not declare to us what these [are] to us, that thou art doing?'
And I say unto them, 'A word of Jehovah hath been unto me, saying:
Say to the house of Israel: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I am polluting My sanctuary, The excellency of your strength, The desire of your eyes, and the pitied of your soul, And your sons and your daughters whom ye have left, by sword they do fall.
And ye have done as I have done, On the upper lip ye are not covered, And bread of men ye do not eat.
And your bonnets [are] on your heads, And your shoes [are] on your feet, Ye do not mourn nor do ye weep, And ye have wasted away for your iniquities, And ye have howled one unto another.
And Ezekiel hath been to you for a type, According to all that he hath done ye do; In its coming in — ye have known that I [am] the Lord Jehovah.
And thou, son of man, Is it not in the day of My taking from them their strength, The joy of their beauty, the desire of their eyes, And the song of their soul, Their sons and their daughters?
In that day come doth the escaped one to thee. To cause the ears to hear.
In that day opened is thy mouth with the escaped, And thou speakest, and art not silent any more, And thou hast been to them for a type. And they have known that I [am] Jehovah.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Son of man, set thy face unto the sons of Ammon, and prophesy against them;
and thou hast said to the sons of Ammon: Hear ye a word of the Lord Jehovah: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Because of thy saying, Aha, to My sanctuary, Because it hath been polluted, And unto the ground of Israel, Because it hath been desolate, And unto the house of Judah, Because they have gone into a removal:
Therefore, lo, I am giving thee to sons of the east for a possession, And they set their towers in thee, And have placed in thee their tabernacles. They eat thy fruit, and they drink thy milk,
And I have given Rabbah for a habitation of camels, And the sons of Ammon for the crouching of a flock, And ye have known that I [am] Jehovah.
For thus said the Lord Jehovah: Because of thy clapping the hand, And of thy stamping with the foot, And thou rejoicest with all thy despite in soul Against the ground of Israel,
Therefore, lo, I — I have stretched out My hand against thee, And have given thee for a portion to nations, And I have cut thee off from the peoples, And caused thee to perish from the lands; I destroy thee, and thou hast known that I [am] Jehovah.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Because of the saying of Moab and Seir: Lo, as all the nations [is] the house of Judah;
Therefore, lo, I am opening the shoulder of Moab — From the cities — from his cities — from his frontier, The beauty of the land, Beth-Jeshimoth, Baal-Meon, and Kiriathaim,
To the sons of the east, with the sons of Ammon, And I have given it for a possession, So that the sons of Ammon are not remembered among nations.
And in Moab I do judgments, And they have known that I [am] Jehovah.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Because of the doings of Edom, In taking vengeance on the house of Judah, Yea, they are very guilty, And they have taken vengeance on them.
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: I have stretched out My hand against Edom, And I have cut off from it man and beast, And given it up — a waste, from Teman even to Dedan, By sword they do fall.
And I have given My vengeance on Edom, By the hand of My people Israel, And they have done in Edom, According to My anger, and according to My fury, And they have known My vengeance, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Because of the doings of the Philistines in vengeance, And they take vengeance with despite in soul, To destroy — the enmity age-during!
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I am stretching out My hand against the Philistines, And I have cut off the Cherethim, And destroyed the remnant of the haven of the sea,
And done upon them great vengeance with furious reproofs, And they have known that I [am] Jehovah, In My giving out My vengeance on them!
And it cometh to pass, in the eleventh year, in the first of the month, there hath been a word of Jehovah unto me, saying: 'Son of man,
Because that Tyre hath said of Jerusalem: Aha, she hath been broken, the doors of the peoples, She hath turned round unto me, I am filled — she hath been laid waste,
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I [am] against thee, O Tyre, And have caused to come up against thee many nations, As the sea causeth its billows to come up.
And they have destroyed the walls of Tyre, And they have broken down her towers, And I have scraped her dust from her, And made her for a clear place of a rock.
A spreading place of nets she is in the midst of the sea, For I — I have spoken — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, And she hath been for a spoil to nations.
And her daughters who [are] in the field, by sword they are slain, And they have known that I [am] Jehovah,
For, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I am bringing in unto Tyre Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, From the north — a king of kings, With horse, and with chariot, and with horsemen, Even an assembly, and a numerous people.
Thy daughters in the field by sword he slayeth, And he hath made against thee a fort, And hath poured out against thee a mount, And hath raised against thee a buckler.
And a battering-ram before him he placeth against thy walls, And thy towers he breaketh by his weapons.
From the abundance of his horses cover thee doth their dust, From the noise of horseman, and wheel, and rider, Shake do thy walls, in his coming in to thy gates, As the coming into a city broken-up.
With hoofs of his horses he treadeth all thine out-places, Thy people by sword he doth slay, And the pillars of thy strength to the earth come down.
And they have spoiled thy wealth, And they have plundered thy merchandise, And they have thrown down thy walls, And thy desirable houses they break down, And thy stones, and thy wood, and thy dust, In the midst of the waters they place.
And I have caused the noise of thy songs to cease, And the voice of thy harps is heard no more.
And I have given thee up for a clear place of a rock, A spreading-place of nets thou art, Thou art not built up any more, For I, Jehovah, I have spoken, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah to Tyre: Do not — from the noise of thy fall, In the groaning of the wounded, In the slaying of the slaughter in thy midst, The isles shake?
And come down from off their thrones have all princes of the sea, And they have turned aside their robes, And their embroidered garments strip off, Trembling they put on, on the earth they sit, And they have trembled every moment, And they have been astonished at thee,
And have lifted up for thee a lamentation, And said to thee: How hast thou perished, That art inhabited from the seas, The praised city, that was strong in the sea, She and her inhabitants, Who put their terror on all her inhabitants!
Now they tremble, is it not the day of thy fall? Troubled have been the isles that [are] in the sea, at thine outgoing.
For thus said the Lord Jehovah: In my making thee a city wasted, Like cities that have not been inhabited, In bringing up against thee the deep, Then covered thee have the great waters.
And I have caused thee to go down, With those going down to the pit, Unto the people of old, And I have caused thee to dwell in the land, The lower parts — in wastes of old, With those going down to the pit, So that thou art not inhabited, And I have given beauty in the land of the living.
Wastes I do make thee, and thou art not, And thou art sought, and art not found any more — to the age, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah!'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying:
'And thou, son of man, lift up concerning Tyre a lamentation, and thou hast said to Tyre:
O dweller on the entrances of the sea, Merchant of the peoples unto many isles, Thus said the Lord Jehovah: O Tyre, thou — thou hast said: I [am] the perfection of beauty.
In the heart of the seas [are] thy borders, Thy builders have perfected thy beauty.
Of firs of Senir they have built to thee all thy double-boarded ships, Of cedars of Lebanon they have taken to make a mast for thee,
Of oaks of Bashan they made thine oars, Thy bench they have made of ivory, A branch of Ashurim from isles of Chittim.
Of fine linen with embroidery from Egypt hath been thy sail, To be to thee for an ensign, Of blue and purple from isles of Elishah hath been thy covering.
Inhabitants of Zidon and Arvad have been rowers to thee, Thy wise men, O Tyre, have been in thee, They [are] thy pilots.
Elders of Gebal and its wise men have been in thee, Strengthening thy breach; All ships of the sea and their mariners, Have been in thee, to trade [with] thy merchandise.
Persian and Lud and Phut Have been in thy forces — thy men of war. Shield and helmet they hung up in thee, They — they have given out thine honour.
The sons of Arvad, and thy force, [Are] on thy walls round about, And short swordsmen in thy towers have been, Their shields they have hung up on thy walls round about, They — they have perfected thy beauty.
Tarshish [is] thy merchant, Because of the abundance of all wealth, For silver, iron, tin, and lead, They have given out thy remnants.
Javan, Tubal, and Meshech — they [are] thy merchants, For persons of men, and vessels of brass, They have given out thy merchandise.
They of the house of Togarmah, [For] horses, and riding steeds, and mules, They have given out thy remnants.
Sons of Dedan [are] thy merchants, Many isles [are] the mart of thy hand, Horns of ivory and ebony they sent back thy reward.
Aram [is] thy merchant, Because of the abundance of thy works, For emerald, purple, and embroidery, And fine linen, and coral, and agate, They have given out thy remnants.
Judah and the land of Israel — they [are] thy merchants, For wheat of Minnith, and Pannag, And honey, and oil, and balm, They have given out thy merchandise.
Damascus [is] thy merchant, For the abundance of thy works, Because of the abundance of all wealth, For wine of Helbon, and white wool.
Vedan and Javan go about with thy remnants, They have given shining iron, cassia, and cane, In thy merchandise it hath been.
Dedan [is] thy merchant, For clothes of freedom for riding.
Arabia, and all princes of Kedar, They [are] the traders of thy hand, For lambs, and rams, and he-goats, In these thy merchants.
Merchants of Sheba and Raamah — they [are] thy merchants, For the chief of all spices, And for every precious stone, and gold, They have given out thy remnants.
Haran, and Canneh, and Eden, merchants of Sheba, Asshur — Chilmad — [are] thy merchants,
They [are] thy merchants for perfect things, For wrappings of blue, and embroidery, And for treasuries of rich apparel, With cords bound and girded, for thy merchandise,
Ships of Tarshish [are] thy double walls of thy merchandise, And thou art filled and honoured greatly, In the heart of the seas.
Into great waters have they brought thee, Those rowing thee, The east wind hath broken thee in the heart of the seas.
Thy wealth and thy remnants, Thy merchandise, thy mariners, And thy pilots, strengtheners of thy breach, And the traders of thy merchandise, And all thy men of war, who [are] in thee, And in all thine assembly that [is] in thy midst, Fall into the heart of the seas in the day of thy fall,
At the voice of the cry of thy pilots shake do the suburbs.
And come down from their ships have all handling an oar, Mariners, all the pilots of the sea, on the land they stand,
And have sounded for thee with their voice, And cry bitterly, and cause dust to go up on their heads, In ashes they do roll themselves.
And they have made for thee baldness, And they have girded on sackcloth, And they have wept for thee, In bitterness of soul — a bitter mourning.
And lifted up for thee have their sons a lamentation, And they have lamented over thee, who [is] as Tyre? As the cut-off one in the midst of the sea?
With the outgoing of thy remnants from the seas, Thou hast filled many peoples, With the abundance of thy riches, and thy merchandise, Thou hast made rich things of earth.
The time of [thy] being broken by the seas in the depths of the waters, Thy merchandise and all thy assembly in thy midst have fallen.
All inhabitants of the isles have been astonished at thee, And their kings have been sore afraid, They have been troubled in countenance.
Merchants among the peoples have shrieked for thee, Wastes thou hast been, and thou art not — to the age!'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying:
'Son of man, say to the leader of Tyre: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Because thy heart hath been high, And thou dost say: A god I [am], The habitation of God I have inhabited, In the heart of the seas, And thou [art] man, and not God, And thou givest out thy heart as the heart of God,
Lo, thou [art] wiser than Daniel, No hidden thing have they concealed from thee.
By thy wisdom and by thine understanding Thou hast made for thee wealth, And makest gold and silver in thy treasuries.
By the abundance of thy wisdom, Through thy merchandise, Thou hast multiplied thy wealth, And high is thy heart through thy wealth.
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Because of thy giving out thy heart as the heart of God,
Therefore, lo, I am bringing in against thee strangers, The terrible of the nations, And they have drawn out their swords Against the beauty of thy wisdom, And they have pierced thy brightness.
To destruction they bring thee down, Thou diest by the deaths of the wounded, in the heart of the seas.
Dost thou really say, 'I [am] God,' Before him who is slaying thee? And thou [art] man, and not God, In the hand of him who is piercing thee.
The deaths of the uncircumcised thou diest, By the hand of strangers, for I have spoken, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying:
'Son of man, lift up a lamentation for the king of Tyre, And thou hast said to him: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Thou art sealing up a measurement, Full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty.
In Eden, the garden of God, thou hast been, Every precious stone thy covering, Ruby, topaz, and diamond, beryl, onyx, and jasper, Sapphire, emerald, and carbuncle, and gold, The workmanship of thy tabrets, and of thy pipes, In thee in the day of thy being produced, have been prepared.
Thou [art] an anointed cherub who is covering, And I have set thee in the holy mount, God thou hast been, In the midst of stones of fire thou hast walked up and down.
Perfect [art] thou in thy ways, From the day of thy being produced, Till perversity hath been found in thee.
By the abundance of thy merchandise They have filled thy midst with violence, And thou dost sin, And I thrust thee from the mount of God, And I destroy thee, O covering cherub, From the midst of the stones of fire.
High hath been thy heart, because of thy beauty, Thou hast corrupted thy wisdom because of thy brightness, On the earth I have cast thee, Before kings I have set thee, to look on thee,
From the abundance of thy iniquity, By the perversity of thy traffic, Thou hast polluted thy sanctuaries, And I bring forth fire from thy midst, It hath devoured thee, And I make thee become ashes on the earth, Before the eyes of all beholding thee.
All knowing thee among the peoples Have been astonished at thee, Wastes thou hast been, and thou art not — to the age.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Son of man, set thy face unto Zidon, and prophesy concerning it;
and thou hast said: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I [am] against thee, O Zidon, And I have been honoured in thy midst, And they have known that I [am] Jehovah, In My doing in her judgments, And I have been sanctified in her.
And I have sent into her pestilence, And blood into her out-places, The wounded hath been judged in her midst, By the sword upon her round about, And they have known that I [am] Jehovah.
And there is no more to the house of Israel A pricking brier, and paining thorn, Of all round about them — despising them, And they have known that I [am] the Lord Jehovah.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: In My gathering the house of Israel, Out of the peoples among whom they were scattered, I have been sanctified in them, Before the eyes of the nations, And they have dwelt on their ground, That I gave to My servant, to Jacob,
And they have dwelt on it confidently, And builded houses, and planted vineyards, And dwelt confidently — in My doing judgments, On all those despising them round about, And they have known that I, Jehovah, [am] their God!'
In the tenth year, in the tenth [month], in the twelfth of the month, hath a word of Jehovah been unto me, saying,
'Son of man, set thy face against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and prophesy concerning him, and concerning Egypt — all of it.
Speak, and thou hast said: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I [am] against thee, Pharaoh king of Egypt! The great dragon that is crouching in the midst of his floods, Who hath said, My flood [is] my own, And I — I have made it [for] myself.
And I have put hooks in thy jaws, And I have caused the fish of thy floods to cleave to thy scales, And I have caused thee to come up from the midst of thy floods, And every fish of thy floods to thy scales doth cleave.
And I have left thee in the wilderness, Thou and every fish of thy floods, On the face of the field thou dost fall, Thou art not gathered nor assembled, To the beast of the earth and to the fowl of the heavens I have given thee for food.
And known have all inhabitants of Egypt That I [am] Jehovah, Because of their being a staff of reed to the house of Israel.
In their taking hold of thee by thy hand, — thou art crushed, And hast rent to them all the shoulder, And in their leaning on thee thou art broken, And hast caused all their thighs to stand.
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I am bringing in against thee a sword, And have cut off from thee man and beast.
And the land of Egypt hath been for a desolation and a waste, And they have known that I [am] Jehovah. Because he said: The flood [is] mine, and I made [it].
Therefore, lo, I [am] against thee, and against thy floods, And have given the land of Egypt for wastes, A waste, a desolation, from Migdol to Syene, And unto the border of Cush.
Not pass over into it doth a foot of man, Yea, the foot of beast doth not pass into it, Nor is it inhabited forty years.
And I have made the land of Egypt a desolation, In the midst of desolate lands, And its cities, in the midst of waste cities, Are a desolation forty years, And I have scattered the Egyptians among nations, And I have dispersed them through lands.
But thus said the Lord Jehovah: At the end of forty years I gather the Egyptians Out of the peoples whither they have been scattered,
And I have turned back [to] the captivity of Egypt, And I have brought them back [To] the land of Pathros, to the land of their birth, And they have been there a low kingdom.
Of the kingdoms it is lowest, And it lifteth not up itself any more above the nations, And I have made them few, So as not to rule among nations.
And it is no more to the house of Israel for a confidence, Bringing iniquity to remembrance, By their turning after them, And they have known that I [am] the Lord Jehovah.'
And it cometh to pass, in the twenty and seventh year, in the first [month], in the first of the month, hath a word of Jehovah been unto me, saying:
'Son of man, Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, Hath caused his force to serve a great service against Tyre, Every head [is] bald — every shoulder peeled, And reward he had none, nor his force, out of Tyre, For the service that he served against it.
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah, Lo, I am giving to Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon the land of Egypt, And he hath taken away its store, And hath taken its spoil, and taken its prey, And it hath been a reward to his force.
His wage for which he laboured I have given to him, The land of Egypt — in that they wrought for Me, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
In that day I cause to shoot up a horn to the house of Israel, And to thee I give an opening of the mouth in their midst, And they have known that I [am] Jehovah!'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying:
'Son of man, prophesy, and thou hast said: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Howl ye, ha! for the day!
For near [is] a day, near [is] a day to Jehovah! A day of clouds, the time of nations it is.
And come in hath a sword to Egypt, And there hath been great pain in Cush, In the falling of the wounded in Egypt, And they have taken its store, And broken down have been its foundations.
Cush, and Phut, and Lud, and all the mixture, and Chub, And the sons of the land of the covenant with them by sword do fall,
Thus said Jehovah: And — fallen have supporters of Egypt, And come down hath the arrogance of her strength, From Migdol to Syene, by sword they fall in her, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
And they have been desolated in the midst of desolate lands, And its cities are in the midst of wasted cities.
And they have known that I [am] Jehovah, In My giving fire against Egypt, And broken have been all her helpers.
In that day go forth do messengers from before Me in ships, To trouble confident Cush, And there hath been great pain among them, As the day of Egypt, for lo, it hath come.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: I have caused the multitude of Egypt to cease, By the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon,
He and his people with him — the terrible of nations, Are brought in to destroy the land, And they have drawn their swords against Egypt, And have filled the land [with] the wounded.
And I have made floods a dry place, And I have sold the land into the hand of evil doers, And I have made desolate the land, And its fulness, by the hand of strangers, I, Jehovah, have spoken.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: And — I have destroyed idols, And caused vain things to cease from Noph, And a prince of the land of Egypt there is no more, And I give fear in the land of Egypt.
And I have made Pathros desolate, And I have given fire against Zoan, And I have done judgments in No,
And I have poured out My fury on Sin, the stronghold of Egypt, And I have cut off the multitude of No.
And I have given fire against Egypt, Greatly pained is Sin, and No is to be rent, And Noph hath daily distresses.
The youths of Aven and Pi-Beseth by sword do fall, And these into captivity do go.
And in Tehaphnehes hath the day been dark, In My breaking there the yokes of Egypt, And ceased in her hath the excellency of her strength, She — a cloud doth cover her, And her daughters into captivity do go.
And I have done judgments in Egypt, And they have known that I [am] Jehovah.'
And it cometh to pass, in the eleventh year, in the first [month], in the seventh of the month, hath a word of Jehovah been unto me, saying: 'Son of man,
The arm of Pharaoh, king of Egypt, I have broken, And lo, it hath not been bound up to give healing, To put a bandage to bind it, To strengthen it — to lay hold on the sword.
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I [am] against Pharaoh, king of Egypt, And I have broken his arms, The strong one and the broken one, And have caused the sword to fall out of his hand,
And scattered the Egyptians among nations, And I have spread them through lands,
And strengthened the arms of the king of Babylon, And I have given My sword into his hand, And I have broken the arms of Pharaoh, And he hath groaned the groans of a pierced one — before him.
And I have strengthened the arms of the king of Babylon, And the arms of Pharaoh do fall down, And they have known that I [am] Jehovah, In My giving My sword into the hand of the king of Babylon, And he hath stretched it out toward the land of Egypt.
And I have scattered the Egyptians among nations, And I have spread them through lands, And they have known that I [am] Jehovah!'
And it cometh to pass, in the eleventh year, in the third [month], in the first of the month, hath a word of Jehovah been unto me, saying:
'Son of man, say unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, and unto his multitude: To whom hast thou been like in thy greatness?
Lo, Asshur, a cedar in Lebanon, Fair in branch, and shading bough, and high in stature, And between thickets hath its foliage been.
Waters have made it great, The deep hath exalted him with its flowings, Going round about its planting, And its conduits it hath sent forth unto all trees of the field.
Therefore higher hath been his stature than all trees of the field, And multiplied are his boughs, and long are his branches, Because of many waters in his shooting forth,
In his boughs made a nest hath every fowl of the heavens, And under his branches brought forth hath every beast of the field, And in his shade dwell do all great nations.
And he is fair in his greatness, In the length of his thin shoots, For his root hath been by great waters.
Cedars have not hid him in the garden of God, Firs have not been like unto his boughs, And chesnut-trees have not been as his branches, No tree in the garden of God hath been like unto him in his beauty,
Fair I have made him in the multitude of his thin shoots, And envy him do all trees of Eden that [are] in the garden of God.
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Because that thou hast been high in stature, And he yieldeth his foliage between thickets, And high is his heart in his haughtiness,
I give him into the hand of a god of nations, He dealeth sorely with him, In his wickedness I have cast him out.
And cut him off do strangers, The terrible of nations, and they leave him, On the mountains and in all valleys have his thin shoots fallen, And broken are his boughs at all streams of the land, And go down from his shade do all peoples of the land, and they leave him.
On his ruin dwell do all fowls of the heavens, And on his boughs have been all the beasts of the field,
In order that none of the trees of the waters May become haughty because of their stature, Nor give their foliage between thickets, Nor any drinking waters stand up unto them in their haughtiness, For all of them are given up to death, Unto the earth — the lower part, In the midst of the sons of men, Unto those going down to the pit.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: In the day of his going down to sheol I have caused mourning, I have covered for him the deep, and diminish its flowings, And restrained are many waters, And I make Lebanon black for him, And all trees of the field have been covered for him.
From the sound of his fall I have caused nations to shake, In My causing him to go down to sheol, With those going down to the pit, And comforted in the earth — the lower part, are all trees of Eden, The choice and the good of Lebanon, All drinking waters.
Also they with him have gone down to sheol, Unto the pierced of the sword, And — his arm — they dwelt in his shade in the midst of nations.
Unto whom hast thou been thus like, In honour and in greatness among the trees of Eden, And thou hast been brought down with the trees of Eden, Unto the earth — the lower part, In the midst of the uncircumcised thou liest, With the pierced of the sword? It [is] Pharaoh, and all his multitude, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah!'
And it cometh to pass, in the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, in the first of the month, hath a word of Jehovah been unto me, saying,
'Son of man, lift up a lamentation for Pharaoh king of Egypt, and thou hast said unto him: A young lion of nations thou hast been like, And thou [art] as a dragon in the seas, And thou comest forth with thy flowings, And dost trouble the waters with thy feet, And thou dost foul their flowings.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: And — I have spread out for thee My net, With an assembly of many peoples, And they have brought thee up in My net.
And I have left thee in the land, On the face of the field I do cast thee out, And have caused to dwell upon thee every fowl of the heavens, And have satisfied out of thee the beasts of the whole earth.
And I have put thy flesh on the mountains, And filled the valleys [with] thy hugeness,
And watered the land with thy flowing, From thy blood — unto the mountains, And streams are filled from thee.
And in quenching thee I have covered the heavens, And have made black their stars, The sun with a cloud I do cover, And the moon causeth not its light to shine.
All luminaries of light in the heavens, I make black over thee, And I have given darkness over thy land, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah,
And I have vexed the heart of many peoples, In My bringing in thy destruction among nations, Unto lands that thou hast not known.
And I have made many peoples astonished at thee, And their kings are afraid at thee with trembling, In My brandishing My sword before their faces, And they have trembled every moment, Each for his life — in the day of thy fall.
For thus said the Lord Jehovah: A sword of the king of Babylon entereth thee,
By swords of the mighty I cause thy multitude to fall, The terrible of nations — all of them, And they have spoiled the excellency of Egypt, And destroyed hath been all her multitude.
And I have destroyed all her beasts, From beside many waters, And trouble them not doth a foot of man any more, Yea, the hoofs of beasts trouble them not.
Then do I cause their waters to sink, And their rivers as oil I cause to go, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
In My making the land of Egypt a desolation, And desolated hath been the land of its fulness, In My smiting all the inhabitants in it, And they have known that I [am] Jehovah.
A lamentation it [is], and they have lamented her, Daughters of the nations do lament her, For Egypt, and for all her multitude, they lament her, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.'
And it cometh to pass, in the twelfth year, in the fifteenth of the month, hath a word of Jehovah been unto me, saying,
'Son of man, Wail for the multitude of Egypt, And cause it to go down, It — and the daughters of honourable nations, Unto the earth — the lower parts, With those going down to the pit.
Than whom hast thou been more pleasant? Go down, and be laid with the uncircumcised.
In the midst of the pierced of the sword they fall, [To] the sword she hath been given, They drew her out, and all her multitude.
Speak to him do the gods of the mighty out of the midst of sheol, With his helpers — they have gone down, They have lain with the uncircumcised, The pierced of the sword.
There [is] Asshur, and all her assembly, Round about him [are] his graves, All of them [are] wounded, who are falling by sword,
Whose graves are appointed in the sides of the pit, And her assembly is round about her grave, All of them wounded, falling by sword, Because they gave terror in the land of the living.
There [is] Elam, and all her multitude, Round about [is] her grave, All of them wounded, who are falling by sword, Who have gone down uncircumcised unto the earth — the lower parts, Because they gave their terror in the land of the living, And they bear their shame with those going down to the pit.
In the midst of the wounded they have appointed a bed for her with all her multitude, Round about him [are] her graves, All of them uncircumcised, pierced of the sword, For their terror was given in the land of the living, And they bear their shame with those going down to the pit, In the midst of the pierced he hath been put.
There [is] Meshech, Tubal, and all her multitude, Round about him [are] her graves, All of them uncircumcised, pierced of the sword, For they gave their terror in the land of the living,
And they lie not with the mighty, Who are falling of the uncircumcised, Who have gone down to sheol with their weapons of war, And they put their swords under their heads, And their iniquities are on their bones, For the terror of the mighty [is] in the land of the living.
And thou, in the midst of the uncircumcised art broken, And dost lie with the pierced of the sword.
There [is] Edom, her kings, and all her princes, Who have been given up in their might, With the pierced of the sword, They with the uncircumcised do lie, And with those going down to the pit.
There [are] princes of the north, All of them, and every Zidonian, Who have gone down with the pierced in their terror, Of their might they are ashamed, And they lie uncircumcised with the pierced of the sword, And they bear their shame with those going down to the pit.
Then doth Pharaoh see, And he hath been comforted for all his multitude, The pierced of the sword — Pharaoh and all his force, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
For I have given his terror in the land of the living, And he hath been laid down in the midst of the uncircumcised, With the pierced of the sword — Pharaoh, and all his multitude, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah!'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Son of man, speak unto the sons of thy people, and thou hast said unto them: A land — when I bring in against it a sword, And the people of the land have taken one man out of their borders, And made him to them for a watchman.
And he hath seen the sword coming against the land, And hath blown with a trumpet, and hath warned the people,
And the hearer hath heard the voice of the trumpet, and he hath not taken warning, And come in doth the sword, and taketh him away, His blood is on his head.
The voice of the trumpet he heard, And he hath not taken warning, his blood is on him, And he who took warning his soul hath delivered.
And the watchman, when he seeth the sword coming in, And he hath not blown with a trumpet, And the people hath not been warned, And come in doth a sword, And taketh away of them — a soul, He in his iniquity is taken away, And his blood from the hand of the watchman I require.
And thou, son of man, A watchman I gave thee to the house of Israel, And thou hast heard from My mouth a word, And thou hast warned them from Me.
In My saying to the wicked, O wicked one — thou dost surely die, And thou hast not spoken to warn the wicked from his way, He — the wicked — in his iniquity doth die, And his blood from thy hand I require.
And thou, when thou hast warned the wicked of his way, to turn back from it, And he hath not turned back from his way, He in his iniquity doth die, And thou thy soul hast delivered.
And thou, son of man, say unto the house of Israel: Rightly ye have spoken, saying: Surely our transgressions and our sins [are] on us, And in them we are wasting away, How, then, do we live?
Say unto them, I live — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, I delight not in the death of the wicked, But — in the turning of the wicked from his way, And he hath lived, Turn back, turn back, from your evil ways, Yea, why do ye die, O house of Israel?
And thou, son of man, say unto the sons of thy people: The righteousness of the righteous doth not deliver him in the day of his transgression, And the wickedness of the wicked, He doth not stumble for it in the day of his turning from his wickedness, And the righteous is not able to live in it in the day of his sinning.
In My saying of the righteous: He surely liveth, And — he hath trusted on his righteousness, And he hath done perversity, All his righteous acts are not remembered, And for his perversity that he hath done, For it he doth die.
And in My saying to the wicked: Thou surely diest, And — he hath turned back from his sin, And hath done judgment and righteousness,
(The pledge the wicked restoreth, plunder he repayeth,) In the statutes of life he hath walked, So as not to do perversity, He surely liveth — he doth not die.
None of his sin that he hath sinned is remembered to him, Judgment and righteousness he hath done, He doth surely live.
And the sons of thy people have said: The way of the Lord is not pondered, As to them — their way is not pondered.
In the turning back of the righteous from his righteousness, And he hath done perversity — he dieth for it.
And in the turning back of the wicked from his wickedness, And he hath done judgment and righteousness, by them he liveth.
And ye have said: The way of the Lord is not pondered, Each according to his ways do I judge you, O house of Israel.'
And it cometh to pass, in the twelfth year — in the tenth [month], in the fifth of the month — of our removal, come in unto me doth one who is escaped from Jerusalem, saying, 'The city hath been smitten.'
And the hand of Jehovah hath been unto me in the evening, before the coming in of the escaped one, and He openeth my mouth till the coming in unto me in the morning, and opened is my mouth, and I have not been silent again.
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Son of man, the inhabitants of these wastes on the ground of Israel are speaking, saying: Alone hath been Abraham — and he possesseth the land, and we [are] many — to us hath the land been given for a possession.
Therefore say unto them: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: With the blood ye do eat, And your eyes ye lift up unto your idols, And blood ye shed, and the land ye inherit!
Ye have stood on your sword, Ye have done abomination, Each the wife of his neighbour ye have defiled, And the land ye possess!
Thus dost thou say unto them: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: I live — do not they who [are] in the wastes by the sword fall? And they who [are] on the face of the field, To the beast I have given for food, And they who are in strongholds and in caves by pestilence die.
And I have made the land a desolation and an astonishment, And ceased hath the excellency of its strength, And desolated have been mountains of Israel, Without any one passing through.
And they have known that I [am] Jehovah, In My making the land a desolation and an astonishment, For all their abominations that they have done.
And thou, son of man, the sons of thy people who are speaking about thee, By the walls, and in openings of the houses, Have spoken one with another, each with his brother, Saying: Come in, I pray you, And hear what [is] the word that cometh out from Jehovah.
And they come in unto thee as the coming in of a people, And they sit before thee — My people, And have heard thy words, and they do them not, For doting loves with their mouth they are making, After their dishonest gain their heart is going.
And lo, thou [art] to them as a singer of doting loves, A pleasant voice, and playing well on an instrument, And they have heard thy words, and they are not doing them.
And in its coming in — lo, it hath come, And they have known that a prophet hath been in their midst!'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Son of man, prophesy concerning shepherds of Israel, prophesy, and thou hast said unto them: To the shepherds, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Woe [to] the shepherds of Israel, Who have been feeding themselves! The flock do not the shepherds feed?
The fat ye do eat, and the wool ye put on, The fed one ye slaughter, the flock ye feed not.
The weak ye have not strengthened, And the sick one ye have not healed, And the broken ye have not bound up, And the driven away have not brought back, And the lost ye have not sought, And with might ye have ruled them and with rigour.
And they are scattered from want of a shepherd, And are for food to every beast of the field, Yea, they are scattered.
Go astray do My flock on all the mountains, And on every high hill, And on all the face of the land have My flock been scattered, And there is none inquiring, and none seeking.
Therefore, shepherds, hear a word of Jehovah:
I live — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, If not, because of My flock being for a prey, Yea, My flock is for food to every beast of the field, Because there is no shepherd, And My shepherds have not sought My flock, And the shepherds do feed themselves, And My flock they have not fed.
Therefore, O shepherds, hear a word of Jehovah:
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I [am] against the shepherds, And have required My flock from their hand, And caused them to cease from feeding the flock, And no more do the shepherds feed themselves, And I have delivered My flock from their mouth, And they are not to them for food.
For thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I — even I, have required My flock, And I have sought it out.
As a shepherd's searching of his drove, In the day of his being in the midst of his scattered flock, so I do seek My flock, And have delivered them out of all places, Whither they have been scattered, In a day of cloud and thick darkness.
And brought them out from the peoples, And have gathered them from the lands, And brought them unto their own ground, And have fed them on mountains of Israel, By streams, and by all dwellings of the land.
With good pasture I do feed them, And on mountains of the high place of Israel is their habitation, There do they lie down in a good habitation, And fat pastures they enjoy on mountains of Israel.
I feed My flock, and cause them to lie down, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
The lost I seek, and the driven away bring back, And the broken I bind up, and the sick I strengthen, And the fat and the strong I destroy, I feed it with judgment.
And you, My flock, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I am judging between sheep and sheep, Between rams and he-goats.
Is it a little thing for you — the good pasture ye enjoy, And the remnant of your pasture ye tread down with your feet, And a depth of waters ye do drink, And the remainder with your feet ye trample,
And My flock the trodden thing of your feet consumeth, And the trampled thing of your feet drinketh?
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah to them: Lo, I — even I, have judged between fat sheep and lean sheep.
Because with side and with shoulder ye thrust away, And with your horns push all the diseased, Till ye have scattered them to the out-place,
And I have given safety to My flock, And they are not any more for prey, And I have judged between sheep and sheep.
And have raised up over them one shepherd, And he hath fed them — my servant David, He doth feed them, and he is their shepherd,
And I, Jehovah, I am their God, And My servant David prince in their midst, I, Jehovah, have spoken.
And I have made for them a covenant of peace, And caused evil beasts to cease out of the land, And they have dwelt in a wilderness confidently, And they have slept in forests.
And I have given them, and the suburbs of my hill, a blessing, And caused the shower to come down in its season, Showers of blessing they are.
And given hath the tree of the field its fruit, And the land doth give her increase, And they have been on their land confident, And they have known that I [am] Jehovah, In My breaking the bands of their yoke, And I have delivered them from the hand of those laying service on them.
And they are no more a prey to nations, And the beast of the earth devoureth them not, And they have dwelt confidently, And there is none troubling.
And I have raised for them a plant for renown, And they are no more consumed by hunger in the land, And they bear no more the shame of the nations.
And they have known that I, Jehovah, their God, [am] with them, And they — the house of Israel — My people, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
And ye, My flock, the flock of My pasture, Men ye [are] — I [am] your God, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah!'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying:
'Son of man, set thy face against mount Seir, and prophesy against it,
and thou hast said to it: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I [am] against thee, O mount Seir, And have stretched out My hand against thee, And made thee a desolation and an astonishment.
Thy cities a waste I make, and thou art a desolation, And thou hast known that I [am] Jehovah.
Because of thy having an enmity age-during, And thou dost saw the sons of Israel, By the hands of the sword, In the time of their calamity, In the time of the iniquity of the end:
Therefore, I live — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, Surely for blood I do appoint thee, And blood doth pursue thee, If blood thou hast not hated, Blood also doth pursue thee.
And I have given mount Seir for a desolation and an astonishment, And have cut off from it him who is passing over and him who is returning,
And filled his mountains with his wounded, Thy hills, and thy valleys, and all thy streams, The pierced of the sword fall into them.
Desolations age-during I make thee, And thy cities do not return, And ye have known that I [am] Jehovah.
Because of thy saying: The two nations and the two lands are mine, and we have possessed it, And Jehovah hath been there;
Therefore, I live — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, And I have done according to thine anger, And according to thine envy, With which thou hast wrought, Because of thy hatred against them, And I have been known among them when I judge thee.
And thou hast known that I — Jehovah, I have heard all thy despisings that thou hast spoken Against mountains of Israel, saying: A desolation, to us they were given for food.
And ye magnify yourselves against Me with your mouth, And have made abundant against Me your words, I — I have heard.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: According to the rejoicing of the whole land, A desolation I make of thee.
According to thy joy at the inheritance of the house of Israel because of desolation, So I do to thee — a desolation thou art, O mount Seir, and all Edom — all of it, And they have known that I [am] Jehovah!
And thou, son of man, prophesy unto mountains of Israel, and thou hast said, O mountains of Israel, hear a word of Jehovah.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Because the enemy said against you, Aha, and the high places of old for a possession have been to us,
therefore, prophesy, and thou hast said: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Because, even because, of desolating, And of swallowing you up from round about, For your being a possession to the remnant of the nations, And ye are taken up on the tip of the tongue, And [are] an evil report of the people.
Therefore, O mountains of Israel, Hear a word of the Lord Jehovah: Thus said the Lord Jehovah, to mountains, and to hills, To streams, and to valleys, And to wastes that [are] desolate, And to cities that are forsaken, That have been for a prey, And for a scorn, to the remnant of the nations who [are] round about.
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Have I not, in the fire of My jealousy, Spoken against the remnant of the nations, And against Edom — all of it, Who gave My land to themselves for a possession, With the joy of the whole heart — with despite of soul, For the sake of casting it out for a prey?
Therefore, prophesy concerning the ground of Israel, And thou hast said to mountains, and to hills, To streams, and to valleys, Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I, in My jealousy, and in My fury, I have spoken, Because the shame of nations ye have borne.
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: I — I have lifted up My hand, Do not — the nations who [are] with you from round about — they their own shame bear?
And ye, O mountains of Israel, Your branch ye give out, and your fruits ye bear for My people Israel, For they have drawn near to come.
For, lo, I [am] for you, and have turned to you, And ye have been tilled and sown.
And I have multiplied on you men, All the house of Israel — all of it, And the cities have been inhabited, And the wastes are built.
And I have multiplied on you man and beast, And they have multiplied and been fruitful, And I have caused you to dwell according to your former states, And I have done better than at your beginnings, And ye have known that I [am] Jehovah.
And I have caused man to walk over you, — My people Israel, And they possess thee, and thou hast been to them for an inheritance, And thou dost add no more to bereave them.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Because they are saying to you: A devourer of men [art] thou, And a bereaver of thy nations thou hast been,
Therefore, man thou devourest no more, And thy nations thou causest not to stumble any more, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
And I proclaim not unto thee any more the shame of the nations, And the reproach of peoples thou bearest no more, And thy nations stumble not any more, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'Son of man, The house of Israel are dwelling on their land, And they defile it by their way and by their doings, As the uncleanness of a separated one hath their way been before Me.
And I do pour out My fury upon them For the blood that they shed on the land, And with their idols they have defiled it.
And I scatter them among nations, And they are spread through lands, According to their way, and according to their doings, I have judged them.
And one goeth in unto the nations whither they have gone, And they pollute My holy name by saying to them, The people of Jehovah [are] these, And from His land they have gone forth.
And I have pity on My holy name, That the house of Israel have polluted among nations whither they have gone in.
Therefore, say to the house of Israel, Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Not for your sake am I working, O house of Israel, But — for My holy name, That ye have polluted among nations whither ye have gone in.
And I have sanctified My great name, That is profaned among nations, That ye have polluted in your midst, And known have the nations that I [am] Jehovah, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, In My being sanctified in you before your eyes.
And I have taken you out of the nations, And have gathered you out of all the lands, And I have brought you in unto your land,
And I have sprinkled over you clean water, And ye have been clean; From all your uncleannesses, and from all your idols, I do cleanse you.
And I have given to you a new heart, And a new spirit I give in your midst, And I have turned aside the heart of stone out of your flesh, And I have given to you a heart of flesh.
And My Spirit I give in your midst, And I have done this, so that in My statutes ye walk, And My judgments ye keep, and have done them.
And ye have dwelt in the land that I have given to your fathers, And ye have been to Me for a people, And I — I am to you for God.
And I have saved you from all your uncleannesses, And I have called unto the corn, and multiplied it, And I have put no famine upon you.
And I have multiplied the fruit of the tree, And the increase of the field, So that ye receive not any more a reproach of famine among nations.
And ye have remembered your ways that [are] evil, And your doings that [are] not good, And have been loathsome in your own faces, For your iniquities, and for your abominations.
Not for your sake am I working, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, Be it known to you, Be ashamed and confounded, because of your ways, O house of Israel.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: In the day of My cleansing you from all your iniquities, I have caused the cities to be inhabited, And the wastes have been built,
And the desolate land is tilled, Instead of which it was a desolation before the eyes of every passer by,
And they have said: This land, that was desolated, Hath been as the garden of Eden, And the cities — the wasted, And the desolated, and the broken down, Fenced places have remained.
And known have the nations who are left round about you, That I Jehovah have built the thrown down, I have planted the desolated: I Jehovah have spoken, and I have done [it].
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Yet this I am required, By the house of Israel to do to them, I multiply them as a flock of men,
As a flock of holy ones, as a flock of Jerusalem, In her appointed seasons, So are the waste cities full of flocks of men, And they have known that I [am] Jehovah!'
There hath been upon me a hand of Jehovah, and He taketh me forth in the Spirit of Jehovah, and doth place me in the midst of the valley, and it is full of bones,
and He causeth me to pass over by them, all round about, and lo, very many [are] on the face of the valley, and lo, very dry.
And He saith unto me, 'Son of man, do these bones live?' And I say, 'O Lord Jehovah, Thou — Thou hast known.'
And He saith unto me, 'Prophesy concerning these bones, and thou hast said unto them: O dry bones, hear a word of Jehovah:
Thus said the Lord Jehovah to these bones: Lo, I am bringing into you a spirit, and ye have lived,
and I have given on you sinews, and cause flesh to come up upon you, and covered you over with skin, and given in you a spirit, and ye have lived, and ye have known that I [am] Jehovah.'
And I have prophesied as I have been commanded, and there is a noise, as I am prophesying, and lo, a rushing, and draw near do the bones, bone unto its bone.
And I beheld, and lo, on them [are] sinews, and flesh hath come up, and cover them doth skin over above — and spirit there is none in them.
And He saith unto me: 'Prophesy unto the Spirit, prophesy, son of man, and thou hast said unto the Spirit: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: From the four winds come in, O Spirit, and breathe on these slain, and they do live.'
And I have prophesied as He commanded me, and the Spirit cometh into them, and they live, and stand on their feet — a very very great force.
And He saith unto me, 'Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel; lo, they are saying: Dried up have our bones, And perished hath our hope, We have been cut off by ourselves.
Therefore, prophesy, and thou hast said unto them, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I am opening your graves, And have brought you up out of your graves, O My people, And brought you in unto the land of Israel.
And ye have known that I [am] Jehovah, In My opening your graves, And in My bringing you up out of your graves, O My people.
And I have given My Spirit in you, and ye have lived, And I have caused you to rest on your land, And ye have known that I Jehovah, I have spoken, and I have done [it], An affirmation of Jehovah.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
'And thou, son of man, take to thee one stick, and write on it, For Judah, and for the sons of Israel, his companions; and take another stick, and write on it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and all the house of Israel, his companions,
and bring them near one unto another, to thee, for one stick, and they have become one in thy hand.
'And when sons of thy people speak unto thee, saying, Dost thou not declare to us what these [are] to thee?
Speak unto them, Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I am taking the stick of Joseph, that [is] in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his companions, and have given them unto him, with the stick of Judah, and have made them become one stick, and they have been one in My hand.
And the sticks on which thou writest have been in thy hand before thine eyes,
and speak thou unto them: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I am taking the sons of Israel, From among the nations whither they have gone, And have gathered them from round about, And I have brought them in unto their land.
And I have made them become one nation in the land, on mountains of Israel, And one king is to them all for king, And they are no more as two nations, Nor are they divided any more into two kingdoms again.
Nor are they defiled any more with their idols, And with their abominations, And with any of their transgressions, And I have saved them out of all their dwellings, In which they have sinned, And I have cleansed them, And they have been to Me for a people, And I — I am to them for God.
And My servant David [is] king over them, And one shepherd have they all, And in My judgments they go, And My statutes they keep, and have done them.
And they have dwelt on the land that I gave to My servant, to Jacob, In which your fathers have dwelt, And they have dwelt on it, they and their sons, And their son's sons — unto the age, And David My servant [is] their prince — to the age.
And I have made to them a covenant of peace, A covenant age-during it is with them, And I have placed them, and multiplied them, And placed My sanctuary in their midst — to the age.
And My tabernacle hath been over them, And I have been to them for God, And they have been to Me for a people.
And known have the nations that I Jehovah am sanctifying Israel, In My sanctuary being in their midst — to the age!'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying:
'Son of man, set thy face unto Gog, of the land of Magog, prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal, and prophesy concerning him,
and thou hast said: Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I [am] against thee, O Gog, Prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal,
And I have turned thee back, And I have put hooks in thy jaws, And have brought thee out, and all thy force, Horses and horsemen, Clothed in perfection all of them, A numerous assembly, [with] buckler and shield, Handling swords — all of them.
Persia, Cush, and Phut, with them, All of them [with] shield and helmet.
Gomer and all its bands, The house of Togarmah of the sides of the north, And all its bands, many peoples with thee,
Be prepared, yea, prepare for thee, Thou and all thine assemblies who are assembled unto thee, And thou hast been to them for a guard.
After many days thou art appointed, In the latter end of the years thou comest in unto a land brought back from sword, [A people] gathered out of many peoples, Upon mountains of Israel, That have been for a perpetual waste, And it from the peoples hath been brought out, And dwelt safely have all of them.
And thou hast gone up — as wasting thou comest in, As a cloud to cover the land art thou, Thou and all thy bands, and many peoples with thee.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: And it hath come to pass in that day, Come up do things on thy heart, And thou hast thought an evil thought,
And thou hast said: I go up against a land of unwalled villages, I go in to those at rest, dwelling confidently, All of them are dwelling without walls, And bar and doors they have not.
To take a spoil, and to take a prey, To turn back thy hand on inhabited wastes, And on a people gathered out of nations, Making cattle and substance, Dwelling on a high part of the land.
Sheba, and Dedan, and merchants of Tarshish, And all its young lions say to thee: To take a spoil art thou come in? To take a prey assembled thine assembly? To bear away silver and gold? To take away cattle and substance? To take a great spoil?
Therefore, prophesy, son of man, and thou hast said to Gog: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: In that day, in the dwelling of My people Israel safely, Dost thou not know?
And thou hast come in out of thy place, From the sides of the north, Thou and many peoples with thee, Riding on horses — all of them, A great assembly, and a numerous force.
And thou hast come up against My people Israel, As a cloud to cover the land, In the latter end of the days it is, And I have brought thee in against My land, In order that the nations may know Me, In My being sanctified in thee before their eyes, O Gog.
Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Art thou he of whom I spake in former days, By the hand of My servants, prophets of Israel, Who are prophesying in those days — years, To bring thee in against them?
And it hath come to pass, in that day, In the day of the coming in of Gog against the land of Israel, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, Come up doth My fury in My face,
And in My zeal, in the fire of My wrath, I have spoken: Is there not in that day a great rushing on the land of Israel?
And rushed from My presence have fishes of the sea, And the fowl of the heavens, And the beast of the field, And every creeping thing that is creeping on the ground, And all men who [are] on the face of the ground, And thrown down have been the mountains, And fallen have the ascents, And every wall to the earth falleth.
And I have called against him, to all My mountains a sword, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, The sword of each is against his brother.
And I have been judged with him, With pestilence and with blood, And an overflowing rain and hailstones, Fire and brimstone I rain on him, and on his bands, And on many peoples who [are] with him.
And I have magnified Myself, and sanctified Myself, And I have been known before the eyes of many nations, And they have known that I [am] Jehovah!
And thou, son of man, prophesy concerning Gog, and thou hast said: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Lo, I [am] against thee, O Gog, Prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal,
And have turned thee back, and enticed thee, And caused thee to come up from the sides of the north, And brought thee in against mountains of Israel,
And have smitten thy bow out of thy left hand, Yea, thine arrows out of thy right I cause to fall.
On mountains of Israel thou fallest, Thou, and all thy bands, and the peoples who [are] with thee, To ravenous fowl — a bird of every wing, And [to] a beast of the field, I have given thee for food.
On the face of the field thou fallest, for I have spoken, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
And I have sent a fire against Magog, And against the confident inhabitants of the isles, And they have known that I [am] Jehovah.
And My holy name I make known in the midst of My people Israel, And I pollute not My holy name any more, And known have the nations that I, Jehovah, the Holy One, [am] in Israel.
Lo, it hath come, and it hath been done, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, It [is] the day of which I spake.
And gone out have the inhabitants of cities of Israel, And they have burned and kindled [a fire], With armour, and shield, and buckler, With bow, and with arrows, And with hand-staves, and with javelins, And they have caused a fire to burn with them seven years,
And they do not take wood out of the field, Nor do they hew out of the forests, For with armour they cause the fire to burn, And they have spoiled their spoilers, And they have plundered their plunderers, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, I give to Gog a place there — a grave in Israel, the valley of those passing by, east of the sea, and it is stopping those passing by, and they have buried there Gog, and all his multitude, and have cried, O valley of the multitude of Gog!
And the house of Israel have buried them — in order to cleanse the land — seven months.
Yea, all the people of the land have buried them, and it hath been to them for a name — the day of My being honoured — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
And men for continual employment they separate, passing on through the land, burying with those passing by those who are left on the face of the earth, to cleanse it: at the end of seven months they search.
And those passing by have passed through the land, and seen a bone of man, and one hath constructed near it a sign till those burying have buried it in the valley of the multitude of Gog.
And also the name of the city [is] The multitude; and they have cleansed the land.
And thou, son of man, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Say to the bird — every wing, and to every beast of the field: Be assembled and come in, Be gathered from round about, For My sacrifice that I am sacrificing for you, A great sacrifice on mountains of Israel, And ye have eaten flesh, and drunk blood.
Flesh of the mighty ye do eat, And blood of princes of the earth ye drink, Of rams, of lambs, and of he-goats, Of calves, fatlings of Bashan — all of them.
And ye have eaten fat to satiety, And ye have drunk blood — to drunkenness, Of My sacrifice that I sacrificed for you.
And ye have been satisfied at My table with horse and rider, Mighty man, and every man of war, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
And I have given My honour among nations, And seen have all the nations My Judgment that I have done, And My hand that I have laid on them.
And known have the house of Israel that I [am] Jehovah their God, From that day and henceforth.
And known have the nations that for their iniquity, Removed have the house of Israel, Because they have trespassed against Me, And I do hide My face from them, And give them into the hand of their adversaries, And they fall by sword — all of them.
According to their uncleanness, And according to their transgressions, I have done with them, And I do hide My face from them.
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: Now do I bring back the captivity of Jacob, And I have pitied all the house of Israel, And have been zealous for My holy name.
And they have forgotten their shame, And all their trespass that they trespassed against Me, In their dwelling on their land confidently and none troubling.
In My bringing them back from the peoples, I have assembled them from the lands of their enemies, And I have been sanctified in them before the eyes of the many nations,
And they have known that I [am] Jehovah their God, In My removing them unto the nations, And I have gathered them unto their land, And I leave none of them any more there.
And I hide not any more My face from them, In that I have poured out My spirit on the house of Israel, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah!'
In the twenty and fifth year of our removal, in the beginning of the year, in the tenth of the month, in the fourteenth year after that the city was smitten, in this self-same day hath a hand of Jehovah been upon me, and He bringeth me in thither;
in visions of God He hath brought me in unto the land of Israel, and causeth me to rest on a very high mountain, and upon it [is] as the frame of a city on the south.
And He bringeth me in thither, and lo, a man, his appearance as the appearance of brass, and a thread of flax in his hand, and a measuring-reed, and he is standing at the gate,
and the man speaketh unto me: 'Son of man, see with thine eyes, And with thine ears hear, And set thy heart to all that I am shewing thee, For, in order to shew [it] thee, Thou hast been brought in hither, Declare all that thou art seeing to the house of Israel.'
And lo, a wall on the outside of the house all round about, and in the hand of the man a measuring-reed, six cubits by a cubit and a handbreadth, and he measureth the breadth of the building one reed, and the height one reed.
And he cometh in unto the gate whose front [is] eastward, and he goeth up by its steps, and he measureth the threshold of the gate one reed broad, even the one threshold one reed broad,
and the little chamber one reed long and one reed broad, and between the little chambers five cubits, and the threshold of the gate, from the side of the porch of the gate from within, one reed.
And he measureth the porch of the gate from within one reed,
and he measureth the porch of the gate eight cubits, and its posts two cubits, and the porch of the gates from within,
and the little chambers of the gate eastward, three on this side, and three on that side; one measure [is] to them three, and one measure [is] to the posts, on this side and on that side.
And he measureth the breadth of the opening of the gate ten cubits, the length of the gate thirteen cubits;
and a border before the little chambers, one cubit, and one cubit [is] the border on this side, and the little chamber [is] six cubits on this side, and six cubits on that side.
And he measureth the gate from the roof of the [one] little chamber to the roof of another; the breadth twenty and five cubits, opening over-against opening.
And he maketh the posts of sixty cubits, even unto the post of the court, the gate all round about;
and by the front of the gate of the entrance, by the front of the porch of the inner gate, fifty cubits;
and narrow windows [are] unto the little chambers, and unto their posts at the inside of the gate all round about — and so to the arches — and windows all round about [are] at the inside, and at the post [are] palm-trees.
And he bringeth me in unto the outer court, and lo, chambers and a pavement made for the court all round about — thirty chambers on the pavement —
and the pavement unto the side of the gates over-against the length of the gates [is] the lower pavement;
and he measureth the breadth from before the lower gate, to the front of the inner court, on the outside, a hundred cubits, eastward and northward.
As to the gate of the outer court whose front [is] northward, he hath measured its length and its breadth;
and its little chambers, three on this side, and three on that side, and its posts and its arches have been according to the measure of the first gate, fifty cubits its length, and the breadth five and twenty by the cubit;
and its windows, and its arches, and its palm-trees [are] according to the measure of the gate whose face [is] eastward, and by seven steps they go up on it, and its arches [are] before them.
And the gate of the inner court [is] over-against the gate at the north and at the east; and he measureth from gate unto gate, a hundred cubits.
And he causeth me to go southward, and lo, a gate southward, and he hath measured its posts and its arches according to these measures;
and windows [are] to it and to its arches all round about, like these windows, fifty cubits the length, and the breadth five and twenty cubits;
and seven steps [are] its ascent, and its arches [are] before them, and palm-trees [are] to it, one on this side, and one on that side, at its posts;
and the gate of the inner court [is] southward, and he measureth from gate unto gate southward, a hundred cubits.
And he bringeth me in unto the inner court by the south gate, and he measureth the south gate according to these measures;
and its little chambers, and its posts, and its arches [are] according to these measures, and windows [are] to it and to its arches all round about; fifty cubits the length, and the breadth twenty and five cubits.
As to the arches all round about, the length [is] five and twenty cubits, and the breadth five cubits;
and its arches [are] unto the outer court, and palm-trees [are] unto its posts, and eight steps [are] its ascent.
And he bringeth me in unto the inner court eastward, and he measureth the gate according to these measures;
and its little chambers, and its posts, and its arches [are] according to these measures: and windows [are] to it and to its arches all round about, the length fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits;
and its arches [are] toward the outer court, and palm-trees [are] toward its posts, on this side and on that side, and eight steps [are] its ascent.
And he bringeth me in unto the north gate, and hath measured according to these measures;
its little chambers, its posts, and its arches; and windows [are] to it all round about: the length fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits;
and its posts [are] to the outer court, and palm-trees [are] unto its posts, on this side and on that side, and eight steps [are] its ascent.
And the chamber and its opening [is] by the posts of the gates, there they purge the burnt-offering.
And in the porch of the gate [are] two tables on this side, and two tables on that side, to slaughter on them the burnt-offering, and the sin-offering, and the guilt-offering;
and at the side without, at the going up to the opening of the north gate, [are] two tables; and at the other side that [is] at the porch of the gate, [are] two tables;
four tables [are] on this side, and four tables on that side, at the side of the gate, eight tables on which they slaughter.
And the four tables for burnt-offering [are] of hewn stone: the length one cubit and a half, and the breadth one cubit and a half, and the height one cubit: on them they place the instruments with which they slaughter the burnt-offering and the sacrifice.
And the boundaries [are] one handbreadth, prepared within all round about: and on the tables [is] the flesh of the offering.
And on the outside of the inner gate [are] chambers of the singers, in the inner court, that [are] at the side of the north gate, and their fronts [are] southward, one at the side of the east gate [hath] the front northward.
And he speaketh unto me: 'This chamber, whose front [is] southward, [is] for priests keeping charge of the house;
and the chamber, whose front [is] northward, [is] for priests keeping charge of the altar: they [are] sons of Zadok, who are drawing near of the sons of Levi unto Jehovah, to serve Him.'
And he measureth the court: the length a hundred cubits, and the breadth a hundred cubits, square, and the altar [is] before the house.
And he bringeth me in unto the porch of the house, and he measureth the post of the porch, five cubits on this side, and five cubits on that side, and the breadth of the gate, three cubits on this side, and three cubits on that side;
the length of the porch twenty cubits, and the breadth eleven cubits; and by the steps whereby they go up unto it: and pillars [are] at the posts, one on this side, and one on that side.
And he bringeth me in unto the temple, and he measureth the posts, six cubits the breadth on this side, and six cubits the breadth on that side — the breadth of the tent.
And the breadth of the opening [is] ten cubits; and the sides of the opening [are] five cubits on this side, and five cubits on that side; and he measureth its length forty cubits, and the breadth twenty cubits.
And he hath gone inward, and measureth the post of the opening two cubits, and the opening six cubits, and the breadth of the opening seven cubits.
And he measureth its length twenty cubits, and the breadth twenty cubits, unto the front of the temple, and he saith unto me, 'This [is] the holy of holies.'
And he measureth the wall of the house six cubits, and the breadth of the side-chamber four cubits, all round the house round about.
And the side-chambers [are] side-chamber by side-chamber, three and thirty times; and they are entering into the wall — which the house hath for the side-chambers all round about — to be taken hold of, and they are not taken hold of by the wall of the house.
And a broad place and a turning place still upwards [are] to the side-chambers, for the turning round of the house [is] still upwards all round about the house: therefore the breadth of the house [is] upwards, and so the lower one goeth up unto the higher by the midst.
And I have looked at the house, the height all round about: the foundations of the side-chambers [are] the fulness of the reed, six cubits by the joining.
The breadth of the wall that [is] to the side-chamber at the outside [is] five cubits; and that which is left [is] the place of the side-chambers that [are] to the house.
And between the chambers [is] a breadth of twenty cubits round about the house, all round about.
And the opening of the side-chamber [is] to the place left, one opening northward, and one opening southward, and the breadth of the place that is left [is] five cubits all round about.
As to the building that [is] at the front of the separate place [at] the corner westward, the breadth [is] seventy cubits, and the wall of the building five cubits broad all round about, and its length ninety cubits.
And he hath measured the house, the length [is] a hundred cubits; and the separate place, and the building, and its walls, the length [is] a hundred cubits;
and the breadth of the front of the house, and of the separate place eastward, a hundred cubits.
And he hath measured the length of the building unto the front of the separate place that [is] at its hinder part, and its galleries on this side and on that side, a hundred cubits, and the inner temple and the porches of the court,
the thresholds, and the narrow windows, and the galleries round about them three, over-against the threshold, a ceiling of wood all round about, and the ground unto the windows and the covered windows,
over above the opening, and unto the inner-house, and at the outside, and by all the wall all round about within and without [by] measure.
And it is made [with] cherubs and palm-trees, and a palm-tree [is] between cherub and cherub, and two faces [are] to the cherub;
and the face of man [is] unto the palm-tree on this side, and the face of a young lion unto the palm-tree on that side; it is made unto all the house all round about.
from the earth unto above the opening [are] the cherubs and the palm-trees made, and [on] the wall of the temple.
Of the temple the side post [is] square, and of the front of the sanctuary, the appearance [is] as the appearance.
Of the altar, the wood [is] three cubits in height, and its length two cubits; and its corners [are] to it, and its length, and its walls [are] of wood, and he speaketh unto me, 'This [is] the table that [is] before Jehovah.'
And two doors [are] to the temple and to the sanctuary;
and two leaves [are] to the doors, two turning leaves [are] to the doors, two to the one door, and two leaves to the other.
And made on them, on the doors of the temple, [are] cherubs and palm-trees as are made on the walls, and a thickness of wood [is] at the front of the porch on the outside.
And narrow windows and palm-trees [are] on this side, and on that side, at the sides of the porch, and the side-chambers of the house, and the thick places.
And he bringeth me forth unto the outer court, the way northward, and he bringeth me in unto the chamber that [is] over-against the separate place, and that [is] over-against the building at the north.
At the front of the length [is] a hundred cubits [at] the north opening, and the breadth fifty cubits.
Over-against the twenty [cubits] that are to the inner court, and over-against the pavement that [is] to the outer court, [is] gallery over-against gallery, in the three [storeys].
And at the front of the chambers [is] a walk of ten cubits in breadth unto the inner part, a way of one cubit, and their openings [are] at the north.
And the upper chambers [are] short, for the galleries contain more than these, than the lower, and than the middle one, of the building;
for they [are] threefold, and they have no pillars as the pillars of the court, therefore it hath been kept back — more than the lower and than the middle one — from the ground.
As to the wall that [is] at the outside, over-against the chambers, the way of the outer-court at the front of the chambers, its length [is] fifty cubits;
for the length of the chambers that [are] to the outer court [is] fifty cubits, and of those on the front of the temple a hundred cubits.
And under these chambers [is] the entrance from the east, in one's going into them from the outer court.
In the breadth of the wall of the court eastward, unto the front of the separate place, and unto the front of the building, [are] chambers.
And the way before them [is] as the appearance of the chambers that [are] northward, according to their length so [is] their breadth, and all their outlets, and according to their fashions, and according to their openings.
And according to the openings of the chambers that [are] southward [is] an opening at the head of the way, the way directly in the front of the wall eastward in entering them.
And he saith unto me, 'The north chambers, the south chambers, that [are] at the front of the separate place, they [are] holy chambers, where the priests (who [are] near to Jehovah) eat the most holy things, there they place the most holy things, and the present, and the sin-offering, and the guilt-offering, for the place [is] holy.
In the priests' going in, they come not out from the sanctuary unto the outer court, and there they place their garments with which they minister, for they [are] holy, and have put on other garments, and have drawn near unto that which [is] for the people.'
And he hath finished the measurements of the inner house, and hath brought me forth the way of the gate whose front [is] eastward, and he hath measured it all round about.
He hath measured the east side with the measuring-reed, five hundred reeds, with the measuring-reed round about.
He hath measured the north side, five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed round about.
The south side he hath measured, five hundred reeds, with the measuring-reed.
He hath turned round unto the west side, he hath measured five hundred reeds with the measuring-reed.
At the four sides he hath measured it, a wall [is] to it all round about, the length five hundred, and the breadth five hundred, to separate between the holy and the profane place.
And he causeth me to go to the gate, the gate that is looking eastward.
And lo, the honour of the God of Israel hath come from the way of the east, and His voice [is] as the noise of many waters, and the earth hath shone from His honour.
And according to the appearance [is] the appearance that I saw, as the appearance that I saw in my coming in to destroy the city, and the appearances [are] as the appearance that I saw at the river Chebar, and I fall on my face.
And the honour of Jehovah hath come in unto the house, the way of the gate whose face [is] eastward.
And take me up doth the Spirit, and bringeth me in unto the inner court, and lo, the honour of Jehovah hath filled the house.
And I hear one speaking unto me from the house, and a man hath been standing near me,
and He saith unto me: 'Son of man, the place of My throne, And the place of the soles of My feet, Where I dwell in the midst of the sons of Israel to the age, Defile no more do the house of Israel My holy name, They, and their kings, by their whoredom, And by the carcases of their kings — their high places.
In their putting their threshold with My threshold, And their door-post near My door-post, And the wall between Me and them, And they have defiled My holy name, By their abominations that they have done, And I consume them in Mine anger.
Now do they put far off their whoredom, And the carcases of their kings — from Me, And I have dwelt in their midst to the age.
Thou, son of man, Shew the house of Israel the house, And they are ashamed of their iniquities, And they have measured the measurement.
And since they have been ashamed of all that they have done, The form of the house, and its measurement, And its outlets, and its inlets, and all its forms, And all its statutes, even all its forms, And all its laws cause them to know, And write [it] before their eyes, And they observe all its forms, And all its statutes, and have done them.
This [is] a law of the house: on the top of the mountain, all its border all round about [is] most holy; lo, this [is] a law of the house.
'And these [are] measures of the altar by cubits: The cubit [is] a cubit and a handbreadth, and the centre [is] a cubit, and a cubit the breadth; and its border on its edge round about [is] one span, and this [is] the upper part of the altar.
And from the centre of the ground unto the lower border [is] two cubits, and the breadth one cubit, and from the lesser border unto the greater border four cubits, and the breadth a cubit.
'And the altar [is] four cubits, and from the altar and upward [are] four horns.
And the altar [is] twelve long by twelve broad, square in its four squares.
And the border [is] fourteen long by fourteen broad, at its four squares, and the border round about it [is] half a cubit, and the centre to it [is] a cubit round about, and its steps are looking eastward.'
And He saith unto me, 'Son of man, Thus said the Lord Jehovah: These [are] statutes of the altar in the day of its being made to cause burnt-offering to go up on it, and to sprinkle on it blood.
And thou hast given unto the priests, the Levites, who [are] of the seed of Zadok — who are near unto Me, an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, to serve Me — a calf from the herd, for a sin-offering.
And thou hast taken of its blood, and hast put it on its four horns, and on the four corners of its border, and on the border round about, and hast cleansed it, and purified it.
And thou hast taken the bullock of the sin-offering, and hast burnt it in the appointed place of the house at the outside of the sanctuary.
And on the second day thou dost bring near a kid of the goats, a perfect one, for a sin-offering, and they have cleansed the altar, as they cleansed [it] for the bullock.
In thy finishing cleansing, thou dost bring near a calf, a son of the herd, a perfect one, and a ram out of the flock, a perfect one.
And thou hast brought them near before Jehovah, and the priests have cast upon them salt, and have caused them to go up, a burnt-offering to Jehovah.
Seven days thou dost prepare a goat for a sin-offering daily, and a bullock, a son of the herd, and a ram out of the flock, perfect ones, do they prepare.
Seven days they purify the altar, and have cleansed it, and filled their hand.
And the days are completed, and it hath come to pass on the eighth day, and henceforth, the priests prepare on the altar your burnt-offerings and your peace-offerings, and I have accepted you — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.'
And he causeth me to turn back the way of the gate of the outer sanctuary that is looking eastward, and it is shut.
And Jehovah saith unto me, 'This gate is shut, it is not opened, and none doth go in by it, for Jehovah, God of Israel, hath come in by it, and it hath been shut.
The prince, who [is] prince, he sitteth by it to eat bread before Jehovah, by the way of the porch of the gate he cometh in, and by its way he goeth out.'
And he bringeth me in the way of the north gate unto the front of the house, and I look, and lo, filled hath the honour of Jehovah the house of Jehovah, and I fall on my face.
And Jehovah saith unto me, 'Son of man, set thy heart, and see with thine eyes, and with thine ears hear, all that I am speaking with thee, of all the statutes of the house of Jehovah, and of all its laws; and thou hast set thy heart to the entrance of the house, with all the outlets of the sanctuary,
and hast said unto the rebellious, unto the house of Israel: Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Enough to you — of all your abominations, O house of Israel.
In your bringing in sons of a stranger, uncircumcised of heart, and uncircumcised of flesh, to be in My sanctuary, to pollute it, even My house, in your bringing near My bread, fat, and blood, and they break My covenant by all your abominations,
and ye have not kept the charge of My holy things, and ye set [them] for keepers of My charge in My sanctuary for you.
'Thus said the Lord Jehovah: No son of a stranger, uncircumcised of heart, and uncircumcised of flesh, cometh in unto My sanctuary, even any son of a stranger, who [is] in the midst of the sons of Israel,
but — the Levites who have gone far off from me, in the wandering of Israel when they went astray from Me after their idols, and they have borne their iniquity.
And they have been in My sanctuary ministrants, overseers at the gates of the house, and ministrants at the house; they slay the burnt-offering and the sacrifice for the people, and they stand before them to serve them.
Because that they serve them before their idols, and have been to the house of Israel for a stumbling-block of iniquity, therefore I have lifted up my hand against them — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah — and they have borne their iniquity.
And they draw not nigh unto Me to act as My priest, and to draw nigh unto any of My holy things, unto the holy of holies, and they have borne their shame and their abominations that they have done,
and I made them keepers of the charge of the house, for all its service and for all that is done in it.
'And the priests, the Levites, sons of Zadok, who have kept the charge of My sanctuary in the wandering of the sons of Israel from off Me, they draw near unto Me to serve Me, and have stood before Me, to bring near to Me fat and blood — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah:
they come in unto My sanctuary, and they draw near unto My table to serve Me, and they have kept My charge.
And it hath come to pass, in their going in unto the gates of the inner court, linen garments they put on; and no wool cometh up on them in their ministering in the gates of the inner court and within.
Linen bonnets are on their head, and linen trousers are on their loins, they are not restrained with sweat.
And in their going forth unto the outer court — unto the outer court unto the people — they strip off their garments, in which they are ministering, and have placed them in the holy chambers, and have put on other garments; and they do not sanctify the people in their own garments.
And their head they do not shave, and the lock they do not send forth; they certainly poll their heads.
And no priest doth drink wine in their coming in unto the inner court.
And a widow and divorced woman they do not take to them for wives: but — virgins of the seed of the house of Israel, and the widow who is widow of a priest, do they take.
'And My people they direct between holy and common, and between unclean and clean they cause them to discern.
And concerning controversy, they stand up for judgment; with My judgments they judge it; and My law and My statutes in all My appointed places they keep; and My sabbaths they sanctify.
And unto any dead man they come not for uncleanness, but for father, and for mother, and for son, and for daughter, for brother, for sister who hath not been to a man, they defile themselves.
'And after his cleansing, seven days they number to him.
And in the day of his coming in unto the sanctuary, unto the inner court, to minister in the sanctuary, he bringeth near his sin-offering — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
And it hath been to them for an inheritance; I [am] their inheritance: and a possession ye do not give to them in Israel; I [am] their possession.
The present, and the sin-offering, and the guilt-offering, they do eat, and every devoted thing in Israel is theirs.
And the first of all the first-fruits of all, and every heave-offering of all, of all your heave-offerings, are the priests': and the first of your dough ye give to the priest, to cause a blessing to rest on thy house.
Any carcase and torn thing, of the fowl, and of the beasts, the priests do not eat.
And in your causing the land to fall in inheritance, ye lift up a heave-offering to Jehovah, a holy [portion] of the land: the length — five and twenty thousand [is] the length, and the breadth ten thousand; it [is] holy in all its border round about.
There is of this for the sanctuary five hundred by five hundred, square, round about; and fifty cubits of suburb [is] to it round about.
And by this measure thou dost measure: the length [is] five and twenty thousand, and the breadth ten thousand: and in it is the sanctuary, the holy of holies.
The holy [portion] of the land it [is]; for priests, ministrants of the sanctuary, it is, who are drawing near to serve Jehovah; and it hath been to them a place for houses, and a holy place for a sanctuary.
'And of the five and twenty thousand of length, and of the ten thousand of breadth, there is to the Levites, ministrants of the house, for them — for a possession — twenty chambers.
'And of the possession of the city ye give five thousand of breadth, and of length five and twenty thousand, over-against the heave-offering of the holy [portion]: to all the house of Israel it is.
As to the prince, on this side, and on that side, of the heave-offering of the holy place, and of the possession of the city, at the front of the heave-offering of the holy place, and at the front of the possession of the city, from the west corner westward, and from the east corner eastward — and the length [is] over-against one of the portions from the west border unto the east border —
of the land there is to him for a possession in Israel, and My princes do not oppress any more My people, and the land they give to the house of Israel according to their tribes.
'Thus said the Lord Jehovah: Enough to you — princes of Israel; violence and spoil turn aside, and judgment and righteousness do; lift up your exactions from off My people — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
Just balances, and a just ephah, and a just bath — ye have.
The ephah and the bath is of one measure, for the bath to bear a tenth of the homer, and the ephah a tenth of the homer: according to the homer is its measurement.
And, the shekel [is] twenty gerah: twenty shekels, five and twenty shekels, fifteen shekels — is your maneh.
'This [is] the heave-offering that ye lift up; a sixth part of the ephah of a homer of wheat, also ye have given a sixth part of the ephah of a homer of barley,
and the portion of oil, the bath of oil, a tenth part of the bath out of the cor, a homer of ten baths — for ten baths [are] a homer;
and one lamb out of the flock, out of two hundred, out of the watered country of Israel, for a present, and for a burnt-offering, and for peace-offerings, to make atonement by them — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
All the people of the land are at this heave-offering for the prince in Israel.
And on the prince are the burnt-offerings, and the present, and the libation, in feasts, and in new moons, and in sabbaths, in all appointed times of the house of Israel: he doth make the sin-offering, and the present, and the burnt-offering, and the peace-offerings, to make atonement for the house of Israel.
'Thus said the Lord Jehovah: In the first [month], in the first of the month, thou dost take a bullock, a son of the herd, a perfect one, and hast cleansed the sanctuary:
and the priest hath taken of the blood of the sin offering, and hath put on the door-post of the house, and on the four corners of the border of the altar, and on the post of the gate of the inner court.
And so thou dost do on the seventh of the month, because of each erring one, and because of the simple one — and ye have purified the house.
'In the first [month], in the fourteenth day of the month, ye have the passover, a feast of seven days, unleavened food is eaten.
And the prince hath prepared on that day, for himself, and for all the people of the land, a bullock, a sin-offering.
And the seven days of the feast he prepareth a burnt-offering to Jehovah, seven bullocks, and seven rams, perfect ones, daily seven days, and a sin-offering, a kid of the goats, daily.
And a present of an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, he doth prepare, and of oil a hin for an ephah.
In the seventh [month], in the fifteenth day of the month, in the feast, he doth according to these things seven days; as the sin-offering so the burnt-offering, and as the present so also the oil.
'Thus said the Lord Jehovah: The gate of the inner court that is looking eastward is shut the six days of work, and on the day of rest it is opened, and in the day of the new moon it is opened;
and come in hath the prince the way of the porch of the gate at the outside, and he hath stood by the post of the gate, and the priests have made his burnt-offering, and his peace-offerings, and he hath bowed himself by the opening of the gate, and hath gone forth, and the gate is not shut till the evening.
And bowed themselves have the people of the land at the opening of that gate, on sabbaths, and on new moons, before Jehovah.
'And the burnt-offering that the prince bringeth near to Jehovah on the day of rest [is] six lambs, perfect ones, and a ram, a perfect one.
And the present [is] an ephah for a ram, and for the lambs a present, the gift of his hand, and of oil a hin for an ephah.
And on the day of the new moon a bullock, a son of the herd, a perfect one, and six lambs and a ram, they are perfect.
And with an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, he prepareth a present, and for the lambs as his hand attaineth, and of oil a hin for an ephah.
'And in the coming in of the prince, the way of the porch of the gate he cometh in, and by its way he goeth out.
And in the coming in of the people of the land before Jehovah at appointed times, he who hath come in the way of the north gate to bow himself, goeth out the way of the south gate, and he who hath come in the way of the south gate, goeth out by the way of the north gate: he doth not turn back the way of the gate by which he came in, but over-against it he goeth out.
And the prince in their midst in their coming in cometh in, and in their going out he goeth out.
'And in feasts, and in appointed times, the present is an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and for lambs the gift of his hand, and of oil a hin for an ephah.
And when the prince maketh a free-will burnt-offering, or free-will peace-offerings, to Jehovah, then he hath opened for himself the gate that is looking eastward, and he hath made his burnt-offering and his peace-offerings as he doth in the day of rest, and he hath gone out, and he hath shut the gate after his going out.
'And a lamb, son of a year, a perfect one, thou dost make a burnt-offering daily to Jehovah; morning by morning thou dost make it.
And a present thou dost make for it morning by morning, a sixth part of the ephah, and of oil a third part of the hin, to temper with the fine flour, a present to Jehovah, by a statute age-during — continually;
and prepare ye the lamb, and the present, and the oil, morning by morning, a continual burnt-offering.
'Thus said the Lord Jehovah: When the prince giveth a gift to any of his sons, his inheritance it [is], to his sons it [is]; their possession it [is] by inheritance.
And when he giveth a gift out of his inheritance to one of his servants, then it hath been to him till the year of freedom, and it hath turned back to the prince, only the inheritance of his sons is theirs.
And the prince doth not take of the inheritance of the people to oppress them, out of their possession, out of his own possession he doth cause his sons to inherit, so that My people are not scattered each from his possession.'
And he bringeth me in through the entrance that [is] by the side of the gate, unto the holy chambers, unto the priests, that are looking northward, and lo, there [is] a place in their two sides westward.
And he saith unto me, 'This [is] the place where the priests do boil the guilt-offering and the sin-offering, where they bake the present, so as not to bring [it] out unto the outer court, to sanctify the people.'
And he bringeth me out unto the outer court, and causeth me to pass over unto the four corners of the court, and lo, a court in a corner of the court, a court in a corner of the corner.
In the four corners of the court [are] perfume courts, forty long, and thirty broad, one measure [is] to the four corners.
And a row [is] round about in them, round about to them four, and made with boilers under the rows round about.
And he saith unto me, 'These [are] the houses of those boiling where the ministrants of the house boil the sacrifice of the people.'
And he causeth me to turn back unto the opening of the house; and lo, water is coming forth from under the threshold of the house eastward, for the front of the house [is] eastward, and the water is coming down from beneath, from the right side of the house, from the south of the altar.
And he causeth me to go out the way of the gate northward, and causeth me to turn round the way without, unto the gate that [is] without, the way that is looking eastward, and lo, water is coming forth from the right side.
In the going out of the man eastward, and a line in his hand, then he measureth a thousand by the cubit, and he causeth me to pass over into water — water to the ankles.
And he measureth a thousand, and causeth me to pass over into water — water to the knees. And he measureth a thousand, and causeth me to pass over — water to the loins.
And he measureth a thousand — a stream that I am not able to pass over; for risen have the waters — waters to swim in — a stream that is not passed over.
And he saith unto me, 'Hast thou seen, son of man?' and he leadeth me, and bringeth me back unto the edge of the stream.
In my turning back, then, lo, at the edge of the stream [are] very many trees, on this side and on that side.
And he saith unto me, 'These waters are going forth unto the east circuit, and have gone down unto the desert, and have entered the sea; unto the sea they are brought forth, and the waters have been healed.
And it hath come to pass, every living creature that teemeth, whithersoever the streams come, doth live: and there hath been great abundance of fish, for these waters have come thither, and they are healed; and every thing whither the stream cometh hath lived.
And it hath come to pass, fishers do stand by it, from En-Gedi even unto En-Eglaim; a spreading place of nets they are; according to their own kind is their fish, as the fish of the great sea, very many.
Its miry and its marshy places — they are not healed; to salt they have been given up.
And by the stream there cometh up on its edge, on this side and on that side, every [kind of] fruit-tree whose leaf fadeth not, and not consumed is its fruit, according to its months it yieldeth first-fruits, because its waters from the sanctuary are coming forth; and its fruits hath been for food, and its leaf for medicine.
'Thus said the Lord Jehovah: This [is] the border whereby ye inherit the land, according to the twelve tribes of Israel; Joseph [hath] portions.
And ye have inherited it, one as well as another, in that I have lifted up My hand to give it to your fathers; and this land hath fallen to you in inheritance.
'And this [is] the border of the land at the north quarter; from the great sea, the way of Hethlon, at the coming in to Zedad:
Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, that [is] between the border of Damascus and the border of Hamath; Hazar-Hatticon, that [is] at the coast of Havran.
And the border from the sea hath been Hazar-Enan, the border of Damascus, and Zaphon at the north, and the border of Hamath: and [this is] the north quarter.
'And the east quarter [is] from between Havran, and Damascus, and Gilead, and the land of Israel, [to] the Jordan; from the border over-against the eastern sea ye measure: and [this is] the east quarter.
'And the south quarter southward [is] from Tamar unto the waters of Meriboth-Kadesh, the stream unto the great sea: and [this is] the south quarter southward.
'And the west quarter [is] the great sea, from the border till over-against the coming in to Hamath: this [is] the west quarter.
'And ye have divided this land to you, according to the tribes of Israel;
and it hath come to pass, ye separate it for an inheritance to yourselves, and to the sojourners who are sojourning in your midst, who have begotten sons in your midst, and they have been to you as native, with the sons of Israel, with you they are separated for an inheritance in the midst of the tribes of Israel.
And it hath come to pass, in the tribe with which the sojourner sojourneth, there ye give his inheritance — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
And these [are] the names of the tribes: From the north end unto the side of the way of Hethlon, at the coming in to Hamath, Hazar-Enan, the border of Damascus northward, unto the side of Hamath, and they have been his — side east and west, Dan one,
and by the border of Dan, from the east side unto the west side, Asher one,
and by the border of Asher, from the east side even unto the west side, Naphtali one,
and by the border of Naphtali, from the east side unto the west side, Manasseh one,
and by the border of Manasseh, from the east side unto the west side, Ephraim one,
and by the border of Ephraim, from the east side even unto the west side, Reuben one,
and by the border of Reuben, from the east side unto the west side, Judah one,
and by the border of Judah, from the east side unto the west side is the heave-offering that ye lift up, five and twenty thousand broad and long, as one of the parts, from the east side unto the west side: and the sanctuary hath been in its midst.
The heave-offering that ye lift up to Jehovah [is] five and twenty thousand long, and broad ten thousand.
And of these is the holy heave-offering for the priests, northward five and twenty thousand, and westward [in] breadth ten thousand, and eastward [in] breadth ten thousand, and southward [in] length five and twenty thousand: and the sanctuary of Jehovah hath been in its midst.
For the priests who are sanctified of the sons of Zadok, who have kept My charge, who erred not in the erring of the sons of Israel, as the Levites erred,
even the heave-offering hath been to them, out of the heave-offering of the land, most holy, by the border of the Levites.
'And [to] the Levites over-against the border of the priests [are] five and twenty thousand [in] length, and [in] breadth ten thousand, all the length [is] five and twenty thousand, and the breadth ten thousand.
And they do not sell of it, nor exchange, nor cause to pass away the first-fruit of the land: for [it is] holy to Jehovah.
And the five thousand that is left in the breadth, on the front of the five and twenty thousand, is common — for the city, for dwelling, and for suburb, and the city hath been in its midst.
And these [are] its measures: the north side five hundred, and four thousand, and the south side five hundred, and four thousand, and on the east side five hundred, and four thousand, and the west side five hundred, and four thousand.
And the suburb to the city hath been northward, fifty and two hundred, and southward, fifty and two hundred, and eastward, fifty and two hundred, and westward, fifty and two hundred.
'And the residue in length over-against the heave-offering of the holy [portion is] ten thousand eastward, and ten thousand westward, and it hath been over-against the heave-offering of the holy [portion], and its increase hath been for food to the servants of the city,
even [to] him who is serving the city, they serve it out of all the tribes of Israel.
All the heave-offering [is] five and twenty thousand by five and twenty thousand, square do ye lift up the heave-offering of the holy [portion] with the possession of the city.
'And the residue [is] for the prince, on this side and on that side of the heave-offering of the holy [portion], and of the possession of the city, on the front of the five and twenty thousand of the heave-offering unto the east border, and westward, on the front of the five and twenty thousand on the west border, over-against the portions of the prince; and the heave-offering of the holy [portion], and the sanctuary of the house, hath been in its midst.
And from the possession of the Levites, from the possession of the city, in the midst of that which is to the prince, between the border of Judah and the border of Benjamin, there is to the prince.
'As to the rest of the tribes, from the east side unto the west side, Benjamin one,
and by the border of Benjamin, from the east side unto the west side, Simeon one,
and by the border of Simeon, from the east side unto the west side, Issachar one,
and by the border of Issachar, from the east side unto the west side, Zebulun one,
and by the border of Zebulun, from the east side unto the west side, Gad one,
and by the border of Gad, at the south side southward, the border hath been from Tamar [to] the waters of Meriboth-Kadesh, the stream by the great sea.
This [is] the land that ye separate by inheritance to the tribes of Israel, and these [are] their portions — an affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
'And these [are] the outgoings of the city on the north side, five hundred, and four thousand measures.
And the gates of the city [are] according to the names of the tribes of Israel; three gates northward: the gate of Reuben one, the gate of Judah one, the gate of Levi one.
And on the east side five hundred, and four thousand, and three gates: the gate of Joseph one, the gate of Benjamin one, the gate of Dan one.
And the south side five hundred, and four thousand measures, and three gates: the gate of Simeon one, the gate of Issachar one, the gate of Zebulun one.
The west side five hundred, and four thousand, their gates three: the gate of Gad one, the gate of Asher one, the gate of Naphtali one.
Round about [is] eighteen thousand, and the renown of the city [is] from the day Jehovah [is] there.'
In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah, come hath Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon to Jerusalem, and layeth siege against it;
and the Lord giveth into his hand Jehoiakim king of Judah, and some of the vessels of the house of God, and he bringeth them in [to] the land of Shinar, [to] the house of his god, and the vessels he hath brought in [to] the treasure-house of his god.
And the king saith, to Ashpenaz master of his eunuchs, to bring in out of the sons of Israel, (even of the royal seed, and of the chiefs,)
lads in whom there is no blemish, and of good appearance, and skilful in all wisdom, and possessing knowledge, and teaching thought, and who have ability to stand in the palace of the king, and to teach them the literature and language of the Chaldeans.
And the king doth appoint for them a rate, day by day, of the king's portion of food, and of the wine of his drinking, so as to nourish them three years, that at the end thereof they may stand before the king.
And there are among them out of the sons of Judah, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,
and the chief of the eunuchs setteth names on them, and he setteth on Daniel, Belteshazzar; and on Hananiah, Shadrach; and on Mishael, Meshach; and on Azariah, Abed-Nego.
And Daniel purposeth in his heart that he will not pollute himself with the king's portion of food, and with the wine of his drinking, and he seeketh of the chief of the eunuchs that he may not pollute himself.
And God giveth Daniel for kindness and for mercies before the chief of the eunuchs;
and the chief of the eunuchs saith to Daniel, 'I am fearing my lord the king, who hath appointed your food and your drink, for why doth he see your faces sadder than [those of] the lads which [are] of your circle? then ye have made my head indebted to the king,'
And Daniel saith unto the Meltzar, whom the chief of the eunuchs hath appointed over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,
'Try, I pray thee, thy servants, ten days; and they give to us of the vegetables, and we eat, and water, and we drink;
and our appearance is seen before thee, and the appearance of the lads who are eating the king's portion of food, and as thou seest — deal with thy servants.'
And he hearkeneth to them, to this word, and trieth them ten days:
and at the end of ten days their appearance hath appeared better and fatter in flesh then any of the lads who are eating the king's portion of food.
And the Meltzar is taking away their portion of food, and the wine of their drink, and is giving to them vegetables.
As to these four lads, God hath given to them knowledge and understanding in every [kind of] literature, and wisdom; and Daniel hath given instruction about every [kind of] vision and dreams.
And at the end of the days that the king had said to bring them in, bring them in doth the chief of the eunuchs before Nebuchadnezzar.
And the king speaketh with them, and there hath none been found among them all like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, and they stand before the king;
and [in] any matter of wisdom [and] understanding that the king hath sought of them, he findeth them ten hands above all the scribes, the enchanters, who [are] in all his kingdom.
And Daniel is unto the first year of Cyrus the king.
And in the second year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, dreamed hath Nebuchadnezzar dreams, and his spirit doth move itself, and his sleep hath been against him;
and the king saith to call for scribes, and for enchanters, and for sorcerers, and for Chaldeans, to declare to the king his dreams. And they come in and stand before the king;
and the king saith to them, 'A dream I have dreamed, and moved is my spirit to know the dream.'
And the Chaldeans speak to the king [in] Aramaean, 'O king, to the ages live, tell the dream to thy servants, and the interpretation we do shew.'
The king hath answered and said to the Chaldeans, 'The thing from me is gone; if ye do not cause me to know the dream and its interpretation, pieces ye are made, and your houses are made dunghills;
and if the dream and its interpretation ye do shew, gifts, and fee, and great glory ye receive from before me, therefore the dream and its interpretation shew ye me.'
They have answered a second time, and are saying, 'Let the king tell the dream to his servants, and the interpretation we do shew.
The king hath answered and said, 'Of a truth I know that time ye are gaining, because that ye have seen that the thing is gone from me,
[so] that, if the dream ye do not cause me to know — one is your sentence, seeing a word lying and corrupt ye have prepared to speak before me, till that the time is changed, therefore the dream tell ye to me, then do I know that its interpretation ye do shew me.'
The Chaldeans have answered before the king, and are saying, 'There is not a man on the earth who is able to shew the king's matter; therefore, no king, chief, and ruler, hath asked such a thing as this of any scribe, and enchanter, and Chaldean;
and the thing that the king is asking [is] precious, and others are there not that do shew it before the king, save the gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh.'
Therefore the king hath been angry and very wroth, and hath said to destroy all the wise men of Babylon;
And the sentence hath gone forth, and the wise men are being slain, and they have sought Daniel and his companions to be slain.
Then Daniel hath replied [with] counsel and discretion to Arioch chief of the executioners of the king, who hath gone forth to slay the wise men of Babylon.
He hath answered and said to Arioch the king's captain, 'Wherefore [is] the sentence so urgent from before the king?' Then Arioch hath made the thing known to Daniel,
and Daniel hath gone up, and sought of the king that he would give him time to shew the interpretation to the king.
Then Daniel to his house hath gone, and to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions, he hath made the thing known,
and to seek mercies from before the God of the heavens concerning this secret, that they destroy not Daniel and his companions with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.
Then to Daniel, in a vision of the night, the secret hath been revealed. Then hath Daniel blessed the God of the heavens.
Daniel hath answered and said, 'Let the name of God be blessed from age even unto age, for wisdom and might — for they are His.
And He is changing times and seasons, He is causing kings to pass away, and He is raising up kings; He is giving wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to those possessing understanding.
He is revealing deep and hidden things; He hath known what [is] in darkness, and light with Him hath dwelt.
Thee, O God of my fathers, I am thanking and praising, for wisdom and might Thou hast given to me; and now, Thou hast caused me to know that which we have sought from Thee, for the king's matter Thou hast caused us to know.'
Therefore Daniel hath gone up unto Arioch, whom the king hath appointed to destroy the wise men of Babylon; he hath gone, and thus hath said to him, 'The wise men of Babylon thou dost not destroy, bring me up before the king, and the interpretation to the king I do shew.'
Then Arioch in haste hath brought up Daniel before the king, and thus hath said to him — 'I have found a man of the sons of the Removed of Judah, who the interpretation to the king doth make known.'
The king hath answered and said to Daniel, whose name [is] Belteshazzar, 'Art thou able to cause me to know the dream that I have seen, and its interpretation?'
Daniel hath answered before the king and said, 'The secret that the king is asking, the wise men, the enchanters, the scribes, the soothsayers, are not able to shew to the king;
but there is a God in the heavens, a revealer of secrets, and He hath made known to king Nebuchadnezzar that which [is] to be in the latter end of the days. 'Thy dream and the visions of thy head on thy bed are these:
Thou, O king, thy thoughts on thy bed have come up [concerning] that which [is] to be after this, and the Revealer of secrets hath caused thee to know that which [is] to be.
As to me — not for [any] wisdom that is in me above any living hath this secret been revealed to me; but for the intent that the interpretation to the king they make known, and the thoughts of thy heart thou dost know.
'Thou, O king, wast looking, and lo, a certain great image. This image [is] mighty, and its brightness excellent; it is standing over-against thee, and its appearance [is] terrible.
This image! its head [is] of good gold, its breasts and its arms of silver, its belly and its thighs of brass;
its legs of iron, its feet, part of them of iron, and part of them of clay.
Thou wast looking till that a stone hath been cut out without hands, and it hath smitten the image on its feet, that [are] of iron and of clay, and it hath broken them small;
then broken small together have been the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, and they have been as chaff from the summer threshing-floor, and carried them away hath the wind, and no place hath been found for them: and the stone that smote the image hath become a great mountain, and hath filled all the land.
This [is] the dream, and its interpretation we do tell before the king.
'Thou, O king, art a king of kings, for the God of the heavens a kingdom, strength, and might, and glory, hath given to thee;
and whithersoever sons of men are dwelling, the beast of the field, and the fowl of the heavens, He hath given into thy hand, and hath caused thee to rule over them all; thou [art] this head of gold.
And after thee doth rise up another kingdom lower than those, and another third kingdom of brass, that doth rule overall the earth.
And the fourth kingdom is strong as iron, because that iron is breaking small, and making feeble, all [things], even as iron that is breaking all these, it beateth small and breaketh.
As to that which thou hast seen: the feet and toes, part of them potter's clay, and part of them iron, the kingdom is divided: and some of the standing of the iron [is] to be in it, because that thou hast seen the iron mixed with miry clay.
As to the toes of the feet, part of them iron, and part of them clay: some part of the kingdom is strong, and some part of it is brittle.
Because thou hast seen iron mixed with miry clay, they are mixing themselves with the seed of men: and they are not adhering one with another, even as iron is not mixed with clay.
'And in the days of these kings raise up doth the God of the heavens a kingdom that is not destroyed — to the age, and its kingdom to another people is not left: it beateth small and endeth all these kingdoms, and it standeth to the age.
Because that thou hast seen that out of the mountain cut hath been a stone without hands, and it hath beaten small the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; the great God hath made known to the king that which [is] to be after this; and the dream [is] true, and its interpretation stedfast.
Then hath king Nebuchadnezzar fallen on his face, and to Daniel he hath done obeisance, and present, and sweet things, he hath said to pour out to him.
The king hath answered Daniel and said, 'Of a truth [it is] that your God is a God of gods, and a Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets, since thou hast been able to reveal this secret.'
Then the king hath made Daniel great, and many great gifts he hath given to him, and hath caused him to rule over all the province of Babylon, and chief of the perfects over all the wise men of Babylon.
And Daniel hath sought from the king, and he hath appointed over the work of the province of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego, and Daniel [is] in the gate of the king.
Nebuchadnezzar the king hath made an image of gold, its height sixty cubits, its breadth six cubits; he hath raised it up in the valley of Dura, in the province of Babylon;
and Nebuchadnezzar the king hath sent to gather the satraps, the prefects, and the governors, the honourable judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the province, to come to the dedication of the image that Nebuchadnezzar the king hath raised up.
Then are gathered the satraps, the prefects, and the governors, the honourable judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the province, to the dedication of the image that Nebuchadnezzar the king hath raised up: and they are standing before the image that Nebuchadnezzar hath raised up.
And a crier is calling mightily: 'To you they are saying: O peoples, nations, and languages!
at the time that ye hear the voice of the cornet, the flute, the harp, the sackbut, the psaltery, the symphony, and all kinds of music, ye fall down and do obeisance to the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king hath raised up:
and whoso doth not fall down and do obeisance, in that hour he is cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.'
Therefore at that time, when all the peoples are hearing the voice of the cornet, the flute, the harp, the sackbut, the psaltery, and all kinds of music, falling down are all the peoples, nations and languages, doing obeisance to the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king hath raised up.
Therefore at that time drawn near have certain Chaldeans, and accused the Jews;
they have answered, yea, they are saying to Nebuchadnezzar the king, 'O king, to the ages live!
Thou, O king, hast made a decree that every man who doth hear the voice of the cornet, the flute, the harp, the sackbut, the psaltery, and the symphony, and all kinds of music, doth fall down and do obeisance to the golden image;
and whoso doth not fall down and do obeisance, is cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.
There are certain Jews whom thou hast appointed over the work of the province of Babylon — Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego, these men have not made of thee, O king, [any] regard; thy gods they are not serving, and to the golden image thou hast raised up — are not making obeisance.'
Then Nebuchadnezzar, in anger and fury, hath said to bring in Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego. Then these men have been brought in before the king.
Nebuchadnezzar hath answered and said to them, 'Is [it] a laid plan, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego — my gods ye are not serving, and to the golden image that I have raised up ye are not doing obeisance?
Now, lo, ye are ready, so that at the time that ye hear the voice of the cornet, the flute, the harp, the sackbut, the psaltery, and the symphony, and all kinds of music, ye fall down and do obeisance to the image that I have made! — and lo, ye do no obeisance — in that hour ye are cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace; who is that God who doth deliver you out of my hands?'
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego have answered, yea, they are saying to the king Nebuchadnezzar, 'We have no need concerning this matter to answer thee.
Lo, it is; our God whom we are serving, is able to deliver us from a burning fiery furnace; and from thy hand, O king, He doth deliver.
And lo — not! be it known to thee, O king, that thy gods we are not serving, and to the golden image thou hast raised up we do no obeisance.'
Then Nebuchadnezzar hath been full of fury, and the expression of his face hath been changed concerning Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego; he answered and said to heat the furnace seven times above that which it is seen to be heated;
and to certain mighty men who [are] in his force he hath said to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego, to cast into the burning fiery furnace.
Then these men have been bound in their coats, their tunics, and their turbans, and their clothing, and have been cast into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.
Therefore, because that the word of the king is urgent, and the furnace heated exceedingly, those men who have taken up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego — killed them hath the spark of the fire.
And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego, have fallen down in the midst of the burning fiery furnace — bound.
Then Nebuchadnezzar the king hath been astonished, and hath risen in haste; he hath answered and said to his counsellors, 'Have we not cast three men into the midst of the fire — bound?' They have answered and are saying to the king, 'Certainly, O king.'
He answered and hath said, 'Lo, I am seeing four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the appearance of the fourth [is] like to a son of the gods.'
Then Nebuchadnezzar hath drawn near to the gate of the burning fiery furnace; he hath answered and said, 'Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego, servants of God Most High come forth, yea, come;' then come forth do Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego, from the midst of the fire;
and gathered together, the satraps, the prefects, and the governors, and the counsellors of the king, are seeing these men, that the fire hath no power over their bodies, and the hair of their head hath not been singed, and their coats have not changed, and the smell of fire hath not passed on them.
Nebuchadnezzar hath answered and hath said, 'Blessed [is] the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego, who hath sent His messenger, and hath delivered His servants who trusted on Him, and the word of the king changed, and gave up their bodies that they might not serve nor do obeisance to any god except to their own God.
And by me a decree is made, that any people, nation, and language, that doth speak erroneously concerning the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego, pieces he is made, and its house is made a dunghill, because that there is no other god who is able thus to deliver.'
Then the king hath caused Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego, to prosper in the province of Babylon.
'Nebuchadnezzar the king to all peoples, nations, and languages, who are dwelling in all the earth: Your peace be great!
The signs and wonders that God Most High hath done with me, it is good before me to shew.
His signs how great! and His wonders how mighty! His kingdom [is] a kingdom age-during, and His rule [is] with generation and generation.
'I, Nebuchadnezzar, have been at rest in my house, and flourishing in my palace:
a dream I have seen, and it maketh me afraid, and the conceptions on my bed, and the visions of my head, do trouble me.
And by me a decree is made, to cause all the wise men of Babylon to come up before me, that the interpretation of the dream they may cause me to know.
Then coming up are the scribes, the enchanters, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers, and the dream I have told before them, and its interpretation they are not making known to me.
And at last come up before me hath Daniel, whose name [is] Belteshazzar — according to the name of my god — and in whom [is] the spirit of the holy gods, and the dream before him I have told:
'O Belteshazzar, master of the scribes, as I have known that the spirit of the holy gods [is] in thee, and no secret doth press thee, the visions of my dream that I have seen, and its interpretation, tell.
As to the visions of my head on my bed, I was looking, and lo, a tree in the midst of the earth, and its height [is] great:
become great hath the tree, yea, strong, and its height doth reach to the heavens, and its vision to the end of the whole land;
its leaves [are] fair, and its budding great, and food for all [is] in it: under it take shade doth the beast of the field, and in its boughs dwell do the birds of the heavens, and of it fed are all flesh.
'I was looking, in the visions of my head on my bed, and lo, a sifter, even a holy one, from the heavens is coming down.
He is calling mightily, and thus hath said, Cut down the tree, and cut off its branches, shake off its leaves, and scatter its budding, move away let the beast from under it, and the birds from off its branches;
but the stump of its roots leave in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field, and with the dew of the heavens is it wet, and with the beasts [is] his portion in the herb of the earth;
his heart from man's is changed, and the heart of a beast is given to him, and seven times pass over him;
by the decree of the sifters [is] the sentence, and by the saying of the holy ones the requirement, to the intent that the living may know that the Most High is ruler in the kingdom of men, and to whom He willeth He giveth it, and the lowest of men He doth raise up over it.
'This dream I have seen, I king Nebuchadnezzar; and thou, O Belteshazzar, the interpretation tell, because that all the wise men of my kingdom are not able to cause me to know the interpretation, and thou [art] able, for the spirit of the holy gods [is] in thee.
'Then Daniel, whose name [is] Belteshazzar, hath been astonished about one hour, and his thoughts do trouble him; the king hath answered and said, O Belteshazzar, let not the dream and its interpretation trouble thee. Belteshazzar hath answered and said, My lord, the dream — to those hating thee, and its interpretation — to thine enemies!
The tree that thou hast seen, that hath become great and strong, and its height doth reach to the heavens, and its vision to all the land,
and its leaves [are] fair, and its budding great, and food for all [is] in it, under it dwell doth the beast of the field, and on its boughs sit do the birds of the heavens.
'Thou it [is], O king, for thou hast become great and mighty, and thy greatness hath become great, and hath reached to the heavens, and thy dominion to the end of the earth;
and that which the king hath seen — a sifter, even a holy one, coming down from the heavens, and he hath said, Cut down the tree, and destroy it; but the stump of its roots leave in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field, and with the dew of the heavens it is wet, and with the beast of the field [is] his portion, till that seven times pass over him.
'This [is] the interpretation, O king, and the decree of the Most High it [is] that hath come against my lord the king:
and they are driving thee away from men, and with the beast of the field is thy dwelling, and the herb as oxen they do cause thee to eat, and by the dew of the heavens they are wetting thee, and seven times do pass over thee, till that thou knowest that the Most High is ruler in the kingdom of men, and to whom He willeth He giveth it.
And that which they said — to leave the stump of the roots of the tree; thy kingdom for thee abideth, after that thou knowest that the heavens are ruling.
'Therefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and thy sins by righteousness break off, and thy perversity by pitying the poor, lo, it is a lengthening of thine ease.
'All — hath come on Nebuchadnezzar the king.
'At the end of twelve months, on the palace of the kingdom of Babylon he hath been walking;
the king hath answered and said, Is not this that great Babylon that I have built, for the house of the kingdom, in the might of my strength, and for the glory of mine honour?
'While the word is [in] the king's mouth a voice from the heavens hath fallen: To thee they are saying: O Nebuchadnezzar the king, the kingdom hath passed from thee,
and from men they are driving thee away, and with the beast of the field [is] thy dwelling, the herb as oxen they do cause thee to eat, and seven times do pass over thee, till that thou knowest that the Most High is ruler in the kingdom of men, and to whom He willeth He giveth it.
'In that hour the thing hath been fulfilled on Nebuchadnezzar, and from men he is driven, and the herb as oxen he eateth, and by the dew of the heavens his body is wet, till that his hair as eagles' hath become great, and his nails as birds.'
'And at the end of the days I, Nebuchadnezzar, mine eyes to the heavens have lifted up, and mine understanding unto me returneth, and the Most High I have blessed, and the Age-during Living One I have praised and honoured, whose dominion [is] a dominion age-during, and His kingdom with generation and generation;
and all who are dwelling on the earth as nothing are reckoned, and according to his will He is doing among the forces of the heavens and those dwelling on the earth, and there is none that doth clap with his hand, and saith to Him, What hast Thou done?
'At that time my understanding doth return unto me, and for the glory of my kingdom, my honour and my brightness doth return unto me, and to me my counsellors and my great men do seek, and over my kingdom I have been made right, and abundant greatness hath been added to me.
'Now, I, Nebuchadnezzar, am praising and exalting and honouring the King of the heavens, for all His works [are] truth, and His paths judgment, and those walking in pride He is able to humble.'
Belshazzar the king hath made a great feast to a thousand of his great men, and before the thousand he is drinking wine;
Belshazzar hath said — while tasting the wine — to bring in the vessels of gold and of silver that Nebuchadnezzar his father had taken from the temple that [is] in Jerusalem, that drink with them may the king, and his great men, his wives, and his concubines.
Then they have brought in the vessels of gold that had been taken out of the temple of the house of God that [is] in Jerusalem, and drunk with them have the king and his great men, his wives and his concubines;
they have drunk wine, and have praised the gods of gold, and of silver, of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.
In that hour come forth have fingers of a man's hand, and they are writing over-against the candlestick, on the plaster of the wall of the king's palace: and the king is seeing the extremity of the hand that is writing;
then the king's countenance hath changed, and his thoughts do trouble him, and the joints of his loins are loosed, and his knees are smiting one against another.
Call doth the king mightily, to bring up the enchanters, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers. Answered hath the king, and said to the wise men of Babylon, that, 'Any man who doth read this writing, and its interpretation doth shew me, purple he putteth on, and a bracelet of gold [is] on his neck, and third in the kingdom he doth rule.'
Then coming up are all the wise men of the king, and they are not able to read the writing, and the interpretation to make known to the king;
then the king Belshazzar is greatly troubled, and his countenance is changing in him, and his great men are perplexed.
The queen, on account of the words of the king and his great men, to the banquet-house hath come up. Answered hath the queen, and said, 'O king, to the ages live; let not thy thoughts trouble thee, nor thy countenance be changed:
there is a man in thy kingdom in whom [is] the spirit of the holy gods: and, in the days of thy father, light, and understanding, and wisdom — as the wisdom of the gods — was found in him; and king Nebuchadnezzar thy father, chief of the scribes, enchanters, Chaldeans, soothsayers, established him — thy father, O king —
because that an excellent spirit, and knowledge, and understanding, interpreting of dreams, and showing of enigmas, and loosing of knots was found in him, in Daniel, whose name the king made Belteshazzar: now let Daniel be called, and the interpretation he doth show.'
Then Daniel hath been caused to come up before the king; answered hath the king, and said to Daniel, 'Thou art that Daniel who [art] of the sons of the Removed of Judah, whom the king my father brought in out of Judah?
And I have heard of thee, that the spirit of the gods [is] in thee, and light, and understanding, and excellent wisdom have been found in thee.
'And now, caused to come up before me have been the wise men, the enchanters, that this writing they may read, and its interpretation to cause me to know: and they are not able to shew the interpretation of the thing:
and I — I have heard of thee, that thou art able to give interpretations, and to loose knots: now, lo — thou art able to read the writing, and its interpretation to cause me to know — purple thou dost put on, and a bracelet of gold [is] on thy neck, and third in the kingdom thou dost rule.'
Then hath Daniel answered and said before the king, 'Thy gifts be to thyself, and thy fee to another give; nevertheless, the writing I do read to the king, and the interpretation I cause him to know;
thou, O king, God Most High, a kingdom, and greatness, and glory, and honour, gave to Nebuchadnezzar thy father:
and because of the greatness that He gave to him, all peoples, nations, and languages were trembling and fearing before him: whom he willed he was slaying, and whom he willed he was keeping alive, and whom he willed he was raising up, and whom he willed he was making low;
and when his heart was high, and his spirit was strong to act proudly, he hath been caused to come down from the throne of his kingdom, and his glory they have caused to pass away from him,
and from the sons of men he is driven, and his heart with the beasts hath been like, and with the wild asses [is] his dwelling; the herb like oxen they cause him to eat, and by the dew of the heavens is his body wet, till that he hath known that God Most High is ruler in the kingdom of men, and whom He willeth He raiseth up over it.
'And thou, his son, Belshazzar, hast not humbled thy heart, though all this thou hast known;
and against the Lord of the heavens thou hast lifted up thyself; and the vessels of His house they have brought in before thee, and thou, and thy great men, thy wives, and thy concubines, are drinking wine with them, and gods of silver, and of gold, of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone, that are not seeing, nor hearing, nor knowing, thou hast praised: and the God in whose hand [is] thy breath, and all thy ways, Him thou hast not honoured.
'Then from before Him sent is the extremity of the hand, and the writing is noted down;
and this [is] the writing that is noted down: Numbered, Numbered, Weighed, and Divided.
This [is] the interpretation of the thing: Numbered — God hath numbered thy kingdom, and hath finished it.
Weighed — Thou art weighed in the balances, and hast been found lacking.
Divided — Divided is thy kingdom, and it hath been given to the Medes and Persians.'
Then hath Belshazzar said, and they have clothed Daniel with purple, and a bracelet of gold [is] on his neck, and they have proclaimed concerning him that he is the third ruler in the kingdom.
In that night Belshazzar king of the Chaldeans is slain,
and Darius the Mede hath received the kingdom, when a son of sixty and two years.
It hath been good before Darius, and he hath established over the kingdom satraps — a hundred and twenty — that they may be throughout the whole kingdom,
and higher than they three presidents, of whom Daniel [is] first, that these satraps may give to them an account, and the king have no loss.
Then this Daniel hath been overseer over the presidents and satraps, because that an excellent spirit [is] in him, and the king hath thought to establish him over the whole kingdom.
Then the presidents and satraps have been seeking to find a cause of complaint against Daniel concerning the kingdom, and any cause of complaint and corruption they are not able to find, because that he [is] faithful, and any error and corruption have not been found in him.
Then these men are saying, 'We do not find against this Daniel any cause of complaint, except we have found [it] against him in the law of his God.'
Then these presidents and satraps have assembled near the king, and thus they are saying to him: 'O king Darius, to the ages live!
Taken counsel have all the presidents of the kingdom, the prefects, and the satraps, the counsellors, and the governors, to establish a royal statute, and to strengthen an interdict, that any who seeketh a petition from any god and man until thirty days, save of thee, O king, is cast into a den of lions.
Now, O king, thou dost establish the interdict, and sign the writing, that it is not to be changed, as a law of Media and Persia, that doth not pass away.'
Therefore king Darius hath signed the writing and interdict.
And Daniel, when he hath known that the writing is signed, hath gone up to his house, and the window being opened for him, in his upper chamber, over-against Jerusalem, three times in a day he is kneeling on his knees, and praying, and confessing before his God, because that he was doing [it] before this.
Then these men have assembled, and found Daniel praying and entreating grace before his God;
then they have come near, yea, they are saying before the king concerning the king's interdict: 'Hast thou not signed an interdict, that any man who seeketh from any god and man until thirty days, save of thee, O king, is cast into a den of lions?' Answered hath the king, and said, 'The thing [is] certain as a law of Media and Persia, that doth not pass away.'
Then they have answered, yea, they are saying before the king, that, 'Daniel, who [is] of the sons of the Removed of Judah, hath not placed on thee, O king, [any] regard, nor on the interdict that thou hast signed, and three times in a day he is seeking his petition.'
Then the king, when he hath heard the matter, is greatly displeased at himself, and on Daniel he hath set the heart to deliver him, and till the going up of the sun he was arranging to deliver him.
Then these men have assembled near the king, and are saying to the king, 'know, O king, that the law of Media and Persia [is]: That any interdict and statute that the king doth establish is not to be changed.'
Then the king hath said, and they have brought Daniel, and have cast [him] into a den of lions. The king hath answered and said to Daniel, 'Thy God, whom thou art serving continually, Himself doth deliver thee.'
And a stone hath been brought and placed at the mouth of the den, and the king hath sealed it with his signet, and with the signet of his great men, that the purpose be not changed concerning Daniel.
Then hath the king gone to his palace, and he hath passed the night fasting, and dahavan have not been brought up before him, and his sleep hath fled [from] off him.
Then doth the king rise in the early morning, at the light, and in haste to the den of lions he hath gone;
and at his coming near to the den, to Daniel, with a grieved voice, he crieth. The king hath answered and said to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the living God, thy God, whom thou art serving continually, is He able to deliver thee from the lions?'
Then Daniel hath spoken with the king: 'O king, to the ages live:
my God hath sent His messenger, and hath shut the lions' mouths, and they have not injured me: because that before Him purity hath been found in me; and also before thee, O king, injury I have not done.'
Then was the king very glad for him, and he hath commanded Daniel to be taken up out of the den, and Daniel hath been taken up out of the den, and no injury hath been found in him, because he hath believed in his God.
And the king hath said, and they have brought those men who had accused Daniel, and to the den of lions they have cast them, they, their sons, and their wives; and they have not come to the lower part of the den till that the lions have power over them, and all their bones they have broken small.
Then Darius the king hath written to all the peoples, nations, and languages, who are dwelling in all the land: 'Your peace be great!
From before me is made a decree, that in every dominion of my kingdom they are trembling and fearing before the God of Daniel, for He [is] the living God, and abiding to the ages, and His kingdom that which [is] not destroyed, and His dominion [is] unto the end.
A deliverer, and rescuer, and doer of signs and wonders in the heavens and in earth [is] He who hath delivered Daniel from the paw of the lions.'
And this Daniel hath prospered in the reign of Darius, and in the reign of Cyrus the Persian.
In the first year of Belshazzar king of Babylon, Daniel hath seen a dream, and the visions of his head on his bed, then the dream he hath written, the chief of the things he hath said.
Answered hath Daniel and said, 'I was seeing in my vision by night, and lo, the four winds of the heavens are coming forth to the great sea;
and four great beasts are coming up from the sea, diverse one from another.
The first [is] like a lion, and it hath an eagle's wings. I was seeing till that its wings have been plucked, and it hath been lifted up from the earth, and on feet as a man it hath been caused to stand, and a heart of man is given to it.
And lo, another beast, a second, like to a bear, and to the same authority it hath been raised, and three ribs [are] in its mouth, between its teeth, and thus they are saying to it, Rise, consume much flesh.
'After this I was seeing, and lo, another like a leopard, and it hath four wings of a fowl on its back, and four heads hath the beast, and dominion is given to it.
'After this I was seeing in the visions of the night, and lo, a fourth beast, terrible and fearful, and exceedingly strong; and it hath iron teeth very great, it hath consumed, yea, it doth break small, and the remnant with its feet it hath trampled; and it [is] diverse from all the beasts that [are] before it; and it hath ten horns.
'I was considering about the horns, and lo, another horn, a little one, hath come up between them, and three of the first horns have been eradicated from before it, and lo, eyes as the eyes of man [are] in this horn, and a mouth speaking great things.
'I was seeing till that thrones have been thrown down, and the Ancient of Days is seated, His garment as snow [is] white, and the hair of his head [is] as pure wool, His throne flames of fire, its wheels burning fire.
A flood of fire is proceeding and coming forth from before Him, a thousand thousands do serve Him, and a myriad of myriads before Him do rise up, the Judge is seated, and the books have been opened.
'I was seeing, then, because of the voice of the great words that the horn is speaking, I was seeing till that the beast is slain, and his body hath been destroyed, and given to the burning fire;
and the rest of the beasts have caused their dominion to pass away, and a prolongation in life is given to them, till a season and a time.
'I was seeing in the visions of the night, and lo, with the clouds of the heavens as a son of man was [one] coming, and unto the Ancient of Days he hath come, and before Him they have brought him near.
And to him is given dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, and all peoples, nations, and languages do serve him, his dominion [is] a dominion age-during, that passeth not away, and his kingdom that which is not destroyed.
'Pierced hath been my spirit — I, Daniel — in the midst of the sheath, and the visions of my head trouble me;
I have drawn near unto one of those standing, and the certainty I seek from him of all this; and he hath said to me, yea, the interpretation of the things he hath caused me to know:
'These great beasts, that [are] four, [are] four kings, they rise up from the earth;
and receive the kingdom do the saints of the Most High, and they strengthen the kingdom unto the age, even unto the age of the ages.
'Then I wished for certainty concerning the fourth beast, that was diverse from them all, fearful exceedingly; its teeth of iron, and its nails of brass, it hath devoured, it doth break small, and the remnant with its feet it hath trampled;
and concerning the ten horns that [are] in its heads, and of the other that came up, and before which three have fallen, even of that horn that hath eyes, and a mouth speaking great things, and whose appearance [is] great above its companions.
'I was seeing, and this horn is making war with the saints, and hath prevailed over them,
till that the Ancient of Days hath come, and judgment is given to the saints of the Most High, and the time hath come, and the saints have strengthened the kingdom.
'Thus he said: The fourth beast is the fourth kingdom in the earth, that is diverse from all kingdoms, and it consumeth all the earth, and treadeth it down, and breaketh it small.
And the ten horns out of the kingdom [are] ten kings, they rise, and another doth rise after them, and it is diverse from the former, and three kings it humbleth;
and words as an adversary of the Most High it doth speak, and the saints of the Most High it doth wear out, and it hopeth to change seasons and law; and they are given into its hand, till a time, and times, and a division of a time.
'And the Judge is seated, and its dominion they cause to pass away, to cut off, and to destroy — unto the end;
and the kingdom, and the dominion, even the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heavens, is given to the people — the saints of the Most High, His kingdom [is] a kingdom age-during, and all dominions do serve and obey Him.
'Hitherto [is] the end of the matter. I, Daniel, greatly do my thoughts trouble me, and my countenance is changed on me, and the matter in my heart I have kept.
'In the third year of the reign of Belshazzar the king, a vision hath appeared unto me — I Daniel — after that which had appeared unto me at the beginning.
And I see in a vision, and it cometh to pass, in my seeing, and I [am] in Shushan the palace that [is] in Elam the province, and I see in a vision, and I have been by the stream Ulai.
And I lift up mine eyes, and look, and lo, a certain ram is standing before the stream, and it hath two horns, and the two horns [are] high; and the one [is] higher than the other, and the high one is coming up last.
I have seen the ram pushing westward, and northward, and southward, and no living creatures do stand before it, and there is none delivering out of its hand, and it hath done according to its pleasure, and hath exerted itself.
'And I have been considering, and lo, a young he-goat hath come from the west, over the face of the whole earth, whom none is touching in the earth; as to the young he-goat, a conspicuous horn [is] between its eyes.
And it cometh unto the ram possessing the two horns, that I had seen standing before the stream, and runneth unto it in the fury of its power.
And I have seen it coming near the ram, and it becometh embittered at it, and smiteth the ram, and breaketh its two horns, and there hath been no power in the ram to stand before it, and it casteth it to the earth, and trampleth it down, and there hath been no deliverer to the ram out of its power.
'And the young he-goat hath exerted itself very much, and when it is strong, broken hath been the great horn; and come up doth a vision of four in its place, at the four winds of the heavens.
And from the one of them come forth hath a little horn, and it exerteth itself greatly toward the south, and toward the east, and toward the beauteous [land];
yea, it exerteth unto the host of the heavens, and causeth to fall to the earth of the host, and of the stars, and trampleth them down.
And unto the prince of the host it exerteth itself, and by it taken away hath been the continual [sacrifice], and thrown down the base of his sanctuary.
And the host is given up, with the continual [sacrifice], through transgression, and it throweth down truth to the earth, and it hath worked, and prospered.
'And I hear a certain holy one speaking, and a certain holy one saith to the wonderful numberer who is speaking: Till when [is] the vision of the continual [sacrifice], and of the transgression, an astonishment, to make both sanctuary and host a treading down?
And he saith unto me, Till evening — morning two thousand and three hundred, then is the holy place declared right.
'And it cometh to pass in my seeing — I, Daniel — the vision, that I require understanding, and lo, standing over-against me [is] as the appearance of a mighty one.
And I hear a voice of man between [the banks of] Ulai, and he calleth and saith: Gabriel, cause this [one] to understand the appearance.
And he cometh in near my station, and at his coming in I have been afraid, and I fall on my face, and he saith unto me: Understand, son of man, for at the time of the end [is] the vision.
And in his speaking with me, I have been in a trance on my face, on the earth; and he cometh against me, and causeth me to stand on my station,
and saith: Lo, I — I am causing thee to know that which is in the latter end of the indignation; for, at the appointed time [is] the end.
'The ram that thou hast seen possessing two horns, [are] the kings of Media and Persia.
And the young he-goat, the hairy one, [is] the king of Javan; and the great horn that [is] between its eyes is the first king;
and that being broken, stand up do four in its place, four kingdoms from the nation do stand up, and not in its power.
'And in the latter end of their kingdom, about the perfecting of the transgressors, stand up doth a king, fierce of face, and understanding hidden things;
and his power hath been mighty, and not by his own power; and wonderful things he destroyeth, and he hath prospered, and wrought, and destroyed mighty ones, and the people of the Holy Ones.
'And by his understanding he hath also caused deceit to prosper in his hand, and in his heart he exerteth himself, and by ease he destroyeth many; and against the prince of princes he standeth — and without hand he is broken.
And the appearance of the evening and of the morning, that is told, is true; and thou, hide thou the vision, for [it is] after many days.'
And I, Daniel, have been, yea, I became sick [for] days, and I rise, and do the king's work, and am astonished at the appearance, and there is none understanding.
In the first year of Darius, son of Ahasuerus, of the seed of the Medes, who hath been made king over the kingdom of the Chaldeans,
in the first year of his reign, I, Daniel, have understood by books the number of the years, (in that a word of Jehovah hath been unto Jeremiah the prophet,) concerning the fulfilling of the wastes of Jerusalem — seventy years;
and I set my face unto the Lord God, to seek [by] prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes.
And I pray to Jehovah my God, and confess, and say: 'I beseech Thee, O Lord God, the great and the fearful, keeping the covenant and the kindness to those loving Him, and to those keeping His commands;
we have sinned, and done perversely, and done wickedly, and rebelled, to turn aside from Thy commands, and from Thy judgments:
and we have not hearkened unto Thy servants, the prophets, who have spoken in Thy name unto our kings, our heads, and our fathers, and to all the people of the land.
'To Thee, O Lord, [is] the righteousness, and to us the shame of face, as [at] this day, to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to all Israel, who are near, and who are far off, in all the lands whither Thou hast driven them, in their trespass that they have trespassed against Thee.
'O Lord, to us [is] the shame of face, to our kings, to our heads, and to our fathers, in that we have sinned against Thee.
'To the Lord our God [are] the mercies and the forgivenesses, for we have rebelled against Him,
and have not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah our God, to walk in His laws, that He hath set before us by the hand of His servants the prophets;
and all Israel have transgressed Thy law, to turn aside so as not to hearken to Thy voice; and poured on us is the execration, and the oath, that is written in the law of Moses, servant of God, because we have sinned against Him.
'And He confirmeth His words that He hath spoken against us, and against our judges who have judged us, to bring in upon us great evil, in that it hath not been done under the whole heavens as it hath been done in Jerusalem,
as it is written in the law of Moses, all this evil hath come upon us, and we have not appeased the face of Jehovah our God to turn back from our iniquities, and to act wisely in Thy truth.
And Jehovah doth watch for the evil, and bringeth it upon us, for righteous [is] Jehovah our God concerning all His works that He hath done, and we have not hearkened to His voice.
And now, O Lord our God, who hast brought forth Thy people from the land of Egypt by a strong hand, and dost make for Thee a name as at this day, we have sinned, we have done wickedly.
'O Lord, according to all Thy righteous acts, let turn back, I pray Thee, Thine anger and Thy fury from Thy city Jerusalem, Thy holy mount, for by our sins, and by the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and Thy people [are] for a reproach to all our neighbours;
and now, hearken, O our God, unto the prayer of Thy servant, and unto his supplication, and cause Thy face to shine on Thy sanctuary that [is] desolate, for the Lord's sake.
'Incline, O my God, Thine ear, and hear, open Thine eyes and see our desolations, and the city on which Thy name is called; for not for our righteous acts are we causing our supplications to fall before Thee, but for Thy mercies that [are] many.
O lord, hear, O Lord, forgive; O Lord, attend and do; do not delay, for Thine own sake, O my God, for Thy name is called on Thy city, and on Thy people.'
And while I am speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin, and the sin of my people Israel, and causing my supplication to fall before Jehovah my God, for the holy mount of my God,
yea, while I am speaking in prayer, then that one Gabriel, whom I had seen in vision at the commencement, being caused to fly swiftly, is coming unto me at the time of the evening present.
And he giveth understanding, and speaketh with me, and saith, 'O Daniel, now I have come forth to cause thee to consider understanding wisely;
at the commencement of thy supplications hath the word come forth, and I have come to declare [it], for thou [art] greatly desired, and understand thou concerning the matter, and consider concerning the appearance.
'Seventy weeks are determined for thy people, and for thy holy city, to shut up the transgression, and to seal up sins, and to cover iniquity, and to bring in righteousness age-during, and to seal up vision and prophet, and to anoint the holy of holies.
And thou dost know, and dost consider wisely, from the going forth of the word to restore and to build Jerusalem till Messiah the Leader [is] seven weeks, and sixty and two weeks: the broad place hath been built again, and the rampart, even in the distress of the times.
And after the sixty and two weeks, cut off is Messiah, and the city and the holy place are not his, the Leader who hath come doth destroy the people; and its end [is] with a flood, and till the end [is] war, determined [are] desolations.
And he hath strengthened a covenant with many — one week, and [in] the midst of the week he causeth sacrifice and present to cease, and by the wing of abominations he is making desolate, even till the consummation, and that which is determined is poured on the desolate one.'
In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia, a thing is revealed to Daniel, whose name is called Belteshazzar, and the thing [is] true, and the warfare [is] great: and he hath understood the thing, and hath understanding about the appearance.
'In those days, I, Daniel, have been mourning three weeks of days;
desirable bread I have not eaten, and flesh and wine hath not come in unto my mouth, and I have not anointed myself at all, till the completion of three weeks of days.
'And in the twenty and fourth day of the first month, I have been by the side of the great river, that [is] Hiddekel:
and I lift up mine eyes, and look, and lo, a certain one clothed in linen, and his loins girt with pure gold of Uphaz,
and his body as a beryl, and his face as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms and his feet as the aspect of bright brass, and the voice of his words as the voice of a multitude.
'And I have seen — I, Daniel, by myself — the appearance: and the men who have been with me have not seen the appearance, but a great trembling hath fallen on them, and they flee to be hidden;
and I have been left by myself, and I see this great appearance, and there hath been no power left in me, and my honour hath been turned in me to corruption, yea, I have not retained power.
'And I hear the voice of his words, and when I hear the voice of his words, then I have been in a trance on my face, and my face [is] to the earth;
and lo, a hand hath come against me, and shaketh me on my knees and the palms of my hands.
'And he saith unto me: Daniel, man greatly desired, attend to the words that I am speaking unto thee, and stand on thy station, for now I have been sent unto thee. 'And when he speaketh with me this word, I have stood trembling.
And he saith unto me: Do not fear, Daniel, for from the first day that thou didst give thy heart to understand, and to humble thyself before thy God, thy words have been heard, and I have come because of thy words.
'And the head of the kingdom of Persia is standing over-against me twenty and one days, and lo, Michael, first of the chief heads, hath come in to help me, and I have remained there near the kings of Persia;
and I have come to cause thee to understand that which doth happen to thy people in the latter end of the days, for yet the vision [is] after days.
'And when he speaketh with me about these things, I have set my face toward the earth, and have been silent;
and lo, as the manner of the sons of men, he is striking against my lips, and I open my mouth, and I speak, and say unto him who is standing over-against me: My lord, by the appearance turned have been my pangs against me, and I have retained no power.
And how is the servant of this my lord able to speak with this my lord? as for me, henceforth there remaineth in me no power, yea, breath hath not been left in me.
'And he addeth, and striketh against me, as the appearance of a man, and strengtheneth me,
and he saith: Do not fear, O man greatly desired, peace to thee, be strong, yea, be strong; and when he speaketh with me, I have strengthened myself, and I say, Let my lord speak, for thou hast strengthened me.
And he saith, Hast thou known why I have come unto thee? and now I turn back to fight with the head of Persia; yea, I am going forth, and lo, the head of Javan hath come;
but I declare to thee that which is noted down in the Writing of Truth, and there is not one strengthening himself with me, concerning these, except Michael your head.
'And I, in the first year of Darius the Mede, my standing [is] for a strengthener, and for a stronghold to him;
and, now, truth I declare to thee, Lo, yet three kings are standing for Persia, and the fourth doth become far richer than all, and according to his strength by his riches he stirreth up the whole, with the kingdom of Javan.
And a mighty king hath stood, and he hath ruled a great dominion, and hath done according to his will;
and according to his standing is his kingdom broken, and divided to the four winds of the heavens, and not to his posterity, nor according to his dominion that he ruled, for his kingdom is plucked up — and for others apart from these.
'And a king of the south — even of his princes — doth become strong, and doth prevail against him, and hath ruled; a great dominion [is] his dominion.
'And at the end of years they do join themselves together, and a daughter of the king of the south doth come in unto the king of the north to do upright things; and she doth not retain the power of the arm; and he doth not stand, nor his arm; and she is given up, she, and those bringing her in, and her child, and he who is strengthening her in [these] times.
'And [one] hath stood up from a branch of her roots, [in] his station, and he cometh in unto the bulwark, yea, he cometh into a stronghold of the king of the south, and hath wrought against them, and hath done mightily;
and also their gods, with their princes, with their desirable vessels of silver and gold, into captivity he bringeth [into] Egypt; and he doth stand more years than the king of the north.
'And the king of the south hath come into the kingdom, and turned back unto his own land;
and his sons stir themselves up, and have gathered a multitude of great forces, and he hath certainly come in, and overflowed, and passed through, and he turneth back, and they stir themselves up unto his stronghold.
And the king of the south doth become embittered, and hath gone forth and fought with him, with the king of the north, and hath caused a great multitude to stand, and the multitude hath been given into his hand,
and he hath carried away the multitude, his heart is high, and he hath caused myriads to fall, and he doth not become strong.
'And the king of the north hath turned back, and hath caused a multitude to stand, greater than the first, and at the end of the times a second time he doth certainly come in with a great force, and with much substance;
and in those times many do stand up against the king of the south, and sons of the destroyers of thy people do lift themselves up to establish the vision — and they have stumbled.
'And the king of the north cometh in, and poureth out a mount, and hath captured fenced cities; and the arms of the south do not stand, nor the people of his choice, yea, there is no power to stand.
And he who is coming unto him doth according to his will, and there is none standing before him; and he standeth in the desirable land, and [it is] wholly in his hand.
And he setteth his face to go in with the strength of his whole kingdom, and upright ones with him; and he hath wrought, and the daughter of women he giveth to him, to corrupt her; and she doth not stand, nor is for him.
'And he turneth back his face to the isles, and hath captured many; and a prince hath caused his reproach of himself to cease; without his reproach he turneth [it] back to him.
And he turneth back his face to the strongholds of his land, and hath stumbled and fallen, and is not found.
'And stood up on his station hath [one] causing an exactor to pass over the honour of the kingdom, and in a few days he is destroyed, and not in anger, nor in battle.
'And stood up on his station hath a despicable one, and they have not given unto him the honour of the kingdom, and he hath come in quietly, and hath strengthened the kingdom by flatteries.
And the arms of the flood are overflowed from before him, and are broken; and also the leader of the covenant.
And after they join themselves unto him, he worketh deceit, and hath increased, and hath been strong by a few of the nation.
Peaceably even into the fertile places of the province He cometh, and he hath done that which his fathers did not, nor his fathers' fathers; prey, and spoil, and substance, to them he scattereth, and against fenced places he deviseth his devices, even for a time.
'And he stirreth up his power and his heart against the king of the south with a great force, and the king of the south stirreth himself up to battle with a very great and mighty force, and standeth not, for they devise devices against him,
and those eating his portion of food destroy him, and his force overfloweth, and fallen have many wounded.
'And both of the kings' hearts [are] to do evil, and at one table they speak lies, and it doth not prosper, for yet the end [is] at a time appointed.
And he turneth back [to] his land with great substance, and his heart [is] against the holy covenant, and he hath wrought, and turned back to his land.
At the appointed time he turneth back, and hath come against the south, and it is not as the former, and as the latter.
And ships of Chittim have come in against him, and he hath been pained, and hath turned back, and hath been insolent toward the holy covenant, and hath wrought, and turned back, and he understandeth concerning those forsaking the holy covenant.
And strong ones out of him stand up, and have polluted the sanctuary, the stronghold, and have turned aside the continual [sacrifice], and appointed the desolating abomination.
And those acting wickedly [against] the covenant, he defileth by flatteries; and the people knowing their God are strong, and have wrought.
And the teachers of the people give understanding to many; and they have stumbled by sword, and by flame, by captivity, and by spoil — days.
And in their stumbling, they are helped — a little help, and joined to them have been many with flatteries.
And some of the teachers do stumble for refining by them, and for purifying, and for making white — till the end of the time, for [it is] yet for a time appointed.
'And the king hath done according to his will, and exalteth himself, and magnifieth himself against every god, and against the God of gods he speaketh wonderful things, and hath prospered till the indignation hath been completed, for that which is determined hath been done.
And unto the God of his fathers he doth not attend, nor to the desire of women, yea, to any god he doth not attend, for against all he magnifieth himself.
And to the god of strongholds, on his station, he giveth honour; yea, to a god whom his fathers knew not he giveth honour, with gold, and with silver, and with precious stone, and with desirable things.
And he hath dealt in the fortresses of the strongholds with a strange god whom he hath acknowledged; he multiplieth honour, and hath caused them to rule over many, and the ground he apportioneth at a price.
'And at the time of the end, push himself forward with him doth a king of the south, and storm against him doth a king of the north, with chariot, and with horsemen, and with many ships; and he hath come in to the lands, and hath overflowed, and passed over,
and hath come into the desirable land, and many do stumble, and these escape from his hand: Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the sons of Ammon.
'And he sendeth forth his hand upon the lands, and the land of Egypt is not for an escape;
and he hath ruled over treasures of gold and of silver, and over all the desirable things of Egypt, and Lubim and Cushim [are] at his steps.
'And reports trouble him out of the east and out of the north, and he hath gone forth in great fury to destroy, and to devote many to destruction;
and he planteth the tents of his palace between the seas and the holy desirable mountain, and hath come unto his end, and there is no helper to him.
'And at that time stand up doth Michael, the great head, who is standing up for the sons of thy people, and there hath been a time of distress, such as hath not been since there hath been a nation till that time, and at that time do thy people escape, every one who is found written in the book.
'And the multitude of those sleeping in the dust of the ground do awake, some to life age-during, and some to reproaches — to abhorrence age-during.
And those teaching do shine as the brightness of the expanse, and those justifying the multitude as stars to the age and for ever.
And thou, O Daniel, hide the things, and seal the book till the time of the end, many do go to and fro, and knowledge is multiplied.'
And I have looked — I, Daniel — and lo, two others are standing, one here at the edge of the flood, and one there at the edge of the flood,
and he saith to the one clothed in linen, who [is] upon the waters of the flood, 'Till when [is] the end of these wonders?'
And I hear the one clothed in linen, who [is] upon the waters of the flood, and he doth lift up his right hand and his left unto the heavens, and sweareth by Him who is living to the age, that, 'After a time, times, and a half, and at the completion of the scattering of the power of the holy people, finished are all these.'
And I have heard, and I do not understand, and I say, 'O my lord, what [is] the latter end of these?'
And he saith, 'Go, Daniel; for hidden and sealed [are] the things till the time of the end;
Purify themselves, yea, make themselves white, yea, refined are many: and the wicked have done wickedly, and none of the wicked understand, and those acting wisely do understand;
and from the time of the turning aside of the perpetual [sacrifice], and to the giving out of the desolating abomination, [are] days a thousand, two hundred, and ninety.
O the blessedness of him who is waiting earnestly, and doth come to the days, a thousand, three hundred, thirty and five.
And thou, go on to the end, then thou dost rest, and dost stand in thy lot at the end of the days.'
A word of Jehovah that hath been unto Hosea, son of Beeri, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah, kings of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam son of Joash, king of Israel:
The commencement of Jehovah's speaking by Hosea. And Jehovah saith unto Hosea, 'Go, take to thee a woman of whoredoms, and children of whoredoms, for utterly go a-whoring doth the land from after Jehovah.'
And he goeth and taketh Gomer daughter of Diblaim, and she conceiveth and beareth to him a son;
and Jehovah saith unto him, 'Call his name Jezreel, for yet a little, and I have charged the blood of Jezreel on the house of Jehu, and have caused to cease the kingdom of the house of Israel;
and it hath come to pass in that day that I have broken the bow of Israel, in the valley of Jezreel.'
And she conceiveth again, and beareth a daughter, and He saith to him, 'Call her name Lo-Ruhamah, for I add no more to pity the house of Israel, for I do utterly take them away;
and the house of Judah I pity, and have saved them by Jehovah their God, and do not save them by bow, and by sword, and by battle, by horses, and by horsemen.'
And she weaneth Lo-Ruhamah, and conceiveth, and beareth a son;
and He saith, 'Call his name Lo-Ammi, for ye [are] not My people, and I am not for you;
and the number of the sons of Israel hath been as the sand of the sea, that is not measured nor numbered, and it hath come to pass in the place where it is said to them, Ye [are] not My people, it is said to them, Sons of the Living God;
and gathered have been the sons of Judah and the sons of Israel together, and they have appointed to themselves one head, and have gone up from the land, for great [is] the day of Jezreel.
'Say ye to your brethren — Ammi, And to your sisters — Ruhamah.
Plead ye with your mother — plead, (For she [is] not My wife, and I [am] not her husband,) And she turneth her whoredoms from before her, And her adulteries from between her breasts,
Lest I strip her naked. And have set her up as [in] the day of her birth, And have made her as a wilderness, And have set her as a dry land, And have put her to death with thirst.
And her sons I do not pity, For sons of whoredoms [are] they,
For gone a-whoring hath their mother, Acted shamefully hath their conceiver, For she hath said, I go after my lovers, Those giving my bread and my water, My wool and my flax, my oil and my drink.
Therefore, lo, I am hedging up thy way with thorns, And I have made for her a wall, And her paths she doth not find.
And she hath pursued her lovers, And she doth not overtake them, And hath sought them, and doth not find, And she hath said: I go, and I turn back unto My first husband, For — better to me then than now.
And she knew not that I had given to her, The corn, and the new wine, and the oil. Yea, silver I did multiply to her, And the gold they prepared for Baal.
Therefore do I turn back, And I have taken My corn in its season, And My new wine in its appointed time, And I have taken away My wool and My flax, covering her nakedness.
And now do I reveal her dishonour before the eyes of her lovers, And none doth deliver her out of My hand.
And I have caused to cease all her joy, Her festival, her new moon, and her sabbath, Even all her appointed times,
And made desolate her vine and her fig-tree, Of which she said, A gift they [are] to me, That my lovers have given to me, And I have made them for a forest, And consumed them hath a beast of the field.
And I have charged on her the days of the Baalim, To whom she maketh perfume, And putteth on her ring and her ornament, And goeth after her lovers, And Me forgat — an affirmation of Jehovah.
Therefore, lo, I am enticing her, And have caused her to go to the wilderness, And I have spoken unto her heart,
And given to her her vineyards from thence, And the valley of Achor for an opening of hope, And she hath responded there as in the days of her youth, And as in the day of her coming up out of the land of Egypt.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, An affirmation of Jehovah, Thou dost call Me — My husband, And dost not call Me any more — My lord.
And I have turned aside the names of the lords from her mouth, And they are not remembered any more by their name.
And I have made to them a covenant in that day, with the beast of the field, And with the fowl of the heavens, And the creeping thing of the ground, And bow, and sword, and war I break from off the land, And have caused them to lie down confidently.
And I have betrothed thee to Me to the age, And betrothed thee to Me in righteousness, And in judgment, and kindness, and mercies,
And betrothed thee to Me in faithfulness, And thou hast known Jehovah.
And it hath come to pass in that day, I answer — an affirmation of Jehovah, I answer the heavens, and they answer the earth.
And the earth doth answer the corn, And the new wine, and the oil, And they answer Jezreel.
And I have sowed her to Me in the land, And I have pitied Lo-Ruhamah, And I have said to Lo-Ammi, My people thou [art], and it saith, My God!'
And Jehovah saith unto me: 'Again, go, love a woman, loved of a friend, and an adulteress, like the loved of Jehovah, the sons of Israel, and they are turning unto other gods, and are lovers of grape-cakes.'
And I buy her to me for fifteen silverlings, and a homer and a letech of barley;
and I say unto her, 'Many days thou dost remain for Me, thou dost not go a-whoring, nor become any one's; and I also [am] for thee.'
For many days remain do the sons of Israel without a king, and there is no prince, and there is no sacrifice, and there is no standing pillar, and there is no ephod and teraphim.
Afterwards turned back have the sons of Israel, and sought Jehovah their God, and David their king, and have hastened unto Jehovah, and unto His goodness, in the latter end of the days.
'Hear a word of Jehovah, sons of Israel, For a strife [is] to Jehovah with inhabitants of the land, For there is no truth, nor kindness, Nor knowledge of God, in the land,
Swearing, and lying, and murdering, And stealing, and committing adultery — have increased, And blood against blood hath touched.
Therefore mourn doth the land, And weak is every dweller in it, With the beast of the field, And with the fowl of the heavens, And the fishes of the sea — they are removed.
Only, let no one strive, nor reprove a man, And thy people [are] as those striving with a priest.
And thou hast stumbled in the day, And stumbled hath also a prophet with thee in the night, And I have cut off thy mother.
Cut off have been My people for lack of knowledge, Because thou knowledge hast rejected, I reject thee from being priest to Me, And thou forgettest the law of thy God, I forget thy sons, I also!
According to their abundance so they sinned against Me, Their honour into shame I change.
The sin of My people they do eat, And unto their iniquity lift up their soul.
And it hath been, like people, like priest, And I have charged on it its ways, And its habitual doings I return to it.
And they have eaten, and are not satisfied, They have gone a-whoring, and increase not, For they have left off taking heed to Jehovah.
Whoredom, and wine, and new wine, take the heart,
My people at its staff asketh and its rod declareth to it, For a spirit of whoredoms hath caused to err, And they go a-whoring from under their God.
On tops of the mountains they do sacrifice, And on the hills they make perfume, Under oak, and poplar, and terebinth, For good [is] its shade.
Therefore commit whoredom do your daughters, And your spouses commit adultery, I do not see after your daughters when they commit whoredom, And after your spouses when they commit adultery, For they with the harlots are separated, And with the whores they do sacrifice, A people that doth not understand kicketh.
Though a harlot thou [art], O Israel, Let not Judah become guilty, And come not ye in to Gilgal, nor go up to Beth-Aven, Nor swear ye, Jehovah liveth.
For as a refractory heifer hath Israel turned aside, Now doth Jehovah feed them as a lamb in a large place.
Joined to idols [is] Ephraim, let him alone.
Sour [is] their drink, They have gone diligently a-whoring, Her protectors have loved shame thoroughly.
Distressed her hath wind with its wings, And they are ashamed of their sacrifices!
'Hear this, O priests, and attend, O house of Israel, And, O house of the king, give ear, For the judgment [is] for you, For, a snare ye have been on Mizpah, And a net spread out on Tabor.
And to slaughter sinners have gone deep, And I [am] a fetter to them all.
I have known Ephraim, And Israel hath not been hid from me, For now thou hast gone a-whoring, Ephraim, Defiled is Israel.
They give not up their habitual doings, To turn back unto their God, For a spirit of whoredoms [is] in their midst, And Jehovah they have not known.
And humbled hath been the excellency of Israel to his face, And Israel and Ephraim stumble by their iniquity, Stumbled also hath Judah with them.
With their flock and with their herd, They go to seek Jehovah, and do not find, He hath withdrawn from them.
Against Jehovah they dealt treacherously, For strange sons they have begotten, Now consume them doth a month [with] their portions.
Blow ye a cornet in Gibeah, a trumpet in Ramah, Shout, O Beth-Aven, after thee, O Benjamin.
Ephraim is for a desolation in a day of reproof, Among the tribes of Israel I have made known a sure thing.
Princes of Judah have been as those removing a border, On them I do pour out as water My wrath.
Oppressed is Ephraim, broken in judgment, When he pleased he went after the command.
And I [am] as a moth to Ephraim, And as a rotten thing to the house of Judah.
And see doth Ephraim his sickness, and Judah his wound, And Ephraim goeth unto Asshur, And sendeth unto a warlike king, And he is not able to give healing to you, Nor doth he remove from you a scar.
For I [am] as a lion to Ephraim, And as a young lion to the house of Judah, I — I tear and go, I bear away, and there is no deliverer.
I go — I turn back unto My place, Till that they are desolate, and have sought My face. In their distress they do seek Me speedily!'
'Come, and we turn back unto Jehovah, For He hath torn, and He doth heal us, He doth smite, and He bindeth us up.
He doth revive us after two days, In the third day He doth raise us up, And we live before Him.
And we know — we pursue to know Jehovah, As the dawn prepared is His going forth, And He cometh in as a shower to us, As gathered rain — sprinkling earth.'
What do I do to thee, O Ephraim? What do I do to thee, O Judah? Your goodness [is] as a cloud of the morning, And as dew rising early — going.
Therefore I have hewed by prophets, I have slain them by sayings of My mouth, And My judgments to the light goeth forth.
For kindness I desired, and not sacrifice, And a knowledge of God above burnt-offerings.
And they, as Adam, transgressed a covenant, There they dealt treacherously against me.
Gilead [is] a city of workers of iniquity, Slippery from blood.
And as bands do wait for a man, A company of priests do murder — the way to Shechem, For wickedness they have done.
In the house of Israel I have seen a horrible thing, There [is] the whoredom of Ephraim — defiled is Israel.
Also, O Judah, appointed is a harvest to thee, In My turning back [to] the captivity of My people!
'When I give healing to Israel, Then revealed is the iniquity of Ephraim, And the wickedness of Samaria, For they have wrought falsehood, And a thief doth come in, Stript off hath a troop in the street,
And they do not say to their heart, [That] all their evil I have remembered, Now compassed them have their doings, Over-against My face they have been.
With their wickedness they make glad a king, And with their lies — princes.
All of them [are] adulterers, Like a burning oven of a baker, He ceaseth from stirring up after kneading the dough, till its leavening.
A day of our king! Princes have polluted themselves [with] the poison of wine, He hath drawn out his hand with scorners.
For they have drawn near, As an oven [is] their heart, In their lying in wait all the night sleep doth their baker, Morning! he is burning as a flaming fire.
All of them are warm as an oven, And they have devoured their judges, All their kings have fallen, There is none calling unto Me among them.
Ephraim! among peoples he mixeth himself, Ephraim hath been a cake unturned.
Devoured have strangers his power, And he hath not known, Also old age hath sprinkled [itself] on him, And he hath not known.
And humbled hath been the excellency of Israel to his face, And they have not turned back unto Jehovah their God, Nor have they sought Him for all this.
And Ephraim is as a simple dove without heart, Egypt they called on — [to] Asshur they have gone.
When they go I spread over them My net, As the fowl of the heavens I bring them down, I chastise them as their company hath heard.
Woe to them, for they wandered from Me, Destruction to them, for they transgressed against Me, And I — I ransom them, and they have spoken lies against Me,
And have not cried unto Me with their heart, but howl on their beds, For corn and new wine they assemble themselves, They turn aside against Me.
And I instructed — I strengthened their arms, And concerning Me they think evil!
They turn back — not to the Most High, They have been as a deceitful bow, Fall by sword do their princes, From the insolence of their tongue, This [is] their derision in the land of Egypt!
'Unto thy mouth — a trumpet, As an eagle against the house of Jehovah, Because they transgressed My covenant, And against My law they have rebelled.
To Me they cry, 'My God, we — Israel — have known Thee.'
Cast off good hath Israel, an enemy pursueth him.
They have made kings, and not by Me, They have made princes, and I have not known, Their silver and their gold they have made to them idols, So that they are cut off.
Cast off hath thy calf, O Samaria, Burned hath Mine anger against them, Till when are they not capable of purity?
For even it [is] of Israel; an artificer made it, And it [is] not God, For the calf of Samaria is fragments!
For wind they sow, and a hurricane they reap, Stalk it hath none — a shoot not yielding grain, If so be it yield — strangers do swallow it up.
Israel hath been swallowed up, Now they have been among nations, As a vessel in which is no delight.
For they — they have gone up [to] Asshur, A wild ass alone by himself [is] Ephraim, They have hired lovers!
Also though they hire among nations, Now I gather them, and they are pained a little, From the burden of a king of princes.
Because Ephraim did multiply altars to sin, They have been to him altars to sin.
I write for him numerous things of My law, As a strange thing they have been reckoned.
The sacrifices of Mine offerings! They sacrifice flesh, and they eat, Jehovah hath not accepted them, Now doth He remember their iniquity, And inspect their sin, They — [to] Egypt they turn back.
And forget doth Israel his Maker, and buildeth temples, And Judah hath multiplied cities of defence, And I have sent a fire into his cities, And it hath consumed their palaces!
'Rejoice not, O Israel, be not joyful like the peoples, For thou hast gone a-whoring from thy God, Thou hast loved a gift near all floors of corn.
Floor and wine-press do not delight them, And new wine doth fail in her,
They do not abide in the land of Jehovah, And turned back hath Ephraim [to] Egypt, And in Asshur an unclean thing they eat.
They pour not out wine to Jehovah, Nor are they sweet to Him, Their sacrifices [are] as bread of mourners to them, All eating it are unclean: For their bread [is] for themselves, It doth not come into the house of Jehovah.
What do ye at the day appointed? And at the day of Jehovah's festival?
For, lo, they have gone because of destruction, Egypt gathereth them, Moph burieth them, The desirable things of their silver, Nettles possess them — a thorn [is] in their tents.
Come in have the days of inspection, Come in have the days of recompence, Israel doth know! a fool [is] the prophet, Mad [is] the man of the Spirit, Because of the abundance of thine iniquity, And great [is] the hatred.
Ephraim is looking [away] from My God, The prophet! a snare of a fowler [is] over all his ways, Hatred [is] in the house of his God.
They have gone deep — have done corruptly, As [in] the days of Gibeah, He doth remember their iniquity, He doth inspect their sins.
As grapes in a wilderness I found Israel, As the first-fruit in a fig-tree, at its beginning, I have seen your fathers, They — they have gone in [to] Baal-Peor, And are separated to a shameful thing, And are become abominable like their love.
Ephraim [is] as a fowl, Fly away doth their honour, without birth, And without womb, and without conception.
For though they nourish their sons, I have made them childless — without man, Surely also, woe to them, when I turn aside from them.
Ephraim! when I have looked to the rock, Is planted in comeliness, And Ephraim [is] to bring out unto a slayer his sons.
Give to them, Jehovah — what dost Thou give? Give to them miscarrying womb, and dry breasts.
All their evil [is] in Gilgal, Surely there I have hated them, Because of the evil of their doings, Out of My house I do drive them, I add not to love them, all their heads [are] apostates.
Ephraim hath been smitten, Their root hath dried up, fruit they yield not, Yea, though they bring forth, I have put to death the desired of their womb.
Reject them doth my God, Because they have not hearkened to Him, And they are wanderers among nations!
'An empty vine [is] Israel, Fruit he maketh like to himself, According to the abundance of his fruit, He hath multiplied for the altars, According to the goodness of his land, They have made goodly standing-pillars.
Their heart hath been divided, now they are guilty, He doth break down their altars, He doth destroy their standing-pillars.
For now they say: We have no king, Because we have not feared Jehovah, And the king — what doth he for us?
They have spoken words, To swear falsehood in making a covenant, And flourished as a poisonous herb hath judgment, on the furrows of a field.
For the calves of Beth-Aven fear do inhabitants of Samaria, Surely mourned on account of it hath its people, And its priests on account of it leap about, Because of its honour, for it hath removed from it,
Also it to Asshur is carried, a present to a warlike king, Shame doth Ephraim receive, And ashamed is Israel of its own counsel.
Cut off is Samaria! Its king [is] as a chip on the face of the waters.
And destroyed have been high places of Aven, the sin of Israel. Thorn and bramble go up on their altars, And they have said to hills, Cover us, And to heights, Fall upon us.
From the days of Gibeah thou hast sinned, O Israel, There they have stood, Not overtake them in Gibeah doth battle, Because of sons of perverseness.
When I desire, then I do bind them, And gathered against them have peoples, When they bind themselves to their two iniquities.
And Ephraim [is] a trained heifer — loving to thresh, And I — I have passed over on the goodness of its neck, I cause [one] to ride Ephraim, Plough doth Judah, harrow for him doth Jacob.
Sow for yourselves in righteousness, Reap according to loving-kindness, Till for yourselves tillage of knowledge, To seek Jehovah, Till he come and shew righteousness to you.
Ye have ploughed wickedness, Perversity ye have reaped, Ye have eaten the fruit of lying, For thou hast trusted in thy way, In the abundance of thy might.
And rise doth a tumult among thy people, And all thy fortresses are spoiled, As the spoiling of Shalman of Beth-Arbel, In a day of battle, Mother against sons dashed in pieces.
Thus hath Beth-El done to you, Because of the evil of your wickedness, In the dawn cut off utterly is a king of Israel!
Because Israel [is] a youth, and I love him, Out of Egypt I have called for My Son.
They have called to them rightly, They have gone from before them, To lords they do sacrifice, And to graven images they make perfume.
And I have caused Ephraim to go on foot, Taking them by their arms, And they have not known that I strengthened them.
With cords of man I do draw them, With thick cords of love, And I am to them as a raiser up of a yoke on their jaws, And I incline unto him — I feed [him].
He turneth not back unto the land of Egypt, And Asshur — he [is] his king, For they have refused to return.
Grievous hath been the sword in his cities, And it hath ended his bars, and consumed — from their own counsels.
And My people are hanging in suspense, about My returning, And unto the Most High they do call, Together they exalt not.
How do I give thee up, O Ephraim? Do I deliver thee up, O Israel? How do I make thee as Admah? Do I set thee as Zeboim? Turned in Me is My heart, kindled together have been My repentings.
I do not the fierceness of My anger, I turn not back to destroy Ephraim, For God I [am], and not a man. In thy midst the Holy One, and I enter not in enmity,
After Jehovah they go — as a lion He roareth, When He doth roar, then tremble do the sons from the west.
They tremble as a sparrow out of Egypt, And as a dove out of the land of Asshur, And I have caused them to dwell in their own houses, An affirmation of Jehovah.
Compassed Me with feigning hath Ephraim, And with deceit the house of Israel. And Judah again is ruling with God, And with the Holy Ones [is] faithful!
Ephraim is enjoying wind, And is pursuing an east wind, All the day lying and spoiling he multiplieth, And a covenant with Asshur they make, And oil to Egypt is carried.
And a controversy hath Jehovah with Judah, To lay a charge on Jacob according to his ways, According to his doings He returneth to him.
In the womb he took his brother by the heel, And by his strength he was a prince with God,
Yea, he is a prince unto the Messenger, And he overcometh [by] weeping, And he maketh supplication to Him, At Bethel He doth find him, And there He doth speak with us,
Even Jehovah, God of the Hosts, Jehovah [is] His memorial.
And thou, through thy God, dost turn, Kindness and judgment keep thou, And wait on thy God continually.
Canaan! in his hand [are] balances of deceit! To oppress he hath loved.
And Ephraim saith: 'Surely I have become rich, I have found wealth for myself, All my labours — they find not against me iniquity that [is] sin.'
And I — Jehovah thy God from the land of Egypt, Again do I turn thee back into tents, As in the days of the appointed time.
And I have spoken unto the prophets, And I have multiplied vision, And by the hand of the prophets I use similes.
Surely Gilead [is] iniquity, Only, vanity they have been, In Gilead bullocks they have sacrificed, Also their altars [are] as heaps, on the furrows of a field.
And Jacob doth flee to the country of Aram, And Israel doth serve for a wife, Yea, for a wife he hath kept watch.
And by a prophet hath Jehovah brought up Israel out of Egypt, And by a prophet it hath been watched.
Ephraim hath provoked most bitterly, And his blood on himself he leaveth, And his reproach turn back to him doth his Lord!
When Ephraim speaketh tremblingly, He hath been lifted up in Israel, When he becometh guilty in Baal he dieth.
And now do they add to sin, And make to them a molten image of their silver, By their own understanding — idols, A work of artisans — all of it, Of them they say, who [are] sacrificers among men, 'The calves let them kiss.'
Therefore they are as a cloud of the morning, And as dew, rising early, going away, As chaff tossed about out of a floor, And as smoke out of a window.
And I [am] Jehovah thy God from the land of Egypt, And a God besides Me thou dost not know, And a Saviour — there is none save Me.
I — I have known thee in a wilderness, In a land of droughts.
According to their feedings they are satiated, They have been satiated, And their heart is lifted up, Therefore they have forgotten Me,
And I am to them as a lion, As a leopard by the way I look out.
I do meet them as a bereaved bear, And I rend the enclosure of their heart.
And I consume them there as a lioness, A beast of the field doth rend them.
Thou hast destroyed thyself, O Israel, But in Me [is] thy help, Where [is] thy king now — And he doth save thee in all thy cities? And thy judges of whom thou didst say, 'Give to me a king and heads?'
I give to thee a king in Mine anger, And I take away in My wrath.
Bound up [is] the iniquity of Ephraim, Hidden [is] his sin,
Pangs of a travailing woman come to him, He [is] a son not wise, For he remaineth not the time for the breaking forth of sons.
From the hand of Sheol I do ransom them, From death I redeem them, Where [is] thy plague, O death? Where thy destruction, O Sheol? Repentance is hid from Mine eyes.
Though he among brethren produceth fruit, Come in doth an east wind, a wind of Jehovah, From a wilderness it is coming up, And it drieth up his fountain, And become dry doth his spring, It — it spoileth a treasure — every desirable vessel.
Become desolate doth Samaria, Because she hath rebelled against her God, By sword they do fall, Their sucklings are dashed in pieces, And its pregnant ones are ripped up!
Turn back, O Israel, unto Jehovah thy God, For thou hast stumbled by thine iniquity.
Take with you words, and turn to Jehovah, Say ye unto Him: 'Take away all iniquity, and give good, And we do render the fruit of our lips.
Asshur doth not save us, on a horse we ride not, Nor do we say any more, Our God, to the work of our hands, For in Thee find mercy doth the fatherless.'
I heal their backsliding, I love them freely, For turned back hath Mine anger from him.
I am as dew to Israel, he flourisheth as a lily, And he striketh forth his roots as Lebanon.
Go on do his sucklings, And his beauty is as an olive, And he hath fragrance as Lebanon.
Return do the dwellers under his shadow, They revive [as] corn, and flourish as a vine, His memorial [is] as wine of Lebanon.
O Ephraim, what to Me any more with idols? I — I afflicted, and I cause him to sing: 'I [am] as a green fir-tree,' From Me is thy fruit found.
Who [is] wise, and doth understand these? Prudent, and knoweth them? For upright are the ways of Jehovah, And the righteous go on in them, And the transgressors stumble therein!
A word of Jehovah that hath been unto Joel, son of Pethuel:
Hear this, ye aged ones, And give ear, all ye inhabitants of the land, Hath this been in your days? Or in the days of your fathers?
Concerning it to your sons talk ye, And your sons to their sons, And their sons to another generation.
What is left of the palmer-worm, eaten hath the locust, And what is left of the locust, Eaten hath the cankerworm, And what is left of the cankerworm, Eaten hath the caterpillar.
Awake, ye drunkards, and weep, And howl all drinking wine, because of the juice, For it hath been cut off from your mouth.
For a nation hath come up on my land, Strong, and there is no number, Its teeth [are] the teeth of a lion, And it hath the jaw-teeth of a lioness.
It hath made my vine become a desolation, And my fig-tree become a chip, It hath made it thoroughly bare, and hath cast down, Made white have been its branches.
Wail, as a virgin girdeth with sackcloth, For the husband of her youth.
Cut off hath been present and libation from the house of Jehovah, Mourned have the priests, ministrants of Jehovah.
Spoiled is the field, mourned hath the ground, For spoiled is the corn, Dried up hath been new wine, languish doth oil.
Be ashamed, ye husbandmen, Howl, vine-dressers, for wheat and for barley, For perished hath the harvest of the field.
The vine hath been dried up, And the fig-tree doth languish, Pomegranate, also palm, and apple-tree, All trees of the field have withered, For dried up hath been joy from the sons of men.
Gird, and lament, ye priests, Howl, ye ministrants of the altar, Come in, lodge in sackcloth, ministrants of my God, For withheld from the house of your God hath been present and libation.
Sanctify a fast, proclaim a restraint, Gather the elders — all the inhabitants of the land, [Into] the house of Jehovah your God,
And cry unto Jehovah, 'Alas for the day! For near [is] a day of Jehovah, And as destruction from the mighty it cometh.
Is not before our eyes food cut off? From the house of our God joy and rejoicing?
Rotted have scattered things under their clods, Desolated have been storehouses, Broken down have been granaries, For withered hath the corn.
How have cattle sighed! Perplexed have been droves of oxen, For there is no pasture for them, Also droves of sheep have been desolated.
Unto Thee, O Jehovah, I do call, For fire hath consumed comely places of a wilderness, And a flame hath set on fire all trees of the field.
Also the cattle of the field long for Thee, For dried up have been streams of water, And fire hath consumed comely places of a wilderness!'
Blow ye a trumpet in Zion, And shout ye in My holy hill, Tremble do all inhabitants of the earth, For coming is the day of Jehovah, for [it is] near!
A day of darkness and thick darkness, A day of cloud and thick darkness, As darkness spread on the mountains, A people numerous and mighty, Like it there hath not been from of old, And after it there is not again — till the years of generation and generation.
Before it consumed hath fire, And after it burn doth a flame, As the garden of Eden [is] the land before it, And after it a wilderness — a desolation! And also an escape there hath not been to it,
As the appearance of horses [is] its appearance, And as horsemen, so they run.
As the noise of chariots, on the tops of the mountains they skip, As the noise of a flame of fire devouring stubble, As a mighty people set in array for battle.
From its face pained are peoples, All faces have gathered paleness.
As mighty ones they run, As men of war they go up a wall, And each in his own ways they do go, And they embarrass not their paths.
And each his brother they press not, Each in his way they go on, If by the missile they fall, they are not cut off.
In the city they run to and fro, On the wall they run, Into houses they go up by the windows, They go in as a thief.
At their face trembled hath the earth, Shaken have the heavens, Sun and moon have been black, And stars have gathered up their shining.
And Jehovah hath given forth His voice before His force, For very great [is] His camp, For mighty [is] the doer of His word, For great [is] the day of Jehovah — very fearful, And who doth bear it?
And also now — an affirmation of Jehovah, Turn ye back unto Me with all your heart, And with fasting, and with weeping, And with lamentation.
And rend your heart, and not your garments, And turn back unto Jehovah your God, For gracious and merciful [is] He, Slow to anger, and abundant in kindness, And He hath repented concerning the evil.
Who knoweth — He doth turn back, Yea — He hath repented, And He hath left behind Him a blessing, A present and libation of Jehovah your God?
Blow ye a trumpet in Zion, Sanctify a fast — proclaim a restraint.
Gather the people, sanctify an assembly, Assemble the aged, Gather infants and sucklings of the breasts, Go out let a bridegroom from his inner chamber, And a bride out of her closet.
Between the porch and the altar weep let the priests, ministrants of Jehovah, And let them say: 'Have pity, O Jehovah, on Thy people, And give not Thy inheritance to reproach, To the ruling over them of nations, Why do they say among peoples, Where [is] their God?'
And let Jehovah be zealous for His land, And have pity on His people.
Let Jehovah answer and say to His people, 'Lo, I am sending to you the corn, And the new wine, and the oil, And ye have been satisfied with it, And I make you no more a reproach among nations,
And the northern I put far off from you, And have driven him unto a land dry and desolate, With his face unto the eastern sea, And his rear unto the western sea, And come up hath his stink, And come up doth his stench, For he hath exerted himself to work.
Do not fear, O land! joy and rejoice, For Jehovah hath exerted Himself to work.
Do not fear, O cattle of the field! For sprung forth have pastures of a wilderness, For the tree hath borne its fruit, Fig-tree and vine have given their strength!
And ye sons of Zion, joy and rejoice, In Jehovah your God, For He hath given to you the Teacher for righteousness, And causeth to come down to you a shower, Sprinkling and gathered — in the beginning.
And full have been the floors [with] pure corn, And overflown have the presses [with] new wine and oil.
And I have recompensed to you the years That consume did the locust, the cankerworm, And the caterpillar, and the palmer-worm, My great force that I did send against you.
And ye have eaten, eating and being satisfied, And have praised the name of Jehovah your God, Who hath dealt with you wonderfully, And not ashamed are My people to the age.
And ye have known that in the midst of Israel [am] I, And I [am] Jehovah your God, and there is none else, And not ashamed are My people to the age.
And it hath come to pass afterwards, I do pour out My Spirit on all flesh, And prophesied have your sons and your daughters, Your old men do dream dreams, Your young men do see visions.
And also on the men-servants, and on the maid-servants, In those days I do pour out My Spirit.
And I have given wonders in the heavens, and in the earth, Blood and fire, and columns of smoke.
The sun is turned to darkness, and the moon to blood, Before the coming of the day of Jehovah, The great and the fearful.
And it hath come to pass, Every one who calleth in the name of Jehovah is delivered, For in mount Zion and in Jerusalem there is an escape, As Jehovah hath said, And among the remnants whom Jehovah is calling!
For lo, in those days, and in that time, When I turn back [to] the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem,
Then I have gathered all the nations, And caused them to go down unto the valley of Jehoshaphat, And I have been judged with them there, Concerning My people and Mine inheritance — Israel, Whom they scattered among nations, And My land they have apportioned.
And for My people they do cast a lot, And they give the young man for an harlot, And the young woman have sold for wine, That they may drink.
And also, what [are] ye to Me, O Tyre and Zidon, And all circuits of Philistia? Recompence are ye rendering unto Me? And if ye are giving recompence to Me, Swiftly, hastily, I turn back your recompence on your head.
In that My silver and My gold ye took, And My desirable things that are good, Ye have brought in to your temples.
And sons of Judah, and sons of Jerusalem, Ye have sold to the sons of Javan, To put them far off from their border.
Lo, I am stirring them up out of the place Whither ye have sold them, And I have turned back your recompence on your head,
And have sold your sons and your daughters Into the hand of the sons of Judah, And they have sold them to Shabeans, Unto a nation far off, for Jehovah hath spoken.
Proclaim ye this among nations, Sanctify a war, stir up the mighty ones, Come nigh, come up, let all the men of war.
Beat your ploughshares to swords, And your pruning-hooks to javelins, Let the weak say, 'I [am] mighty.'
Haste, and come in, all ye nations round, And be gathered together, Thither cause to come down, O Jehovah, Thy mighty ones.
Wake and come up let the nations unto the valley of Jehoshaphat, For there I sit to judge all the nations around.
Send ye forth a sickle, For ripened hath harvest, Come in, come down, for filled hath been the press, Overflowed hath wine-presses, For great [is] their wickedness.
Multitudes, multitudes [are] in the valley of decision, For near [is] the day of Jehovah in the valley of decision.
Sun and moon have been black, And stars have gathered up their shining.
And Jehovah from Zion doth roar, And from Jerusalem giveth forth His voice, And shaken have the heavens and earth, And Jehovah [is] a refuge to his people, And a stronghold to sons of Israel.
And ye have known that I [am] Jehovah your God, Dwelling in Zion, My holy mountain, And Jerusalem hath been holy, And strangers do not pass over into it again.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, Drop down do the mountains juice, And the hills do flow [with] milk, And all streams of Judah do go [with] water, And a fountain from the house of Jehovah goeth forth, And hath watered the valley of Shittim.
Egypt a desolation becometh, And Edom a desolation, a wilderness, becometh, For violence [to] sons of Judah, Whose innocent blood they shed in their land.
And Judah to the age doth dwell, And Jerusalem to generation and generation.
And I have declared their blood innocent, [That] I did not declare innocent, And Jehovah is dwelling in Zion!
Words of Amos — who hath been among herdsmen of Tekoa — that he hath seen concerning Israel, in the days of Uzziah king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam son of Joash king of Israel, two years before the shaking;
and he saith: Jehovah from Zion doth roar, And from Jerusalem giveth forth His voice, And mourned have pastures of the shepherds, And withered hath the top of Carmel!
And thus said Jehovah: For three transgressions of Damascus, And for four, I do not reverse it, Because of their threshing Gilead with sharp-pointed irons,
And I have sent a fire against the house of Hazael, And it hath consumed the palaces of Ben-Hadad.
And I have broken the bar of Damascus, And cut off the inhabitant from Bikat-Aven, And a holder of a sceptre from Beth-Eden, And removed have been the people of Aram to Kir, said Jehovah.
Thus said Jehovah: For three transgressions of Gaza, And for four, I do not reverse it, Because of their removing a complete captivity, To deliver up to Edom,
And I have sent a fire against the wall of Gaza, And it hath consumed her palaces;
And I have cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod, And a holder of a sceptre from Ashkelon, And have turned back My hand against Ekron, And perished have the remnant of the Philistines, Said the Lord Jehovah.
Thus said Jehovah: For three transgressions of Tyre, And for four, I do not reverse it, Because of their delivering up a complete captivity to Edom, And they remembered not the brotherly covenant,
And I have sent a fire against the wall of Tyre, And it hath consumed her palaces.
Thus said Jehovah: For three transgressions of Edom, And for four, I do not reverse it, Because of his pursuing with a sword his brother, And he hath destroyed his mercies, And tear perpetually doth his anger, And his wrath — he hath kept it for ever,
And I have sent a fire against Teman, And it hath consumed palaces of Bozrah.
Thus said Jehovah: For three transgressions of the sons of Ammon, And for four, I do not reverse it, Because of their ripping up the pregnant ones of Gilead, To enlarge their border,
And I have kindled a fire against the wall of Rabbah, And it hath consumed her palaces, With a shout in a day of battle, With a whirlwind in a day of hurricane,
And gone hath their king in a removal, He and his heads together, said Jehovah!
Thus said Jehovah: For three transgressions of Moab, And for four, I do not reverse it, Because of his burning the bones of the king of Edom to lime,
And I have sent a fire against Moab, And it hath consumed the palaces of Kerioth, And dying with noise is Moab, With shouting, with voice of a trumpet.
And I have cut off a judge from her midst, And all its heads I slay with him, said Jehovah.
Thus said Jehovah: For three transgressions of Judah, And for four, I do not reserve it, Because of their loathing the law of Jehovah, And His statutes they have not kept, And their lies do cause them to err, After which their fathers did walk,
And I have sent a fire against Judah, And it hath consumed palaces of Jerusalem.
Thus said Jehovah: For three transgressions of Israel, And for four, I do not reverse it, Because of their selling for silver the righteous, And the needy for a pair of sandals.
Who are panting for the dust of the earth on the head of the poor, And the way of the humble they turn aside, And a man and his father go unto the damsel, So as to pollute My holy name.
And on pledged garments they stretch themselves near every altar, And the wine of fined ones they drink [in] the house of their gods.
And I — I have destroyed the Amorite from before them, Whose height [is] as the height of cedars, And strong he [is] as the oaks, And I destroy his fruit from above, And his roots from beneath.
And I — I have brought you up from the land of Egypt, And cause you to go in a wilderness forty years, To possess the land of the Amorite.
And I raise of your sons for prophets, And of your choice ones for Nazarites, Is not this true, O sons of Israel? An affirmation of Jehovah.
And ye cause the Nazarites to drink wine, And on the prophets ye have laid a charge, Saying, 'Do not prophecy!'
Lo, I am pressing you under, As the full cart doth press for itself a sheaf.
And perished hath refuge from the swift, And the strong strengtheneth not his power, And the mighty delivereth not his soul.
And the handler of the bow standeth not, And the swift with his feet delivereth not [himself], And the rider of the horse delivereth not his soul.
And the courageous of heart among the mighty, Naked doth flee in that day, An affirmation of Jehovah!
Hear ye this word that Jehovah hath spoken concerning you, O sons of Israel, concerning all the family that I brought up from the land of Egypt, saying:
Only you I have known of all families of the land, Therefore I charge on you all your iniquities.
Do two walk together if they have not met?
Roar doth a lion in a forest and prey he hath none? Give out doth a young lion his voice from his habitation, If he hath not caught?
Doth a bird fall into a snare of the earth, And there is no gin for it? Doth a snare go up from the ground, And prey it captureth not?
Is a trumpet blown in a city, And do people not tremble? Is there affliction in a city, And Jehovah hath not done [it]?
For the Lord Jehovah doth nothing, Except He hath revealed His counsel unto His servants the prophets.
A lion hath roared — who doth not fear? The Lord Jehovah hath spoken — who doth not prophesy?
Sound ye unto palaces in Ashdod, And to palaces in the land of Egypt, and say: Be ye gathered on mountains of Samaria, And see many troubles within her, And oppressed ones in her midst.
And they have not known to act straightforwardly, An affirmation of Jehovah, Who are treasuring up violence and spoil in their palaces.
Therefore, thus said the Lord Jehovah: An adversary — and surrounding the land, And he hath brought down from thee thy strength, And spoiled have been thy palaces.
Thus said Jehovah: As the shepherd delivereth from the lion's mouth Two legs, or a piece of an ear, So delivered are the sons of Israel, Who are sitting in Samaria on the corner of a bed, And in Damascus [on that of] a couch.
Hear ye and testify to the house of Jacob, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, God of Hosts.
For in the day of My charging the transgressions of Israel on him, I have laid a charge on the altars of Beth-El, And cut off have been the horns of the altar, And they have fallen to the earth.
And I have smitten the winter-house with the summer-house, And perished have houses of ivory, And consumed have been many houses, An affirmation of Jehovah!
Hear this word, ye kine of Bashan, Who [are] in the mountain of Samaria, Who are oppressing the poor, Who are bruising the needy, Who are saying to their lords: 'Bring in, and we do drink.'
Sworn hath the Lord Jehovah by His holiness, That lo, days are coming upon you, And he hath taken you away with hooks, And your posterity with fish-hooks.
And [by] breaches ye go forth, A woman [at that] over-against her, And ye have cast down the high place, An affirmation of Jehovah.
Enter ye Beth-El, and transgress, At Gilgal multiply transgression, And bring in every morning your sacrifices, Every third year your tithes.
And perfume with leaven a thank-offering, And proclaim willing gifts, sound ye! For so ye have loved, O sons of Israel, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah.
And I also — I have given to you cleanness of teeth in all your cities, And lack of bread in all your places, And ye have not turned back unto Me, an affirmation of Jehovah.
And I also — I have withheld from you the rain. While yet three months to harvest, And I have sent rain on one city, And on another city I do not send rain, One portion is rained on, And the portion on which it raineth not withereth.
And wandered have two or three cities, Unto the same city to drink water, And they are not satisfied, And ye have not turned back unto Me, An affirmation of Jehovah.
I have smitten you with blasting and with mildew, The abundance of your gardens and of your vineyards, And of your figs, and of your olives, Eat doth the palmer-worm, And ye have not turned back unto Me, An affirmation of Jehovah.
I have sent among you pestilence by the way of Egypt, I have slain by sword your choice ones, With your captive horses, And I cause the stink of your camps to come up — even into your nostrils, And ye have not turned back unto Me, An affirmation of Jehovah.
I have overturned among you, Like the overturn by God of Sodom and Gomorrah, And ye are as a brand delivered from a burning, And ye have not turned back unto Me, An affirmation of Jehovah.
Therefore, thus I do to thee, O Israel, at last, Because this I do to thee, Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.
For, lo, the former of mountains, and creator of wind, And the declarer to man what [is] His thought, He is making dawn obscurity, And is treading on high places of earth, Jehovah, God of Hosts, [is] His name!
Hear this word that I am bearing to you, A lamentation, O house of Israel:
'Fallen, not again to rise, hath the virgin of Israel, Left on her land — she hath no raiser up.'
For thus said the Lord Jehovah: The city that is going out a thousand, Doth leave an hundred, And that which is going out an hundred, Doth leave ten to the house of Israel.
For thus said Jehovah to the house of Israel: Seek ye Me, and live,
And seek not Beth-El, and Gilgal enter not, And Beer-Sheba pass not through, For Gilgal doth utterly remove, And Beth-El doth become vanity.
Seek ye Jehovah, and live, Lest He prosper as fire [against] the house of Joseph, And it hath consumed, And there is no quencher for Beth-El.
Ye who are turning to wormwood judgment, And righteousness to the earth have put down,
The maker of Kimah and Kesil, And the turner to morning of death-shade, And day [as] night He hath made dark, Who is calling to the waters of the sea, And poureth them on the face of the earth, Jehovah [is] His name;
Who is brightening up the spoiled against the strong, And the spoiled against a fortress cometh.
They have hated a reprover in the gate, And a plain speaker they abominate.
Therefore, because of your trampling on the poor, And the tribute of corn ye take from him, Houses of hewn work ye have built, And ye do not dwell in them, Desirable vineyards ye have planted, And ye do not drink their wine.
For I have known — many [are] your transgressions, And mighty your sins, Adversaries of the righteous, taking ransoms, And the needy in the gate ye turned aside.
Therefore is the wise at that time silent, For an evil time it [is].
Seek good, and not evil, that ye may live, And it is so; Jehovah, God of Hosts, [is] with you, as ye said.
Hate evil, and love good, And set up judgment in the gate, It may be Jehovah, God of Hosts, doth pity the remnant of Joseph.
Therefore, thus said Jehovah, God of Hosts, the Lord, In all broad places [is] lamentation, And in all out-places they say, 'Alas, alas,' And called the husbandman to mourning, And to lamentation the skilful of wailing.
And in all vineyards [is] lamentation, For I pass into thy midst, said Jehovah.
Ho, ye who are desiring the day of Jehovah, Why [is] this to you — the day of Jehovah? It is darkness, and not light,
As [when] one fleeth from the face of the lion, And the bear hath met him, And he hath come in to the house, And hath leant his hand on the wall, And the serpent hath bitten him.
Is not the day of Jehovah darkness and not light, Even thick darkness that hath no brightness?
I have hated — I have loathed your festivals, And I am not refreshed by your restraints.
For though ye cause burnt-offerings and your presents to ascend to Me, I am not pleased, And the peace-offering of your fatlings I behold not.
Turn aside from Me the noise of thy songs, Yea, the praise of thy psaltery I hear not.
And roll on as waters doth judgment, And righteousness as a perennial stream.
Sacrifices and offering did ye bring nigh to Me, In a wilderness forty years, O house of Israel?
And ye bare Succoth your king, and Chiun your images, The star of your god, that ye made for yourselves.
And I removed you beyond Damascus, Said Jehovah, God of Hosts [is] His name.
Woe [to] those secure in Zion, And those confident in the mount of Samaria, The marked of the chief of the nations, And come to them have the house of Israel.
Pass ye over [to] Calneh and see, And go thence [to] Hamath the great, And go down [to] Gath of the Philistines, Are [they] better than these kingdoms? Greater [is] their border than your border?
Who are putting away the day of evil, And ye bring nigh the seat of violence,
Who are lying down on beds of ivory, And are spread out on their couches, And are eating lambs from the flock, And calves from the midst of the stall,
Who are taking part according to the psaltery, Like David they invented for themselves instruments of music;
Who are drinking with bowls of wine, And [with] chief perfumes anoint [themselves], And have not been pained for the breach of Joseph.
Therefore now they remove at the head of the captives, And turned aside is the mourning-feast of stretched-out ones.
Sworn hath the Lord Jehovah by Himself, An affirmation of Jehovah, God of Hosts: I am abominating the excellency of Jacob, And his high places I have hated, And I have delivered up the city and its fulness.
And if there are left ten persons in one house, It hath come to pass — that they have died.
And lifted him up hath his loved one, even his burner, To bring forth the bones from the house, And he said to him who [is] in the sides of the house, 'Is there yet with thee?' And he said, 'None,' then he said, 'Hush! Save to make mention of the name of Jehovah.'
For lo, Jehovah is commanding, And He hath smitten the great house [with] breaches, And the little house [with] clefts.
Do horses run on a rock? Doth one plough [it] with oxen? For ye have turned to gall judgment, And the fruit of righteousness to wormwood.
O ye who are rejoicing at nothing, Who are saying, 'Have we not by our strength taken to ourselves horns?'
Surely, lo, I am raising against you a nation, O house of Israel, An affirmation of Jehovah, God of Hosts, And they have oppressed you from the coming in to Hamath, Unto the stream of the desert.
Thus hath the Lord Jehovah shewed me, and lo, He is forming locusts at the beginning of the ascending of the latter growth, and lo, the latter growth [is] after the mowings of the king;
and it hath come to pass, when it hath finished to consume the herb of the land, that I say: 'Lord Jehovah, forgive, I pray Thee, How doth Jacob arise — for he [is] small?'
Jehovah hath repented of this, 'It shall not be,' said Jehovah.
Thus hath the Lord Jehovah shewed me, and lo, the Lord Jehovah is calling to contend by fire, and it consumeth the great deep, yea, it hath consumed the portion, and I say:
'Lord Jehovah, cease, I pray Thee, How doth Jacob arise — for he [is] small?'
Jehovah hath repented of this, 'It also shall not be,' said the Lord Jehovah.
Thus hath He shewed me, and lo, the Lord is standing by a wall [made according to] a plumb-line, and in His hand a plumb-line;
and Jehovah saith unto me, 'What art thou seeing, Amos?' And I say, 'A plumb-line;' and the Lord saith: 'Lo, I am setting a plumb-line in the midst of My people Israel, I do not add any more to pass over to it.
And desolated have been high places of Isaac, And sanctuaries of Israel are wasted, And I have risen against the house of Jeroboam with a sword.'
And Amaziah priest of Beth-El sendeth unto Jeroboam king of Israel, saying, 'Amos hath conspired against thee in the midst of the house of Israel; the land is not able to bear all his words,
for thus said Amos: By sword die doth Jeroboam, And Israel certainly removeth from off its land.'
And Amaziah saith unto Amos, 'Seer, go flee for thee unto the land of Judah, and eat there bread, and there thou dost prophesy;
and [at] Beth-El do not add to prophesy any more, for it [is] the king's sanctuary, and it [is] the royal house.'
And Amos answereth and saith unto Amaziah, 'I [am] no prophet, nor a prophet's son [am] I, but a herdsman I [am], and a cultivator of sycamores,
and Jehovah taketh me from after the flock, and Jehovah saith unto me, Go, prophesy unto My people Israel.
And now, hear a word of Jehovah: thou art saying, Do not prophesy against Israel, nor drop [any thing] against the house of Isaac,
therefore thus said Jehovah: Thy wife in the city doth go a-whoring, And thy sons and thy daughters by sword do fall, And thy land by line is apportioned, And thou on an unclean land diest, And Israel certainly removeth from off its land.'
Thus hath the Lord Jehovah shewed me, and, lo, a basket of summer-fruit.
And He saith, 'What art thou seeing, Amos?' and I say, 'A basket of summer-fruit.' And Jehovah saith unto me: 'The end hath come unto My people Israel, I do not add any more to pass over to it.
And howled have songstresses of a palace in that day, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, Many [are] the carcases, into any place throw — hush!
Hear this, ye who are swallowing up the needy, To cause to cease the poor of the land,
Saying, When doth the new moon pass, And we sell ground corn? And the sabbath, and we open out pure corn? To make little the ephah, And to make great the shekel, And to use perversely balances of deceit.
To purchase with money the poor, And the needy for a pair of sandals, Yea, the refuse of the pure corn we sell.
Sworn hath Jehovah by the excellency of Jacob: 'I forget not for ever any of their works.
For this doth not the land tremble, And mourned hath every dweller in it? And come up as a flood hath all of it. And it hath been cast out, and hath sunk, Like the flood of Egypt.
And it hath come to pass in that day, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, I have caused the sun to go in at noon, And caused darkness on the land in a day of light,
And have turned your festivals to mourning, And all your songs to lamentation, And caused sackcloth to come up on all loins, And on every head — baldness, And made it as a mourning [of] an only one, And its latter end as a day of bitterness.
Lo, days are coming, An affirmation of the Lord Jehovah, And I have sent a famine into the land, Not a famine of bread, nor a thirst of water But of hearing the words of Jehovah.
And they have wandered from sea unto sea, And from north even unto east, They go to and fro to seek the word of Jehovah, And they do not find.
In that day faint do the fair virgins, And the young men, with thirst.
Those swearing by the guilt of Samaria, And have said, Live doth thy god, O Dan, And, Live doth the way of Beer-Sheba, And they have fallen — and rise not again!'
I have seen the Lord standing by the altar, and He saith: 'Smite the knob, and the thresholds shake, And cut them off by the head — all of them, And their posterity with a sword I do slay, Not flee to them doth the fleer, Nor escape to them doth a fugitive.
If they dig through into sheol, From thence doth My hand take them, And if they go up the heavens, From thence I cause them to come down.
And if they be hid in the top of Carmel, From thence I search out, and have taken them, And if they be hid from Mine eyes in the bottom of the sea, From thence I command the serpent, And it hath bitten them.
And if they go into captivity before their enemies, From thence I command the sword, And it hath slain them, And I have set Mine eye on them for evil, And not for good.
And [it is] the Lord, Jehovah of Hosts, Who is striking against the land, and it melteth, And mourned have all the inhabitants in it, And come up as a flood hath all of it, And it hath sunk — like the flood of Egypt.
Who is building in the heavens His upper chambers; As to His troop, Upon earth He hath founded it, Who is calling for the waters of the sea, And poureth them out on the face of the land, Jehovah [is] His name.
As sons of Cushim are ye not to Me? O sons of Israel — an affirmation of Jehovah. Israel did I not bring up out of the land of Egypt? And the Philistines from Caphtor, and Aram from Kir?
Lo, the eyes of the Lord Jehovah [are] on the sinful kingdom, And I have destroyed it from off the face of the ground, Only, I destroy not utterly the house of Jacob, An affirmation of Jehovah.
For lo, I am commanding, And I have shaken among all the nations the house of Israel, As [one] doth shake with a sieve, And there falleth not a grain [to] the earth.
By sword die do all sinners of My people, Who are saying, 'Not overtake, or go before, For our sakes, doth evil.'
In that day I raise the tabernacle of David, that is fallen, And I have repaired their breaches, And its ruins I do raise up, And I have built it up as in days of old.
So that they possess the remnant of Edom, And all the nations on whom My name is called, An affirmation of Jehovah — doer of this.
Lo, days are coming — an affirmation of Jehovah, And come nigh hath the ploughman to the reaper, And the treader of grapes to the scatterer of seed, And the mountains have dropped juice, And all the hills do melt.
And I have turned back [to] the captivity of My people Israel, And they have built desolate cities, and inhabited, And have planted vineyards, and drunk their wine, And made gardens, and eaten their fruit.
And I have planted them on their own ground, And they are not plucked up any more from off their own ground, That I have given to them, said Jehovah thy God!
Thus said the Lord Jehovah to Edom, A report we have heard from Jehovah, And an ambassador among nations was sent, 'Rise, yea, let us rise against her for battle.'
Lo, little I have made thee among nations, Despised [art] thou exceedingly.
The pride of thy heart hath lifted thee up, O dweller in clifts of a rock, (A high place [is] his habitation, He is saying in his heart, 'Who doth bring me down [to] earth?')
If thou dost go up high as an eagle, And if between stars thou dost set thy nest, From thence I bring thee down, An affirmation of Jehovah.
If thieves have come in to thee, If spoilers of the night, How hast thou been cut off! Do they not steal their sufficiency? If gatherers have come in to thee, Do they not leave gleanings?
How hath Esau been searched out! Flowed out have his hidden things,
Unto the border sent thee have all thine allies, Forgotten thee, prevailed over thee, have thy friends, Thy bread they make a snare under thee, There is no understanding in him!
Is it not in that day — an affirmation of Jehovah, That I have destroyed the wise out of Edom, And understanding out of the mount of Esau?
And broken down have been thy mighty ones, O Teman, So that every one of the mount of Esau is cut off.
For slaughter, for violence [to] thy brother Jacob, Cover thee doth shame, And thou hast been cut off — to the age.
In the day of thy standing over-against, In the day of strangers taking captive his force, And foreigners have entered his gates, And for Jerusalem have cast a lot, Even thou [art] as one of them!
And — thou dost not look on the day of thy brother, On the day of his alienation, Nor dost thou rejoice over sons of Judah, In the day of their destruction, Nor make great thy mouth in a day of distress.
Nor come into a gate of My people in a day of their calamity, Nor look, even thou, on its misfortune in a day of its calamity, Nor send forth against its force in a day of its calamity,
Nor stand by the breach to cut off its escaped, Nor deliver up its remnant in a day of distress.
For near [is] the day of Jehovah, on all the nations, As thou hast done, it is done to thee, Thy deed doth turn back on thine own head.
For — as ye have drunk on My holy mount, Drink do all the nations continually, And they have drunk and have swallowed, And they have been as they have not been.
And in mount Zion there is an escape, And it hath been holy, And the house of Jacob have possessed their possessions.
And the house of Jacob hath been a fire, And the house of Joseph a flame, And the house of Esau for stubble, And they have burned among them, And they have consumed them, And there is not a remnant to the house of Esau, For Jehovah hath spoken.
And they have possessed the south with the mount of Esau, And the low country with the Philistines, And they have possessed the field of Ephraim, And the field of Samaria, And Benjamin with Gilead.
And the removed of this force of the sons of Israel, That [is with] the Canaanites unto Zarephat, And the removed of Jerusalem that [is] with the Sepharad, Possess the cities of the south.
And gone up have saviours on mount Zion, To judge the mount of Esau, And the kingdom hath been to Jehovah!'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto Jonah son of Amittai, saying:
'Rise, go unto Nineveh, the great city, and proclaim against it that their wickedness hath come up before Me.'
And Jonah riseth to flee to Tarshish from the face of Jehovah, and goeth down [to] Joppa, and findeth a ship going [to] Tarshish, and he giveth its fare, and goeth down into it, to go with them to Tarshish from the face of Jehovah.
And Jehovah hath cast a great wind on the sea, and there is a great tempest in the sea, and the ship hath reckoned to be broken;
and the mariners are afraid, and cry each unto his god, and cast the goods that [are] in the ship into the sea, to make [it] light of them; and Jonah hath gone down unto the sides of the vessel, and he lieth down, and is fast asleep.
And the chief of the company draweth near to him, and saith to him, 'What — to thee, O sleeper? rise, call unto thy God, it may be God doth bethink himself of us, and we do not perish.'
And they say each unto his neighbour, 'Come, and we cast lots, and we know on whose account this evil [is] on us.' And they cast lots, and the lot falleth on Jonah.
And they say unto him, 'Declare to us, we pray thee, on what account this evil [is] on us? what [is] thine occupation, and whence comest thou? what [is] thy country, seeing thou art not of this people?'
And he saith unto them, 'A Hebrew I [am], and Jehovah, God of the heavens, I am reverencing, who made the sea and the dry land.'
And the men fear a great fear, and say unto him, 'What [is] this thou hast done!' for the men have known that from the face of Jehovah he is fleeing, for he hath told them.
And they say unto him, 'What do we do to thee that the sea may cease from us, for the sea is more and more tempestuous?'
And he saith unto them, 'Lift me up, and cast me into the sea, and the sea doth cease from you; for I know that on my account this great tempest [is] upon you.'
And the men row to turn back unto the dry land, and are not able, for the sea is more and more tempestuous against them.
And they cry unto Jehovah, and say, 'We pray Thee, O Jehovah, let us not, we pray Thee, perish for this man's life, and do not lay on us innocent blood, for Thou, Jehovah, as Thou hast pleased, Thou hast done.'
And they lift up Jonah, and cast him into the sea, and the sea ceaseth from its raging;
and the men fear Jehovah — a great fear, and sacrifice a sacrifice to Jehovah, and vow vows.
And Jehovah appointeth a great fish to swallow up Jonah, and Jonah is in the bowels of the fish three days and three nights.
And Jonah prayeth unto Jehovah his God from the bowels of the fish.
And he saith: I called, because of my distress, to Jehovah, And He doth answer me, From the belly of sheol I have cried, Thou hast heard my voice.
When Thou dost cast me [into] the deep, Into the heart of the seas, Then the flood doth compass me, All Thy breakers and Thy billows have passed over me.
And I — I said: I have been cast out from before Thine eyes, (Yet I add to look unto Thy holy temple!)
Compassed me have waters unto the soul, The deep doth compass me, The weed is bound to my head.
To the cuttings of mountains I have come down, The earth, her bars [are] behind me to the age. And Thou bringest up from the pit my life, O Jehovah my God.
In the feebleness within me of my soul Jehovah I have remembered, And come in unto Thee doth my prayer, Unto Thy holy temple.
Those observing lying vanities their own mercy forsake.
And I — with a voice of thanksgiving — I sacrifice to Thee, That which I have vowed I complete, Salvation [is] of Jehovah.
And Jehovah saith to the fish, and it vomiteth out Jonah on the dry land.
And there is a word of Jehovah unto Jonah a second time, saying,
'Rise, go unto Nineveh, the great city, and proclaim unto it the proclamation that I am speaking unto thee;'
and Jonah riseth, and he goeth unto Nineveh, according to the word of Jehovah. And Nineveh hath been a great city before God, a journey of three days.
And Jonah beginneth to go in to the city a journey of one day, and proclaimeth, and saith, 'Yet forty days — and Nineveh is overturned.'
And the men of Nineveh believe in God, and proclaim a fast, and put on sackcloth, from their greatest even unto their least,
seeing the word doth come unto the king of Nineveh, and he riseth from his throne, and removeth his honourable robe from off him, and spreadeth out sackcloth, and sitteth on the ashes,
and he crieth and saith in Nineveh by a decree of the king and his great ones, saying, 'Man and beast, herd and flock — let them not taste anything, let them not feed, even water let them not drink;
and cover themselves [with] sackcloth let man and beast, and let them call unto God mightily, and let them turn back each from his evil way, and from the violence that [is] in their hands.
Who knoweth? He doth turn back, and God hath repented, and hath turned back from the heat of His anger, and we do not perish.'
And God seeth their works, that they have turned back from their evil way, and God repenteth of the evil that He spake of doing to them, and he hath not done [it].
And it is grievous unto Jonah — a great evil — and he is displeased at it;
and he prayeth unto Jehovah, and he saith, 'I pray Thee, O Jehovah, is not this my word while I was in mine own land — therefore I was beforehand to flee to Tarshish — that I have known that Thou [art] a God, gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and abundant in kindness, and repenting of evil?
And now, O Jehovah, take, I pray Thee, my soul from me, for better [is] my death than my life.'
And Jehovah saith, 'Is doing good displeasing to thee?'
And Jonah goeth forth from the city, and sitteth on the east of the city, and maketh to himself there a booth, and sitteth under it in the shade, till that he seeth what is in the city.
And Jehovah God appointeth a gourd, and causeth it to come up over Jonah, to be a shade over his head, to give deliverance to him from his affliction, and Jonah rejoiceth because of the gourd [with] great joy.
And God appointeth a worm at the going up of the dawn on the morrow, and it smiteth the gourd, and it drieth up.
And it cometh to pass, about the rising of the sun, that God appointeth a cutting east wind, and the sun smiteth on the head of Jonah, and he wrappeth himself up, and asketh his soul to die, and saith, 'Better [is] my death than my life.'
And God saith unto Jonah: 'Is doing good displeasing to thee, because of the gourd?' and he saith, 'To do good is displeasing to me — unto death.'
And Jehovah saith, 'Thou hast had pity on the gourd, for which thou didst not labour, neither didst thou nourish it, which a son of a night was, and a son of a night perished,
and I — have not I pity on Nineveh, the great city, in which there are more than twelve myriads of human beings, who have not known between their right hand and their left — and much cattle!'
A word of Jehovah that hath been unto Micah the Morashite in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah, kings of Judah, that he hath seen concerning Samaria and Jerusalem:
Hear, O peoples, all of them! Attend, O earth, and its fulness, And the Lord Jehovah is against you for a witness, The Lord from His holy temple.
For lo, Jehovah is going out from His place, And He hath come down, And hath trodden on high places of earth.
Melted have been the mountains under Him, And the valleys do rend themselves, As wax from the presence of fire, As waters cast down by a slope.
For the transgression of Jacob [is] all this, And for the sins of the house of Israel. What [is] the transgression of Jacob? Is it not Samaria? And what the high places of Judah? Is it not Jerusalem?
And I have set Samaria for a heap of the field, For plantations of a vineyard, And poured out into a valley her stones, And her foundations I uncover.
And all her graven images are beaten down, And all her gifts are burnt with fire, And all her idols I make a desolation, For, from the hire of a harlot she gathered, and unto the hire of a harlot they return.
For this I lament and howl, I go spoiled and naked, I make a lamentation like dragons, And a mourning like daughters of an ostrich.
For mortal [are] her wounds, For it hath come unto Judah, It hath come to a gate of My people — to Jerusalem.
In Gath tell ye not — in Acco weep not, In Beth-Aphrah, in dust roll thyself.
Pass over for thee, O inhabitant of Shaphir, Naked one of shame. Not gone out hath the inhabitant of Zaanan, The lamentation of Beth-Ezel doth take from you its standing.
For stayed for good hath the inhabitant of Maroth, For evil hath come down from Jehovah to the gate of Jerusalem.
Bind the chariot to a swift beast, O inhabitant of Lachish, The beginning of sin [is] she to the daughter of Zion, For in thee have been found the transgressions of Israel.
Therefore thou givest presents to Moresheth-Gath, The houses of Achzib become a lying thing to the kings of Israel.
Yet the possessor I do bring in to thee, O inhabitant of Mareshah, To Adullam come in doth the honour of Israel.
Make bald and shave, for thy delightful sons, Enlarge thy baldness as an eagle, For they have removed from thee!
Woe [to] those devising iniquity, And working evil on their beds, In the light of the morning they do it, For their hand is — to God.
And they have desired fields, And they have taken violently, And houses, and they have taken away, And have oppressed a man and his house, Even a man and his inheritance.
Therefore, thus said Jehovah: Lo, I am devising against this family evil, From which ye do not remove your necks, Nor walk loftily, for a time of evil it [is].
In that day doth [one] take up for you a simile, And he hath wailed a wailing of woe, He hath said, We have been utterly spoiled, The portion of my people He doth change, How doth He move toward me! To the backslider our fields He apportioneth.
Therefore, thou hast no caster of a line by lot In the assembly of Jehovah.
Ye do not prophesy — they do prophesy, They do not prophesy to these, It doth not remove shame.
Doth the house of Jacob say, 'Hath the Spirit of Jehovah been shortened? Are these His doings?' Do not My words benefit the people that is walking uprightly?
And yesterday My people for an enemy doth raise himself up, From the outer garment the honourable ornament ye strip off, From the confident passers by, Ye who are turning back from war.
The women of My people ye cast out from its delightful house, From its sucklings ye take away My honour to the age.
Rise and go, for this [is] not the rest, Because of uncleanness it doth corrupt, And corruption is powerful.
If one is going [with] the wind, And [with] falsehood hath lied: 'I prophesy to thee of wine, and of strong drink,' He hath been the prophet of this people!
I do surely gather thee, O Jacob, all of thee, I surely bring together the remnant of Israel, Together I do set it as the flock of Bozrah, As a drove in the midst of its pasture, It maketh a noise because of man.
Gone up hath the breaker before them, They have broken through, Yea, they pass through the gate, Yea, they go out through it, And pass on doth their king before them, And Jehovah at their head!
And I say, 'Hear, I pray you, heads of Jacob, And ye judges of the house of Israel, Is it not for you to know the judgment?
Ye who are hating good, and loving evil, Taking violently their skin from off them, And their flesh from off their bones,
And who have eaten the flesh of My people, And their skin from off them have stript, And their bones they have broken, And they have spread [them] out as in a pot, And as flesh in the midst of a caldron.
Then do they cry unto Jehovah, And He doth not answer them, And hideth His face from them at that time, As they have made evil their doings.
Thus said Jehovah concerning the prophets Who are causing My people to err, Who are biting with their teeth, And have cried 'Peace,' And he who doth not give unto their mouth, They have sanctified against him war.
Therefore a night ye have without vision, And darkness ye have without divination, And gone in hath the sun on the prophets, And black over them hath been the day.
And ashamed have been the seers, And confounded have been the diviners, And covered their lip have all of them, For their is no answer, O God.
And yet I have been full of power by the Spirit of Jehovah, And of judgment, and of might, To declare to Jacob his transgression, And to Israel his sin.
Hear this, I pray you, heads of the house of Jacob, And ye judges of the house of Israel, Who are making judgment abominable, And all uprightness do pervert.
Building up Zion with blood, And Jerusalem with iniquity.
Her heads for a bribe do judge, And her priests for hire do teach, And her prophets for silver divine, And on Jehovah they lean, saying, 'Is not Jehovah in our midst? Evil doth not come in upon us.'
Therefore, for your sake, Zion is ploughed a field, and Jerusalem is heaps, And the mount of the house [is] for high places of a forest!
And it hath come to pass, In the latter end of the days, The mount of the house of Jehovah Is established above the top of the mounts, And it hath been lifted up above the hills, And flowed unto it have peoples.
And gone have many nations and said, Come and we go up to the mount of Jehovah, And unto the house of the God of Jacob, And He doth teach us of His ways, And we do walk in His paths, For from Zion doth go forth a law, And a word of Jehovah from Jerusalem.
And He hath judged between many peoples, And given a decision to mighty nations afar off, They have beaten their swords to ploughshares, And their spears to pruning-hooks, Nation lifteth not up sword unto nation, Nor do they learn war any more.
And they have sat each under his vine, And under his fig-tree, And there is none troubling, For the mouth of Jehovah of Hosts hath spoken.
For all the peoples do walk, Each in the name of its god — and we, We do walk in the name of Jehovah our God, To the age and for ever.
In that day — an affirmation of Jehovah, I do gather the halting one, And the driven away one I bring together, And she whom I have afflicted.
And I have set the halting for a remnant, And the far-off for a mighty nation, And reigned hath Jehovah over them in mount Zion, From henceforth, and unto the age.
And thou, O tower of Eder, Fort of the daughter of Zion, unto thee it cometh, Yea, come in hath the former rule, The kingdom to the daughter of Jerusalem.
Now, why dost thou shout aloud? A king — is there none in thee? Hath thy counsellor perished, That taken hold of thee hath pain as a travailing woman?
Be pained, and bring forth, O daughter of Zion, As a travailing woman, For now, thou goest forth from the city, And thou hast dwelt in the field, And thou hast gone unto Babylon, There thou art delivered, There redeem thee doth Jehovah from the hand of thine enemies.
And now, gathered against thee have been many nations, who are saying: 'Let her be defiled, and our eyes look on Zion.'
They have not known the thoughts of Jehovah, Nor have they understood His counsel, For He hath gathered them as a sheaf [into] a threshing-floor.
Arise, and thresh, O daughter of Zion, For thy horn I make iron, And thy hoofs I make brass, And thou hast beaten small many peoples, And I have devoted to Jehovah their gain, And their wealth to the Lord of the whole earth!
Now gather thyself together, O daughter of troops, A siege he hath laid against us, With a rod they smite on the cheek the judge of Israel.
And thou, Beth-Lehem Ephratah, Little to be among the chiefs of Judah! From thee to Me he cometh forth — to be ruler in Israel, And his comings forth [are] of old, From the days of antiquity.
Therefore he doth give them out till the time She who bringeth forth hath brought forth, And the remnant of his brethren return to the sons of Israel.
And he hath stood and delighted in the strength of Jehovah, In the excellency of the name of Jehovah his God, And they have remained, For now he is great unto the ends of earth.
And this [one] hath been peace, Asshur! when he doth come into our land, And when he doth tread in our palaces, We have raised against him seven shepherds, And eight anointed of man.
And they have afflicted the land of Asshur with the sword, And the land of Nimrod at its openings, And he hath delivered from Asshur when he doth come into our land, And when he treadeth in our borders.
And the remnant of Jacob hath been in the midst of many peoples, As dew from Jehovah — as showers on the herb, That waiteth not for man, nor stayeth for the sons of men.
Yea, the remnant of Jacob hath been among nations, In the midst of many peoples, As a lion among beasts of a forest, As a young lion among ranks of a flock, Which if it hath passed through, Hath both trodden down and hath torn, And there is no deliverer.
High is thy hand above thine adversaries, And all thine enemies are cut off.
And it hath come to pass in that day, An affirmation of Jehovah, I have cut off thy horses from thy midst, And I have destroyed thy chariots,
And I have cut off the cities of thy land, And I have thrown down all thy fortresses,
And have cut off sorcerers out of thy hand, And observers of clouds thou hast none.
And I have cut off thy graven images, And thy standing-pillars out of thy midst, And thou dost not bow thyself any more To the work of thy hands.
And I have plucked up thy shrines out of thy midst, And I have destroyed thine enemies.
And I have done vengeance in anger and in fury, With the nations who have not hearkened!
Hear, I pray you, that which Jehovah is saying: 'Rise — strive thou with the mountains, And cause thou the hills to hear thy voice.'
Hear, O mountains, the strife of Jehovah, Ye strong ones — foundations of earth! For a strife [is] to Jehovah, with His people, And with Israel He doth reason.
O My people, what have I done to thee? And what — have I wearied thee? Testify against Me.
For I brought thee up from the land of Egypt, And from the house of servants I have ransomed thee, And I send before thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.
O My people, remember, I pray you, What counsel did Balak king of Moab, What answer him did Balaam son of Beor, (From Shittim unto Gilgal,) In order to know the righteous acts of Jehovah.'
With what do I come before Jehovah? Do I bow to God Most High? Do I come before Him with burnt-offerings? With calves — sons of a year?
Is Jehovah pleased with thousands of rams? With myriads of streams of oil? Do I give my first-born [for] my transgression? The fruit of my body [for] the sin of my soul?
He hath declared to thee, O man, what [is] good; Yea, what is Jehovah requiring of thee, Except — to do judgment, and love kindness, And lowly to walk with thy God?
A voice of Jehovah to the city calleth, And wisdom doth fear Thy name, Hear ye the rod, and Him who appointed it.
Are there yet [in] the house of the wicked Treasures of wickedness, And the abhorred scanty ephah?
Do I reckon [it] pure with balances of wickedness? And with a bag of deceitful stones?
Whose rich ones have been full of violence, And its inhabitants have spoken falsehood, And their tongue [is] deceitful in their mouth.
And I also, I have begun to smite thee, To make desolate, because of thy sins.
Thou — thou eatest, and thou art not satisfied, And thy pit [is] in thy midst, And thou removest, and dost not deliver, And that which thou deliverest, to a sword I give.
Thou — thou sowest, and thou dost not reap, Thou — thou treadest the olive, And thou pourest not out oil, And new wine — and thou drinkest not wine.
And kept habitually are the statutes of Omri, And all the work of the house of Ahab, And ye do walk in their counsels, For My giving thee for a desolation, And its inhabitants for a hissing, And the reproach of My people ye do bear!
My woe [is] to me, for I have been As gatherings of summer-fruit, As gleanings of harvest, There is no cluster to eat, The first-ripe fruit desired hath my soul.
Perished hath the kind out of the land, And upright among men — there are none, All of them for blood lie in wait, Each his brother they hunt [with] a net.
On the evil [are] both hands to do [it] well, The prince is asking — also the judge — for recompence, And the great — he is speaking the mischief of his soul, And they wrap it up.
Their best one [is] as a brier, The upright one — than a thorn-hedge, The day of thy watchmen — Thy visitation — hath come. Now is their perplexity.
Believe not in a friend, trust not in a leader, From her who is lying in thy bosom keep the openings of thy mouth.
For a son is dishonouring a father, A daughter hath stood against her mother, A daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law, The enemies of each [are] the men of his house.
And I — in Jehovah I do watch, I do wait for the God of my salvation, Hear me doth my God.
Thou dost not rejoice over me, O mine enemy, When I have fallen, I have risen, When I sit in darkness Jehovah is a light to me.
The indignation of Jehovah I do bear, For I have sinned against Him, Till that He doth plead my cause, And hath executed my judgment, He doth bring me forth to the light, I look on His righteousness.
And see doth mine enemy, And cover her doth shame, Who saith unto me, 'Where [is] Jehovah thy God?' Mine eyes do look on her, Now she is for a treading-place, As mire of the out-places.
The day to build thy walls! That day — removed is the limit.
That day — even unto thee it doth come in, From Asshur and the cities of the fortress, And from the fortress even unto the river, And from sea to sea, and mount to mount.
And the land hath been for a desolation, Because of its inhabitants, Because of the fruit of their doings.
Rule Thou Thy people with Thy rod, The flock of Thine inheritance, Dwelling alone [in] a forest in the midst of Carmel, They enjoy Bashan and Gilead as in days of old.
According to the days of thy coming forth out of the land of Egypt, I do shew it wonderful things.
See do nations, and they are ashamed of all their might, They lay a hand on the mouth, their ears are deaf.
They lick dust as a serpent, as fearful things of earth, They tremble from their enclosures, Of Jehovah our God they are afraid, Yea, they are afraid of Thee.
Who [is] a God like Thee? taking away iniquity, And passing by the transgression of the remnant of His inheritance, He hath not retained for ever His anger, Because He — He delighteth [in] kindness.
He doth turn back, He pitieth us, He doth subdue our iniquities, And Thou castest into the depths of the sea all their sins.
Thou givest truth to Jacob, kindness to Abraham, That thou hast sworn to our fathers, from the days of antiquity!
Burden of Nineveh. The Book of the Vision of Nahum the Elkoshite.
A God zealous and avenging [is] Jehovah, An avenger [is] Jehovah, and possessing fury. An avenger [is] Jehovah on His adversaries, And He is watching for His enemies.
Jehovah [is] slow to anger, and great in power, And Jehovah doth not entirely acquit, In a hurricane and in a tempest [is] His way, And a cloud [is] the dust of His feet.
He is pushing against a sea, and drieth it up, Yea, all the floods He hath made dry, Languishing [are] Bashan and Carmel, Yea, the flower of Lebanon [is] languishing.
Mountains have shaken because of Him, And the hills have been melted; And lifted up [is] the earth at His presence, And the world and all dwelling in it.
Before His indignation who doth stand? And who riseth up in the heat of His anger? His fury hath been poured out like fire, And the rocks have been broken by Him.
Good [is] Jehovah for a strong place in a day of distress. And He knoweth those trusting in Him.
And with a flood passing over, An end He maketh of its place, And His enemies doth darkness pursue.
What do we devise against Jehovah? An end He is making, arise not twice doth distress.
For while princes [are] perplexed, And with their drink are drunken, They have been consumed as stubble fully dried.
From thee hath come forth a deviser of evil Against Jehovah — a worthless counsellor.
Thus said Jehovah: Though complete, and thus many, Yet thus they have been cut off, And he hath passed away. And I afflicted thee, I afflict thee no more.
And now I break his rod from off thee, And thy bands I do draw away.
And commanded concerning thee hath Jehovah, 'No more of thy name doth spread abroad, From the house of thy gods I cut off graven and molten image, I appoint thy grave, for thou hast been vile.
Lo, on the mountains the feet of one proclaiming tidings, sounding peace! Celebrate, O Judah, thy festivals, complete thy vows, For add no more to pass over into thee doth the worthless, He hath been completely cut off!
Come up hath a scatterer to thy face, Keep the bulwark, watch the way, Strengthen the loins, strengthen power mightily.
For turned back hath Jehovah to the excellency of Jacob, As [to] the excellency of Israel, For emptied them out have emptiers, And their branches they have marred.
The shield of his mighty ones is become red, Men of might [are in] scarlet, With fiery torches [is] the chariot in a day of his preparation, And the firs have been caused to tremble.
In out-places shine do the chariots, They go to and fro in broad places, Their appearances [are] like torches, As lightnings they run.
He doth remember his honourable ones, They stumble in their goings, They hasten [to] its wall, and prepared is the covering.
Gates of the rivers have been opened, And the palace is dissolved.
And it is established — she hath removed, She hath been brought up, And her handmaids are leading as the voice of doves, Tabering on their hearts.
And Nineveh [is] as a pool of waters, From of old it [is] — and they are fleeing! 'Stand ye, stand;' and none is turning!
Seize ye silver, seize ye gold, And there is no end to the prepared things, [To] the abundance of all desirable vessels.
She is empty, yea, emptiness and waste, And the heart hath melted, And the knees have smitten together, And great pain [is] in all loins, And the faces of all of them have gathered paleness.
Where [is] the habitation of lionesses? And a feeding-place it [is] for young lions Where walked hath a lion, an old lion, A lion's whelp, and there is none troubling.
The lion is tearing parts [for] his whelps, And is strangling for his lionesses, And he doth fill [with] prey his holes, And his habitations [with] rapine.
Lo, I [am] against thee, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts, And I have burned in smoke its chariot, And thy young lions consume doth a sword, And I have cut off from the land thy prey, And not heard any more is the voice of thy messengers!
Woe [to] the city of blood, She is all with lies — burglary — full, Prey doth not depart.
The sound of a whip, And the sound of the rattling of a wheel, And of a prancing horse, and of a bounding chariot, Of a horseman mounting.
And the flame of a sword, and the lightning of a spear, And the abundance of the wounded, And the weight of carcases, Yea, there is no end to the bodies, They stumble over their bodies.
Because of the abundance of the fornications of an harlot, The goodness of the grace of the lady of witchcrafts, Who is selling nations by her fornications, And families by her witchcrafts.
Lo, I [am] against thee, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts, And have removed thy skirts before thy face, And have shewed nations thy nakedness, And kingdoms thy shame,
And I have cast upon thee abominations, And dishonoured thee, and made thee as a sight.
And it hath come to pass, Each of thy beholders fleeth from thee, And hath said: 'Spoiled is Nineveh, Who doth bemoan for her?' Whence do I seek comforters for thee?
Art thou better than No-Ammon, That is dwelling among brooks? Waters she hath round about her, Whose bulwark [is] the sea, waters her wall.
Cush her might, and Egypt, and there is no end. Put and Lubim have been for thy help.
Even she doth become an exile, She hath gone into captivity, Even her sucklings are dashed to pieces At the top of all out-places, And for her honoured ones they cast a lot, And all her great ones have been bound in fetters.
Even thou art drunken, thou art hidden, Even thou dost seek a strong place, because of an enemy.
All thy fortresses [are] fig-trees with first-fruits, If they are shaken, They have fallen into the mouth of the eater.
Lo, thy people [are] women in thy midst, To thine enemies thoroughly opened Have been the gates of thy land, Consumed hath fire thy bars.
Waters of a siege draw for thyself, Strengthen thy fortresses, Enter into mire, and tread on clay, Make strong a brick-kiln.
There consume thee doth a fire, Cut thee off doth a sword, It doth consume thee as a cankerworm! Make thyself heavy as the cankerworm, Make thyself heavy as the locust.
Multiply thy merchants above the stars of the heavens, The cankerworm hath stripped off, and doth flee away.
Thy crowned ones [are] as a locust, And thy princes as great grasshoppers, That encamp in hedges in a day of cold, The sun hath risen, and it doth flee away, And not known is its place where they are.
Slumbered have thy friends, king of Asshur, Rest do thine honourable ones, Scattered have been thy people on the mountains, And there is none gathering.
There is no weakening of thy destruction, Grievous [is] thy smiting, All hearing thy fame have clapped the hand at thee, For over whom did not thy wickedness pass continually?
The burden that Habakkuk the prophet hath seen:
Till when, O Jehovah, have I cried, And Thou dost not hear? I cry unto Thee — 'Violence,' and Thou dost not save.
Why dost Thou shew me iniquity, And perversity dost cause to behold? And spoiling and violence [are] before me, And there is strife, and contention doth lift [itself] up,
Therefore doth law cease, And judgment doth not go forth for ever, For the wicked is compassing the righteous, Therefore wrong judgment goeth forth.
Look ye on nations, and behold and marvel greatly. For a work He is working in your days, Ye do not believe though it is declared.
For, lo, I am raising up the Chaldeans, The bitter and hasty nation, That is going to the broad places of earth, To occupy tabernacles not its own.
Terrible and fearful it [is], From itself its judgment and its excellency go forth.
Swifter than leopards have been its horses, And sharper than evening wolves, And increased have its horsemen, Even its horsemen from afar come in, They fly as an eagle, hasting to consume.
Wholly for violence it doth come in, Their faces swallowing up the east wind, And it doth gather as the sand a captivity.
And at kings it doth scoff, And princes [are] a laughter to it, At every fenced place it doth laugh, And it heapeth up dust, and captureth it.
Then passed on hath the spirit, Yea, he doth transgress, And doth ascribe this his power to his god.
Art not Thou of old, O Jehovah, my God, my Holy One? We do not die, O Jehovah, For judgment Thou hast appointed it, And, O Rock, for reproof Thou hast founded it.
Purer of eyes than to behold evil, To look on perverseness Thou art not able, Why dost Thou behold the treacherous? Thou keepest silent when the wicked Doth swallow the more righteous than he,
And Thou makest man as fishes of the sea, As a creeping thing — none ruling over him.
Each of them with a hook he hath brought up, He doth catch it in his net, and gathereth it in his drag, Therefore he doth joy and rejoice.
Therefore he doth sacrifice to his net, And doth make perfume to his drag, For by them [is] his portion fertile, and his food fat.
Doth he therefore empty his net, And continually to slay nations spare not?
On my charge I stand, and I station myself on a bulwark, and I watch to see what He doth speak against me, and what I do reply to my reproof.
And Jehovah answereth me and saith: 'Write a vision, and explain on the tables, That he may run who is reading it.
For yet the vision [is] for a season, And it breatheth for the end, and doth not lie, If it tarry, wait for it, For surely it cometh, it is not late.
Lo, a presumptuous one! Not upright is his soul within him, And the righteous by his stedfastness liveth.
And also, because the wine [is] treacherous, A man is haughty, and remaineth not at home, Who hath enlarged as sheol his soul, And is as death that is not satisfied, And doth gather unto itself all the nations, And doth assemble unto itself all the peoples,
Do not these — all of them — against him a simile taken up, And a moral of acute sayings for him, And say, Woe [to] him who is multiplying [what is] not his? Till when also is he multiplying to himself heavy pledges?
Do not thy usurers instantly rise up, And those shaking thee awake up, And thou hast been for a spoil to them?
Because thou hast spoiled many nations, Spoil thee do all the remnant of the peoples, Because of man's blood, and of violence [to] the land, [To] the city, and [to] all dwelling in it.
Woe [to] him who is gaining evil gain for his house, To set on high his nest, To be delivered from the hand of evil,
Thou hast counselled a shameful thing to thy house, To cut off many peoples, and sinful [is] thy soul.
For a stone from the wall doth cry out, And a holdfast from the wood answereth it.
Woe [to] him who is building a city by blood, And establishing a city by iniquity.
Lo, is it not from Jehovah of Hosts And peoples are fatigued for fire, And nations for vanity are weary?
For full is the earth of the knowledge of the honour of Jehovah, As waters cover [the bottom of] a sea.
Woe [to] him who is giving drink to his neighbour, Pouring out thy bottle, and also making drunk, In order to look on their nakedness.
Thou hast been filled — shame without honour, Drink thou also, and be uncircumcised, Turn round unto thee doth the cup of the right hand of Jehovah, And shameful spewing [is] on thine honour.
For violence [to] Lebanon doth cover thee, And spoil of beasts doth affright them, Because of man's blood, and of violence [to] the land, [To] the city, and [to] all dwelling in it.
What profit hath a graven image given That its former hath graven it? A molten image and teacher of falsehood, That trusted hath the former on his own formation — to make dumb idols?
Woe [to] him who is saying to wood, 'Awake,' 'Stir up,' to a dumb stone, It a teacher! lo, it is overlaid — gold and silver, And there is no spirit in its midst.
And Jehovah [is] in His holy temple, Be silent before Him, all the earth!
A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet concerning erring ones:
O Jehovah, I heard thy report, I have been afraid, O Jehovah, Thy work! in midst of years revive it, In the midst of years Thou makest known In anger Thou dost remember mercy.
God from Teman doth come, The Holy One from mount Paran. Pause! Covered the heavens hath His majesty, And His praise hath filled the earth.
And the brightness is as the light, He hath rays out of His hand, And there — the hiding of His strength.
Before Him goeth pestilence, And a burning flame goeth forth at His feet.
He hath stood, and He measureth earth, He hath seen, and He shaketh off nations, And scatter themselves do mountains of antiquity, Bowed have the hills of old, The ways of old [are] His.
Under sorrow I have seen tents of Cushan, Tremble do curtains of the land of Midian.
Against rivers hath Jehovah been wroth? Against rivers [is] Thine anger? Against the sea [is] Thy wrath? For Thou dost ride on Thy horses — Thy chariots of salvation?
Utterly naked Thou dost make Thy bow, Sworn are the tribes — saying, 'Pause!' [With] rivers Thou dost cleave the earth.
Seen thee — pained are mountains, An inundation of waters hath passed over, Given forth hath the deep its voice, High its hands it hath lifted up.
Sun — moon — hath stood — a habitation, At the light thine arrows go on, At the brightness, the glittering of thy spear.
In indignation Thou dost tread earth, In anger Thou dost thresh nations.
Thou hast gone forth for the salvation of Thy people, For salvation with Thine anointed, Thou hast smitten the head of the house of the wicked, Laying bare the foundation unto the neck. Pause!
Thou hast pierced with his staves the head of his leaders, They are tempestuous to scatter me, Their exultation [is] as to consume the poor in secret.
Thou hast proceeded through the sea with Thy horses — the clay of many waters.
I have heard, and my belly trembleth, At the noise have my lips quivered, Rottenness doth come into my bones, And in my place I do tremble, That I rest for a day of distress, At the coming up of the people, he overcometh it.
Though the fig-tree doth not flourish, And there is no produce among vines, Failed hath the work of the olive, And fields have not yielded food, Cut off from the fold hath been the flock, And there is no herd in the stalls.
Yet I, in Jehovah I exult, I do joy in the God of my salvation.
Jehovah the Lord [is] my strength, And He doth make my feet like hinds, And on my high-places causeth me to tread. To the overseer with my stringed instruments!
A word of Jehovah that hath been unto Zephaniah son of Cushi, son of Gedaliah, son of Amariah, son of Hezikiah, in the days of Josiah son of Amoz, king of Judah:
I utterly consume all from off the face of the ground, An affirmation of Jehovah.
I consume man and beast, I consume fowl of the heavens, and fishes of the sea, And the stumbling-blocks — the wicked, And I have cut off man from the face of the ground, An affirmation of Jehovah,
And stretched out My hand against Judah, And against all inhabiting Jerusalem, And cut off from this place the remnant of Baal, The name of the idolatrous priests, with the priests,
And those bowing themselves On the roofs to the host of the heavens, And those bowing themselves, Swearing to Jehovah, and swearing by Malcham,
And those removing from after Jehovah, And who have not sought Jehovah, nor besought Him.
Hush! because of the Lord Jehovah, For near [is] a day of Jehovah, For prepared hath Jehovah a sacrifice, He hath sanctified His invited ones.
And it hath come to pass, In the day of the sacrifice of Jehovah, That I have laid a charge on the heads, And on sons of the king, And on all putting on strange clothing.
And I have laid a charge on every one Who is leaping over the threshold in that day, Who are filling the house of their masters [With] violence and deceit.
And there hath been in that day, An affirmation of Jehovah, The noise of a cry from the fish-gate, And of a howling from the Second, And of great destruction from the hills.
Howl, ye inhabitants of the hollow place, For cut off hath been all the merchant people, Cut off have been all bearing silver.
And it hath come to pass, at that time, I search Jerusalem with lights, And I have laid a charge on the men Who are hardened on their preserved things, Who are saying in their heart: Jehovah doth no good, nor doth He evil.
And their wealth hath been for a spoil, And their houses for desolation, And they have built houses, and do not inhabit, And they have planted vineyards, And they do not drink their wine.
Near [is] the great day of Jehovah, Near, and hasting exceedingly, The noise of the day of Jehovah, Bitterly shriek there doth a mighty one.
A day of wrath [is] that day, A day of adversity and distress, A day of waste and desolation, A day of darkness and gloominess, A day of cloud and thick darkness.
A day of trumpet and shouting against the fenced cities, And against the high corners.
And I have sent distress to men, And they have walked as the blind, For against Jehovah they have sinned, And poured out is their blood as dust, And their flesh [is] as dung.
Even their silver, even their gold, Is not able to deliver them in a day of the wrath of Jehovah, And in the fire of His jealousy consumed is the whole land, For only a hastened end doth He make Of all the inhabitants of the land!
Bend yourselves, yea, bend ye, O nation not desired,
Before the bringing forth of a statute, As chaff hath the day passed on, While yet not come in upon you doth the heat of the anger of Jehovah, While yet not come in upon you doth a day of the anger of Jehovah,
Seek Jehovah, all ye humble of the land, Who His judgment have done, Seek ye righteousness, seek humility, It may be ye are hidden in a day of the anger of Jehovah.
For Gaza is forsaken, And Ashkelon [is] for a desolation, Ashdod! at noon they do cast her forth, And Ekron is rooted up.
Ho! O inhabitants of the sea-coast, Nation of the Cherethites, A word of Jehovah [is] against you, Canaan, land of the Philistines, And I have destroyed thee without an inhabitant.
And the sea-coast hath been habitations, Cottages [for] shepherds, and folds [for] a flock.
And the coast hath been for the remnant of the house of Judah, By them they have pleasure, In houses of Ashkelon at even they lie down, For inspect them doth Jehovah their God, And He hath turned back [to] their captivity.
I have heard the reproach of Moab, And the revilings of the sons of Ammon, Wherewith they reproached My people, And magnify [themselves] against their border.
Therefore, I live, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts, God of Israel, Surely, Moab is as Sodom, And the sons of Ammon as Gomorrah, An overrunning of nettles and salt-pits, And a desolation — unto the age. A residue of My people do seize them, And a remnant of My nation inherit them.
This [is] to them for their arrogancy, Because they have reproached, And they magnify [themselves] against the people of Jehovah of Hosts.
Fearful [is] Jehovah against them, For He made bare all gods of the land, And bow themselves to Him, each from his place, Do all islanders of the nations.
Also ye, O Cushim, pierced of My sword [are] they.
And He stretcheth His hand against the north, And doth destroy Asshur, And he setteth Nineveh for a desolation, A dry land like a wilderness.
And crouched in her midst have droves, Every beast of the nation, Both pelican and hedge-hog in her knobs lodge, A voice doth sing at the window, 'Destruction [is] at the threshold, For the cedar-work is exposed.'
This [is] the exulting city that is dwelling confidently, That is saying in her heart, 'I [am], and beside me there is none,' How hath she been for a desolation, A crouching-place for beasts, Every one passing by her doth hiss, He doth shake his hand!
Woe [to] the rebellious and polluted, The oppressing city!
She hath not hearkened to the voice, She hath not accepted instruction, In Jehovah she hath not trusted, Unto her God she hath not drawn near.
Her heads in her midst [are] roaring lions, Her judges [are] evening wolves, They have not gnawn the bone in the morning.
Her prophets unstable — men of treachery, Her priests have polluted the sanctuary, They have violated the law.
Jehovah [is] righteous in her midst, He doth not do perverseness, Morning by morning His judgment he giveth to the light, It hath not been lacking, And the perverse doth not know shame.
I have cut off nations, Desolated have been their chief ones, I have laid waste their out-places without any passing by, Destroyed have been their cities, Without man, without inhabitant.
I have said: Only, ye do fear Me, Ye do accept instruction, And her habitation is not cut off, All that I have appointed for her, But they have risen early, They have corrupted all their doings.
Therefore, wait for Me — an affirmation of Jehovah, For the day of My rising for prey, For My judgment [is] to gather nations, To assemble kingdoms, To pour out on them Mine indignation, All the heat of Mine anger, For by the fire of My jealousy consumed is all the earth.
For then do I turn unto peoples a pure lip, To call all of them by the name of Jehovah, To serve Him [with] one shoulder.
From beyond the rivers of Cush, my supplicants, The daughter of My scattered ones, Do bring My present.
In that day thou art not ashamed because of any of thine actions, Wherewith thou hast transgressed against Me, For then do I turn aside from thy midst The exulting ones of thine excellency, And thou dost add no more to be haughty, In My holy mountain.
And I have left in thy midst a people humble and poor, And they have trusted in the name of Jehovah.
The remnant of Israel do no perversity, nor speak lies, Nor found in their mouth is a deceitful tongue, For they have delight, and have lain down, And there is none troubling.
Cry aloud, O daughter of Zion, shout, O Israel, Rejoice and exult with the whole heart, O daughter of Jerusalem.
Jehovah hath turned aside thy judgments, He hath faced thine enemy, The king of Israel, Jehovah, [is] in thy midst, Thou seest evil no more.
In that day it is said to Jerusalem, 'Fear not, O Zion, let not thy hands be feeble.
Jehovah thy God [is] in thy midst, A mighty one doth save, He rejoiceth over thee with joy, He doth work in His love, He joyeth over thee with singing.'
Mine afflicted from the appointed place I have gathered, from thee they have been, Bearing for her sake reproach.
Lo, I am dealing with all afflicting thee at that time, And I have saved the halting one, And the driven out ones I do gather, And have set them for a praise and for a name, In all the land of their shame.
At that time I bring you in, Even at the time of My assembling you, For I give you for a name, and for a praise, Among all peoples of the land, In My turning back [to] your captivity before your eyes, said Jehovah!
In the second year of Darius the king, in the sixth month, in the first day of the month, hath a word of Jehovah been by the hand of Haggai the prophet, unto Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and unto Joshua son of Josedech, the high priest, saying:
Thus spake Jehovah of Hosts, saying: This people! — they have said, 'The time hath not come, The time the house of Jehovah [is] to be built.'
And there is a word of Jehovah by the hand of Haggai the prophet, saying:
Is it time for you — you! To dwell in your covered houses, And this house to lie waste?
And now, thus said Jehovah of Hosts, Set your heart to your ways.
Ye have sown much, and brought in little, To eat, and not to satiety, To drink, and not to drunkenness, To clothe, and none hath heat, And he who is hiring himself out, Is hiring himself for a bag pierced through.
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Set your heart to your ways.
Go up the mountain, and ye have brought in wood, And build the house, and I am pleased with it. And I am honoured, said Jehovah.
Looking for much, and lo, little, And ye brought [it] home, and I blew on it, Wherefore? — an affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts, Because of My house that is waste, And ye are running — each to his house,
Therefore, over you refrained have the heavens from dew, And the land hath refrained its increase.
And I proclaim draught on the land, And on the mountains, and on the corn, And on the new wine, and on the oil, And on what the ground doth bring forth, And on man, and on beast, And on all labour of the hands.'
And Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, and Joshua son of Josedech, the high priest, and all the remnant of the people, do hearken to the voice of Jehovah their God, and unto the words of Haggai the prophet, as Jehovah their God had sent him, and the people are afraid of the face of Jehovah.
And Haggai, messenger of Jehovah, in messages of Jehovah, speaketh to the people, saying: 'I [am] with you, an affirmation of Jehovah.'
And Jehovah doth stir up the spirit of Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua son of Josedech, the high priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the people, and they come in, and do work in the house of Jehovah of Hosts their God,
in the twenty and fourth day of the sixth month, in the second year of Darius the king.
In the seventh [month], in the twenty and first of the month, hath a word of Jehovah been by the hand of Haggai the prophet, saying:
'Speak, I pray thee, unto Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and unto Joshua, son of Josedech, the high priest, and unto the remnant of the people, saying:
Who among you hath been left that saw this house in its former honour? And what are ye seeing it now? Is it not, compared with it, as nothing in your eyes?
And now, be strong, O Zerubbabel, An affirmation of Jehovah, And be strong, O Joshua, son of Josedech, the high priest, And be strong, all ye people of the land, An affirmation of Jehovah, And do ye — (for I [am] with you, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts) —
The thing that I covenanted with you, In your coming forth from Egypt, And My Spirit is remaining in your midst, fear not.
For thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Yet once more — it [is] a little, And I am shaking the heavens and the earth, And the sea, and the dry land,
And I have shaken all the nations, And they have come [to] the desire of all the nations, And I have filled this house [with] honour, Said Jehovah of Hosts.
Mine [is] the silver, and Mine the gold, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts.
Greater is the honour of this latter house, Than of the former, said Jehovah of Hosts, And in this place do I give peace, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts.'
On the twenty and fourth of the ninth [month], in the second year of Darius, hath a word of Jehovah been by the hand of Haggai the prophet, saying:
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: 'Ask, I pray thee, the priests [of] the law, saying:
Lo, one doth carry holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and he hath come with his skirt against the bread, or against the pottage, or against the wine, or against the oil, or against any food — is it holy?' And the priests answer and say, 'No.'
And Haggai saith, 'If the unclean of body doth come against any of these, is it unclean?' And the priests answer and say, 'It is unclean.'
And Haggai answereth and saith, 'So [is] this people, and so [is] this nation before Me — an affirmation of Jehovah — and so [is] every work of their hands, and that which they bring near there — it is unclean.
And now, lay [it], I pray you, to your heart, From this day, and onwards, Before the laying of stone to stone in the temple of Jehovah.
From that time [one] hath come to a heap of twenty, And it hath been ten, He hath come unto the wine-fat to draw out fifty purahs, And it hath been twenty.
I have smitten you with blasting, And with mildew, and with hail — All the work of your hands, And there is none of you with Me, An affirmation of Jehovah.
Set [it], I pray you, to your heart, from this day and onwards, from the twenty and fourth day of the ninth [month], even from the day that the temple of Jehovah hath been founded, set [it] to your heart.
Is the seed yet in the barn? And hitherto the vine and the fig, And the pomegranate, and the olive-tree, Have not borne — from this day I bless.'
And there is a word of Jehovah a second time unto Haggai, on the twenty and fourth of the month, saying:
'Speak unto Zerubbabel governor of Judah, saying: I am shaking the heavens and the earth,
And have overturned the throne of kingdoms, And I have destroyed the strength of kingdoms of the nations, And overturned chariot and its charioteers, And come down have horses and their riders, Each by the sword of his brother.
In that day — an affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts, I take thee, Zerubbabel, son of Shealtiel, My servant — an affirmation of Jehovah, And have set thee as a signet, for on thee I have fixed, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts!
In the eighth month, in the second year of Darius, hath a word of Jehovah been unto Zechariah, son of Berechiah, son of Iddo, the prophet, saying:
'Jehovah was wroth against your fathers — wrath!
And thou hast said unto them, Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, turn back unto Me, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts, And I turn back unto you, said Jehovah of Hosts.
Ye shall not be as your fathers, To whom the former prophets called, saying: Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, Turn back I pray you, From your evil ways and from your evil doings, And they did not hearken, Nor attend to Me — an affirmation of Jehovah.
Your fathers — where [are] they? And the prophets — to the age do they live?
Only, My words, and My statutes, That I commanded My servants the prophets, Have they not overtaken your fathers, And they turn back and say: As Jehovah of Hosts designed to do to us, According to our ways, and according to our doings, So He hath done to us?'
On the twenty and fourth day of the eleventh month, (it [is] the month of Sebat,) in the second year of Darius, hath a word of Jehovah been unto Zechariah, son of Berechiah, son of Iddo, the prophet, saying:
I have seen by night, and lo, one riding on a red horse, and he is standing between the myrtles that [are] in the shade, and behind him [are] horses, red, bay, and white.
And I say, 'What [are] these, my lord?' And the messenger who is speaking with me saith unto me, 'I — I do shew thee what these [are].'
And the one who is standing between the myrtles doth answer and say, 'These [are] they whom Jehovah hath sent to walk up and down in the land.'
And they answer the messenger of Jehovah who is standing between the myrtles, and say, 'We have walked up and down in the land, and lo, all the land is sitting still, and at rest.'
And the messenger of Jehovah answereth and saith, 'Jehovah of Hosts! till when dost Thou not pity Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah, that Thou hast abhorred these seventy years?'
And Jehovah answereth the messenger, who is speaking with me, good words, comfortable words.
And the messenger who is speaking with me, saith unto me, 'Call, saying: Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: I have been zealous for Jerusalem, and for Zion [with] great zeal.
And [with] great wrath I am wroth against the nations who are at ease, For I was a little wroth, and they assisted — for evil.
Therefore, thus said Jehovah: I have turned to Jerusalem with mercies, My house is built in it, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts, And a line is stretched over Jerusalem.
Again call, saying: Thus said Jehovah of Hosts, Again do my cities overflow from good, And Jehovah hath again comforted Zion, And He hath fixed again on Jerusalem.'
And I lift up mine eyes, and look, and lo, four horns.
And I say unto the messenger who is speaking with me, 'What [are] these?' And he saith unto me, 'These [are] the horns that have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem.'
And Jehovah doth shew me four artisans.
And I say, 'What [are] these coming in to do?' And He speaketh, saying: 'These [are] the horns that have scattered Judah, so that no one hath lifted up his head, and these come in to trouble them, to cast down the horns of the nations who are lifting up a horn against the land of Judah — to scatter it.'
And I lift up mine eyes, and look, and lo, a man, and in his hand a measuring line.
And I say, 'Whither are thou going?' And he saith unto me, 'To measure Jerusalem, to see how much [is] its breadth, and how much its length.'
And lo, the messenger who is speaking with me is going out, and another messenger is going out to meet him,
and he saith unto him, 'Run, speak unto this young man, saying: Unwalled villages inhabit doth Jerusalem, From the abundance of man and beast in her midst.
And I — I am to her — an affirmation of Jehovah, A wall of fire round about, And for honour I am in her midst.
Ho, ho, and flee from the land of the north, An affirmation of Jehovah, For, as the four winds of the heavens, I have spread you abroad, An affirmation of Jehovah.
Ho, Zion, be delivered who art dwelling [with] the daughter of Babylon.
For thus said Jehovah of Hosts: After honour He hath sent me unto the nations who are spoiling you, For he who is coming against you, Is coming against the daughter of His eye.
For lo, I am waving my hand against them, And they have been a spoil to their servants. And ye have known that Jehovah of Hosts hath sent me.
Singe, and rejoice, O daughter of Zion, For lo, I am coming, and have dwelt in thy midst, An affirmation of Jehovah.
And joined have been many nations unto Jehovah in that day, And they have been to Me for a people, And I have dwelt in thy midst, And thou hast known that Jehovah of Hosts hath sent me unto thee.
And Jehovah hath inherited Judah, His portion on the holy ground, And He hath fixed again on Jerusalem.
Hush, all flesh, because of Jehovah, For He hath been roused up from His holy habitation!'
And he sheweth me Joshua the high priest standing before the messenger of Jehovah, and the Adversary standing at his right hand, to be an adversary to him.
And Jehovah saith unto the Adversary: 'Jehovah doth push against thee, O Adversary, Yea, push against thee doth Jehovah, Who is fixing on Jerusalem, Is not this a brand delivered from fire?'
And Joshua was clothed with filthy garments, and is standing before the messenger.
And he answereth and speaketh unto those standing before him, saying: 'Turn aside the filthy garments from off him.' And he saith unto him, 'See, I have caused thine iniquity to pass away from off thee, so as to clothe thee with costly apparel.'
He also said, 'Let them set a pure diadem on his head. And they set the pure diadem on his head, and clothe him with garments. And the messenger of Jehovah is standing,
and the messenger of Jehovah doth protest to Joshua, saying:
'Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: If in My ways thou dost walk, And if My charge thou dost keep, Then also thou dost judge My house, And also thou dost keep My courts, And I have given to thee conductors among these standing by.
Hear, I pray thee, Joshua, the high priest, Thou and thy companions sitting before thee, (For men of type [are] they,) For lo, I am bringing in My servant — a Shoot.
For lo, the stone that I put before Joshua, On one stone [are] seven eyes, Lo, I am graving its graving, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts, And I have removed the iniquity of that land in one day.
In that day — an affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts, Ye do call, each unto his neighbour, Unto the place of the vine, And unto the place of the fig-tree!'
And the messenger who is speaking with me doth turn back, and stir me up as one who is stirred up out of his sleep,
and he saith unto me, 'What art thou seeing?' And I say, 'I have looked, and lo, a candlestick of gold — all of it, and its bowl [is] on its top, and its seven lamps [are] upon it, and twice seven pipes [are] to the lights that [are] on its top,
and two olive-trees [are] by it, one on the right of the bowl, and one on its left.'
And I answer and speak unto the messenger who is speaking with me, saying, 'What [are] these, my lord?'
And the messenger who is speaking with me answereth and saith unto me, 'Hast thou not known what these [are]?' And I say, 'No, my lord.'
And he answereth and speaketh unto me, saying: 'This [is] a word of Jehovah unto Zerubbabel, saying: Not by a force, nor by power, But — by My Spirit, said Jehovah of Hosts.
Who [art] thou, O great mountain Before Zerubbabel — for a plain! And he hath brought forth the top-stone, Cries of Grace, grace — [are] to it.'
And there is a word of Jehovah to me, saying,
Hands of Zerubbabel did found this house, And his hands do finish it, And thou hast known that Jehovah of Hosts Hath sent me unto you.
For who trampled on the day of small things, They have rejoiced, And seen the tin weight in the hand of Zerubbabel, These seven [are] the eyes of Jehovah, They are going to and fro in all the land.'
And I answer and say unto him, 'What [are] these two olive-trees, on the right of the candlestick, and on its left?'
And I answer a second time, and say unto him, 'What [are] the two branches of the olive trees that, by means of the two golden pipes, are emptying out of themselves the oil?'
And he speaketh unto me, saying, 'Hast thou not known what these [are]?' And I say, 'No, my lord.'
And he saith, 'These [are] the two sons of the oil, who are standing by the Lord of the whole earth.'
And I turn back, and lift up mine eyes, and look, and lo, a flying roll.
And he saith unto me, 'What art thou seeing?' And I say, 'I am seeing a flying roll, its length twenty by the cubit, and its breadth ten by the cubit.'
And he saith unto me, 'This [is] the execration that is going forth over the face of all the land, for every one who is stealing, on the one side, according to it, hath been declared innocent, and every one who hath sworn, on the other side, according to it, hath been declared innocent.
'I have brought it out — an affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts — and it hath come in unto the house of the thief, and unto the house of him who hath sworn in My name to a falsehood, and it hath remained in the midst of his house, and hath consumed it, both its wood and its stones.'
And the messenger who is speaking with me goeth forth, and saith unto me, 'Lift up, I pray thee, thine eyes, and see what [is] this that is coming forth?'
And I say, 'What [is] it?' And he saith, 'This — the ephah that is coming forth.' And he saith, 'This [is] their aspect in all the land.
And lo, a cake of lead lifted up; and this [is] a woman sitting in the midst of the ephah.'
And he saith, 'This [is] the wicked woman.' And he casteth her unto the midst of the ephah, and casteth the weight of lead on its mouth.
And I lift up mine eyes, and see, and lo, two women are coming forth, and wind in their wings; and they have wings like wings of the stork, and they lift up the ephah between the earth and the heavens.
And I say unto the messenger who is speaking with me, 'Whither [are] they causing the ephah to go?'
And he saith unto me, 'To build to it a house in the land of Shinar.' And it hath been prepared and hath been placed there on its base.
And I turn back, and lift up mine eyes, and look, and lo, four chariots are coming forth from between two of the mountains, and the mountains [are] mountains of brass.
In the first chariot [are] red horses, and in the second chariot brown horses,
and in the third chariot white horses, and in the fourth chariot strong grisled horses.
And I answer and say unto the messenger who is speaking with me, 'What [are] these, my lord?'
And the messenger answereth and saith unto me, 'These [are] four spirits of the heavens coming forth from presenting themselves before the Lord of the whole earth.
The brown horses that [are] therein, are coming forth unto the land of the north; and the white have come forth unto their hinder part; and the grisled have come forth unto the land of the south;
and the strong ones have come forth, and they seek to go to walk up and down in the earth;' and he saith, 'Go, walk up and down in the earth;' and they walk up and down in the earth.
And he calleth me, and speaketh unto me, saying, 'See, those coming forth unto the land of the north have caused My Spirit to rest in the land of the north.'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto me, saying,
to take of the captivity (who came from Babylon) from Heldai, from Tobijah, and from Jedaiah, 'and thou hast come in — thou, in that day, yea, thou hast come into the house of Josiah son of Zephaniah,
and thou hast taken silver and gold, and hast made a crown, and hast placed on the head of Joshua son of Josedech, the high priest,
and hast spoken unto him, saying: Thus spake Jehovah of Hosts, saying: Lo, a man! A Shoot — [is] his name, And from his place he doth shoot up, And he hath built the temple of Jehovah.
Yea, he doth build the temple of Jehovah, And he doth bear away honour, And he hath sat and ruled on His throne, And hath been a priest on His throne, And a counsel of peace is between both.
And the crown is to Helem, and to Tobijah, and to Jedaiah, and to Hen son of Zephaniah, for a memorial in the temple of Jehovah.
And the far-off come in, and they have built in the temple of Jehovah, and ye have known that Jehovah of Hosts hath sent me unto you, yea, it hath come to pass, if ye do certainly hearken to the voice of Jehovah your God.'
And it cometh to pass, in the fourth year of Darius the king hath a word of Jehovah been unto Zechariah, in the fourth of the ninth month, in Chisleu.
And Beth-El sendeth Sherezer and Regem-Melech, and its men, to appease the face of Jehovah,
speaking unto the priests who [are] at the house of Jehovah of Hosts, and unto the prophets, saying, 'Do I weep in the fifth month — being separated — as I have done these so many years?'
And there is a word of Jehovah of Hosts unto me, saying:
'Speak unto all the people of the land, and unto the priests, saying:
When ye fasted with mourning in the fifth and in the seventh [months] — even these seventy years — did ye keep the fast [to] Me — Me? And when ye eat, and when ye drink, is it not ye who are eating, and ye who are drinking?
'Are not [these] the words that Jehovah proclaimed by the hand of the former prophets, in Jerusalem's being inhabited, and [in] safety, and its cities round about it, and the south and the plain — abiding?'
And there is a word of Jehovah unto Zechariah, saying:
'Thus spake Jehovah of Hosts, saying: True judgment judge ye, And kindness and mercy do one with another.
And widow, and fatherless, Sojourner, and poor, ye do not oppress, And the calamity of one another ye do not devise in your heart.
And they refuse to attend, And they give a refractory shoulder, And their ears have made heavy against hearing.
And their heart they have made adamant, Against hearing the law, and the words, That Jehovah of Hosts sent by His Spirit, By the hand of the former prophets, And their is great wrath from Jehovah of Hosts.
And it cometh to pass, as He called, And they have not hearkened, So do they call, and I do not hearken, Said Jehovah of Hosts.
And I toss them on all the nations, That they have not known, The land hath been desolate behind them, Of any passing by and turning back, And they set a desirable land for a desolation!
And there is a word of Jehovah of Hosts, saying:
'Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: I have been zealous for Zion with great zeal, With great heat I have been zealous for her.
Thus said Jehovah: I have turned back unto Zion, And I have dwelt in the midst of Jerusalem, And Jerusalem hath been called 'The city of truth,' And the mountain of Jehovah of Hosts, 'The holy mountain.'
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Again dwell do old men and old women, In broad places of Jerusalem, And each his staff in his hand, Because of abundance of days.
And broad places of the city are full of boys and girls, Playing in its broad places.
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Surely it is wonderful in the eyes of the remnant of this people in those days, Also in Mine eyes it is wonderful, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts.
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Lo, I am saving My people from the land of the rising, And from the land of the going in, of the sun,
And I have brought them in, They have dwelt in the midst of Jerusalem, And they have been to Me for a people, And I am to them for God, In truth and in righteousness.
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Let your hands be strong, Ye who are hearing in these days these words from the mouth of the prophets, That in the day the house of Jehovah of Hosts Hath been founded, the temple [is] to be built.
For, before those days there hath been no hiring of man, Yea, a hiring of beasts there is none; And to him who is going out, And to him who is coming in, There is no peace because of the adversary, And I send all men — each against his neighbour.
And now, not as [in] the former days [am] I to the remnant of this people, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts.
Because of the sowing of peace, The vine doth give her fruit, And the earth doth give her increase, And the heavens do give their dew, And I have caused the remnant of this people To inherit all these.
And it hath come to pass, As ye have been a reviling among nations, O house of Judah, and house of Israel, So I save you, and ye have been a blessing, Do not fear, let your hands be strong.
For, thus said Jehovah of Hosts, As I did purpose to do evil to you, When your fathers made Me wroth, Said Jehovah of Hosts, and I did not repent,
So I have turned back, I have purposed, in these days, To do good with Jerusalem, And with the house of Judah — fear not!
These [are] the things that ye do: Speak ye truth each with his neighbour, Truth and peaceful judgment judge in your gates,
And each the evil of his neighbour ye do not devise in your heart, And a false oath ye do not love, For all these [are] things that I have hated, An affirmation of Jehovah.'
And there is a word of Jehovah of Hosts unto me, saying:
'Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: The fast of the fourth, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth [months], are to the house of Judah for joy and for rejoicing, and for pleasant appointed seasons, and the truth and the peace they have loved.
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: Yet come do peoples, and inhabitants of many cities,
Yea, gone have inhabitants of one To another, saying: We go diligently, To appease the face of Jehovah, To seek Jehovah of Hosts — I go, even I.
Yea, come in have many peoples, and mighty nations, To seek Jehovah of Hosts in Jerusalem, And to appease the face of Jehovah.
Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: In those days take hold do ten men of all languages of the nations, Yea, they have taken hold on the skirt of a man, a Jew, saying: We go with you, for we heard God [is] with you!
The burden of a word of Jehovah against the land of Hadrach, and Demmeseh — his place of rest: (When to Jehovah [is] the eye of man, And of all the tribes of Israel.)
And also Hamath doth border thereon, Tyre and Zidon, for — very wise!
And Tyre doth build a bulwark to herself, And doth heap silver as dust, And gold as mire of out-places.
Lo, the Lord doth dispossess her, And He hath smitten in the sea her force, And she with fire is consumed.
See doth Ashkelon and fear, Also Gaza, and she is exceedingly pained, Also Ekron — for her expectation dried up, And perished hath a king from Gaza, And Ashkelon doth not remain,
And dwelt hath a foreigner in Ashdod, And I have cut off the excellency of the Philistines.
And turned aside his blood from his mouth, His abominations from between his teeth, And he hath remained, even he, to our God, And he hath been as a leader in Judah, And Ekron as a Jebusite.
And I have pitched for My house a camp, Because of the passer through, and of the returner, And pass not through against them again doth an exactor, For, now, I have seen with My eyes.
Rejoice exceedingly, O daughter of Zion, Shout, O daughter of Jerusalem, Lo, thy King doth come to thee, Righteous — and saved is He, Afflicted — and riding on an ass, And on a colt — a son of she-asses.
And I have cut off the chariot from Ephraim, And the horse from Jerusalem, Yea, cut off hath been the bow of battle, And he hath spoken peace to nations, And his rule [is] from sea unto sea, And from the river unto the ends of earth.
Also thou — by the blood of thy covenant, I have sent thy prisoners out of the pit, There is no water in it.
Turn back to a fenced place, Ye prisoners of the hope, Even to-day a second announcer I restore to thee.
For I have trodden for Me Judah, A bow I have filled [with] Ephraim, And I have stirred up thy sons, O Zion, Against thy sons, O Javan, And I have set thee as the sword of a hero.
And Jehovah doth appear for them, And gone forth as lightning hath His arrow, And the Lord Jehovah with a trumpet bloweth, And He hath gone with whirlwinds of the south.
Jehovah of Hosts doth cover them over, And they consumed, and subdued sling-stones, Yea, they have drunk, They have made a noise as wine, And they have been full as a bowl, As corners of an altar.
And saved them hath Jehovah their God In that day, as a flock of His people, For stones of a crown are displaying themselves over His ground.
For what His goodness! and what His beauty! Corn the young men, And new wine the virgins — make fruitful!
They asked of Jehovah rain in a time of latter rain, Jehovah is making lightnings, And rain [in] showers He doth give to them. To each — the herb in the field.
Because the teraphim did speak iniquity, And the diviners have seen a falsehood, And dreams of the vanity they speak, [With] vanity they give comfort, Therefore they have journeyed as a flock, They are afflicted, for there is no shepherd.
Against the shepherds did Mine anger burn, And against the he-goats I lay a charge, For inspected hath Jehovah of Hosts His flock, the house of Judah, And set them as His beauteous horse in battle.
From him [is] a corner-stone, From him a nail, from him a battle-bow, From him goeth forth every exactor together.
And they have been as heroes, Treading in mire of out-places in battle, And they have fought, for Jehovah [is] with them, And have put to shame riders of horses.
And I have made mighty the house of Judah, And the house of Joseph I do save, And I have caused them to dwell, for I have loved them, And they have been as [if] I had not cast them off, For I [am] Jehovah their God, And I answer them.
And Ephraim hath been as a hero, And rejoiced hath their heart as wine, And their sons see, and they have rejoiced, Rejoice doth their heart in Jehovah.
I hist for them, and I gather them, For I have redeemed them, And they have multiplied as they did multiply.
And I sow them among peoples, And in far-off places they remember Me, And they have lived with their sons, And they have turned back.
And I have brought them back from the land of Egypt, And from Asshur I do gather them, And unto the land of Gilead and Lebanon I do bring them in, And there is not found for them [space].
And He hath passed over through the sea, And hath pressed and smitten billows in the sea, And dried up have been all depths of a flood, And brought down hath been the excellency of Asshur, And the rod of Egypt doth turn aside.
And I have made them mighty in Jehovah, And in His name they walk up and down, An affirmation of Jehovah!
Open, O Lebanon, thy doors, And fire doth devour among thy cedars.
Howl, O fir, for fallen hath the cedar, For their honourable ones were destroyed, Howl, ye oaks of Bashan, For come down hath the fenced forest,
A voice of the howling of the shepherds! For destroyed was their robe of honour, A voice of the roaring of young lions! For destroyed was the excellency of Jordan.
Thus said Jehovah my God: 'Feed the flock of the slaughter,
Whose buyers slay them, and are not guilty, And their sellers say, Blessed [is] Jehovah, And I am rich, And their shepherds have no pity on them.
For I have pity no more on inhabitants of the land, An affirmation of Jehovah, And lo, I am causing man to come forth, Each into the hand of his neighbour, And into the hand of his king, And they have beaten down the land, And I do not deliver out of their hand.'
And I feed the flock of slaughter, even you, ye afflicted of the flock; and I take to me two staves, the one I have called Pleasantness, and the other I have called Bands, and I feed the flock.
And I cut off the three shepherds in one month, and my soul is grieved with them, and also their soul hath abhorred me.
And I say, 'I do not feed you, the dying, let die; and the cut off, let be cut off; and the remaining ones, let each eat the flesh of its neighbour.'
And I take My staff Pleasantness, and cut it asunder, to make void My covenant that I had made with all the peoples:
and it is broken in that day, and know well do the afflicted of the flock who are observing me, that it [is] a word of Jehovah.
And I say unto them: 'If good in your eyes, give my hire, and if not, forbear;' and they weigh out my hire — thirty silverlings.
And Jehovah saith unto me, 'Cast it unto the potter;' the goodly price that I have been prized at by them, and I take the thirty silverlings, and cast them [to] the house of Jehovah, unto the potter.
And I cut asunder my second staff, Bands, to break the unity between Judah and Israel.
And Jehovah saith unto me, 'Again take to thee the instrument of a foolish shepherd.
For lo, I am raising up a shepherd in the land, The cut off he doth not inspect, The shaken off he doth not seek, And the broken he doth not heal, The standing he doth not sustain, And the flesh of the fat he doth eat, And their hoofs he doth break off.
Woe [to] the worthless shepherd, forsaking the flock, A sword [is] on his arm, and on his right eye, His arm is utterly dried up, And his right eye is very dim!'
The burden of a word of Jehovah on Israel. An affirmation of Jehovah, Stretching out heaven, and founding earth, And forming the spirit of man in his midst.
Lo, I am making Jerusalem a cup of reeling To all the peoples round about, And also against Judah it is, In the siege against Jerusalem.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone to all the peoples, All loading it are completely pressed down, And gathered against it have been all nations of the earth.
In that day — an affirmation of Jehovah, I do smite every horse with astonishment, And its rider with madness, And on the house of Judah I open My eyes, And every horse of the peoples I smite with blindness.
And leaders of Judah have said in their heart, 'Strength to me [are] the inhabitants of Jerusalem, In Jehovah of Hosts their God.'
In that day I make the leaders of Judah As a hearth of fire among trees, And as a torch of fire in a sheaf, And they have consumed — on the right and on the left — all the peoples round about, And Jerusalem hath inhabited again her place in Jerusalem.
And saved hath Jehovah the tents of Judah first, So that become not great against Judah Doth the beauty of the house of David, And the beauty of the inhabitant of Jerusalem.
In that day cover over doth Jehovah the inhabitant of Jerusalem, And the stumbling among them hath been in that day as David, And the house of David as God — As a messenger of Jehovah — before them.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, I seek to destroy all the nations Who are coming in against Jerusalem,
And I have poured on the house of David, And on the inhabitant of Jerusalem, A spirit of grace and supplications, And they have looked unto Me whom they pierced, And they have mourned over it, Like a mourning over the only one, And they have been in bitterness for it, Like a bitterness over the first-born.
In that day, great is the mourning of Jerusalem, As the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon,
And mourned hath the land — every family apart, The family of the house of David apart, And their women apart; The family of the house of Nathan apart, And their women apart;
The family of the house of Levi apart, And their women apart; The family of Shimei apart, And their women apart,
All the families that are left, Every family apart, and their women apart!
In that day there is a fountain opened To the house of David And to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, For sin and for impurity.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts, I cut off the names of the idols from the land, And they are not remembered any more, And also the prophets and the spirit of uncleanness I cause to pass away from the land.
And it hath been, when one prophesieth again, That said unto him have his father and his mother, his parents, 'Thou dost not live, For falsehood thou hast spoken in the name of Jehovah,' And pierced him through have his father and his mother, his parents, in his prophesying.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, Ashamed are the prophets, each of his vision, in his prophesying, And they put not on a hairy robe to deceive.
And [one] hath said, 'I am not a prophet, A man, a tiller of ground I am, For ground [is] my possession from my youth.'
And [one] hath said unto him, 'What [are] these wounds in thy hands?' And he hath said, 'Because I was smitten [at] home by my lovers.'
Sword, awake against My shepherd, And against a hero — My fellow, An affirmation of Jehovah of Hosts. Smite the shepherd, and scattered is the flock, And I have put back My hand on the little ones.
And it hath come to pass, In all the land, an affirmation of Jehovah, Two parts in it are cut off — they expire, And the third is left in it.
And I have brought the third into fire, And refined them like a refining of silver, And have tried them like a trying of gold, It doth call in My name, and I answer it, I have said, 'My people it [is],' And it saith, 'Jehovah [is] my God!'
Lo, a day hath come to Jehovah, And divided hath been thy spoil in thy midst.
And I have gathered all the nations unto Jerusalem to battle, And captured hath been the city, And spoiled have been the houses, And the women are lain with, Gone forth hath half the city in a removal, And the remnant of the people are not cut off from the city.
And gone forth hath Jehovah, And He hath fought against those nations, As in the day of His fighting in a day of conflict.
And stood have His feet, in that day, On the mount of Olives, That [is] before Jerusalem eastward, And cleft hath been the mount of Olives at its midst, To the east, and to the west, a very great valley, And removed hath the half of the mount towards the north. And its half towards the south.
And ye have fled [to] the valley of My mountains, For join doth the valley of the mountains to Azal, And ye have fled as ye fled before the shaking, In the days of Uzziah king of Judah, And come in hath Jehovah my God, All holy ones [are] with Thee.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, The precious light is not, it is dense darkness,
And there hath been one day, It is known to Jehovah, not day nor night, And it hath been at evening-time — there is light.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, Go forth do living waters from Jerusalem, Half of them unto the eastern sea, And half of them unto the western sea, In summer and in winter it is.
And Jehovah hath become king over all the land, In that day there is one Jehovah, and His name one.
Changed is all the land as a plain, From Gebo to Rimmon, south of Jerusalem, And she hath been high, and hath dwelt in her place, Even from the gate of Benjamin To the place of the first gate, unto the front gate, And from the tower of Hananeel, Unto the wine-vats of the king.
And they have dwelt in her, And destruction is no more, And Jerusalem hath dwelt confidently.
And this is the plague with which Jehovah Doth plague all the peoples who have warred against Jerusalem, He hath consumed away its flesh, And it is standing on its feet, And its eyes are consumed in their holes, And its tongue is consumed in their mouth.
And it hath come to pass, in that day, A great destruction [from] Jehovah is among them, And they have seized each the hand of his neighbour, And gone up hath his hand against the hand of his neighbour.
And also Judah is fought with in Jerusalem, And gathered hath been the force of all the nations round about, Gold, and silver, and apparel, in great abundance.
And so is the plague of the horse, of the mule, Of the camel, and of the ass, And of all the cattle that are in these camps, As this plague.
And it hath come to pass, Every one who hath been left of all the nations, Who are coming in against Jerusalem, They have also gone up from year to year, To bow themselves to the King, Jehovah of Hosts, And to celebrate the feast of the booths.
And it hath come to pass, That he who doth not go up of the families of the land unto Jerusalem, To bow himself to the King, Jehovah of Hosts, Even on them there is no shower.
And if the family of Egypt go not up, nor come in, Then not on them is the plague With which Jehovah doth plague the nations That go not up to celebrate the feast of booths.
This is the punishment of the sin of Egypt, And the punishment of the sin of all the nations, That go not up to celebrate the feast of booths.
In that day there is on bells of the horse, 'Holy to Jehovah,' And the pots in the house of Jehovah Have been as bowls before the altar.
And every pot in Jerusalem, and in Judah, Have been holy to Jehovah of Hosts, And all those sacrificing have come in, And have taken of them, and boiled in them, And there is no merchant any more in the house of Jehovah of Hosts in that day!
The burden of a word of Jehovah unto Israel by the hand of Malachi:
I have loved you, said Jehovah, And ye have said, 'In what hast Thou loved us?'
Is not Esau Jacob's brother? — an affirmation of Jehovah, And I love Jacob, and Esau I have hated, And I make his mountains a desolation, And his inheritance for dragons of a wilderness.
Because Edom saith, 'We have been made poor, And we turn back and we build the wastes,' Thus said Jehovah of Hosts: They do build, and I do destroy, And [men] have called to them, 'O region of wickedness,' 'O people whom Jehovah defied to the age.'
And your eyes do see, and ye say, 'Magnified is Jehovah beyond the border of Israel,
A son honoureth a father, and a servant his master. And if I [am] a father, where [is] Mine honour? And if I [am] a master, where [is] My fear? Said Jehovah of Hosts to you, O priests, despising My name! And ye have said: 'In what have we despised Thy name?'
Ye are bringing nigh on Mine altar polluted bread, And ye have said: 'In what have we polluted Thee?' In your saying: 'The table of Jehovah — it [is] despicable,'
And when ye bring nigh the blind for sacrifice, 'There is no evil,' And when ye bring nigh the lame and sick, 'There is no evil;' Bring it near, I pray thee, to thy governor — Doth he accept thee? or doth he lift up thy face? Said Jehovah of Hosts.
And now, appease, I pray thee, the face of God, And He doth favour us; From your own hand hath this been, Doth He accept of you appearances? Said Jehovah of Hosts.
Who [is] even among you, And he shutteth the two-leaved doors? Yea, ye do not kindle Mine altar for nought, I have no pleasure in you, said Jehovah of Hosts, And a present I do not accept of your hand.
For, from the rising of the sun to its going in, Great [is] My name among nations, And in every place perfume is brought nigh to My name, and a pure present, For great [is] My name among nations, Said Jehovah of Hosts.
And ye are polluting it in your saying, 'The table of Jehovah — it is polluted, As to its fruit — despicable is its food.'
And ye have said, 'Lo, what a weariness,' And ye have puffed at it, said Jehovah of Hosts, And ye have brought in plunder, And the lame and the sick, And ye have brought in the present! Do I accept it from your hand? said Jehovah.
And cursed [is] a deceiver, who hath in his drove a male, And is vowing, and is sacrificing a marred thing to the Lord, For a great king [am] I, said Jehovah of Hosts, And My name [is] revered among nations!
And now, to you [is] this charge, O priests,
If ye hearken not, and if ye lay [it] not to heart, To give honour to My name, said Jehovah of Hosts, I have sent against you the curse, And I have cursed your blessings, Yea, I have also cursed it, Because ye are not laying [it] to heart.
Lo, I am pushing away before you the seed, And have scattered dung before your faces, Dung of your festivals, And it hath taken you away with it.
And ye have known that I have sent unto you this charge, For My covenant being with Levi, Said Jehovah of Hosts.
My covenant hath been with him of life and of peace, And I make them to him a fear, and he doth fear Me, And because of My name he hath been affrighted.
The law of truth hath been in his mouth, And perverseness hath not been found in his lips, In peace and in uprightness he walked with Me, And many he brought back from iniquity.
For the lips of a priest preserve knowledge, And law they do seek from his mouth, For a messenger of Jehovah of Hosts he [is].
And ye, ye have turned from the way, Ye have caused many to stumble in the law, Ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi, Said Jehovah of Hosts.
And I also, I have made you despised and low before all the people, Because ye are not keeping My ways, And are accepting persons in the law.
Have we not all one father? Hath not our God prepared us? Wherefore do we deal treacherously, Each against his brother, To pollute the covenant of our fathers?
Dealt treacherously hath Judah, And abomination hath been done in Israel, and in Jerusalem, For polluted hath Judah the holy thing of Jehovah, That He hath loved, and hath married the daughter of a strange god.
Cut off doth Jehovah the man who doth it, Tempter and tempted — from the tents of Jacob, Even he who is bringing nigh a present to Jehovah of Hosts.
And this a second time ye do, Covering with tears the altar of Jehovah, With weeping and groaning, Because there is no more turning unto the present, Or receiving of a pleasing thing from your hand.
And ye have said, 'Wherefore?' Because Jehovah hath testified between thee And the wife of thy youth, That thou hast dealt treacherously against her, And she thy companion, and thy covenant-wife.
And He did not make one [only], And He hath the remnant of the Spirit. And what [is] the one [alone]! He is seeking a godly seed. And ye have been watchful over your spirit, And with the wife of thy youth, None doth deal treacherously.
For [I] hate sending away, said Jehovah, God of Israel, And He [who] hath covered violence with his clothing, said Jehovah of Hosts, And ye have been watchful over your spirit, And ye do not deal treacherously.
Ye have wearied Jehovah with your words, And ye have said: 'In what have we wearied Him?' In your saying: 'Every evil-doer [is] good in the eyes of Jehovah, And in them He is delighting,' Or, 'Where [is] the God of judgment?'
Lo, I am sending My messenger, And he hath prepared a way before Me, And suddenly come in unto his temple Doth the Lord whom ye are seeking, Even the messenger of the covenant, Whom ye are desiring, Lo, he is coming, said Jehovah of Hosts.
And who is bearing the day of his coming? And who is standing in his appearing? For he [is] as fire of a refiner, And as soap of a fuller.
And he hath sat, a refiner and purifier of silver, And he hath purified the sons of Levi, And hath refined them as gold and as silver, And they have been to Jehovah bringing nigh a present in righteousness.
And sweet to Jehovah hath been the present of Judah and Jerusalem, As in days of old, and as in former years.
And I have drawn near to you for judgment, And I have been a witness, Making haste against sorcerers, And against adulterers, And against swearers to a falsehood, And against oppressors of the hire of an hireling, Of a widow, and of a fatherless one, And those turning aside a sojourner, And who fear Me not, said Jehovah of Hosts.
For I [am] Jehovah, I have not changed, And ye, the sons of Jacob, Ye have not been consumed.
Even from the days of your fathers Ye have turned aside from My statutes, And ye have not taken heed. Turn back unto Me, and I turn back to you, Said Jehovah of Hosts. And ye have said, 'In what do we turn back?'
Doth man deceive God? but ye are deceiving Me, And ye have said: 'In what have we deceived Thee?' The tithe and the heave-offering!
With a curse ye are cursed! And Me ye are deceiving — this nation — all of it.
Bring in all the tithe unto the treasure-house, And there is food in My house; When ye have tried Me, now, with this, Said Jehovah of Hosts, Do not I open to you the windows of heaven? Yea, I have emptied on you a blessing till there is no space.
And I have pushed for you against the consumer, And He doth not destroy to you the fruit of the ground, Nor miscarry to you doth the vine in the field, Said Jehovah of Hosts.
And declared you happy have all the nations, For ye are a delightful land, said Jehovah of Hosts.
Hard against Me have been your words, Said Jehovah, and ye have said: 'What have we spoken against Thee?'
Ye have said, 'A vain thing to serve God! And what gain when we kept His charge? And when we have gone in black, Because of Jehovah of Hosts?
And now, we are declaring the proud happy, Yea, built up have been those doing wickedness, Yea they have tempted God, and escape.'
Then have those fearing Jehovah spoken one to another, And Jehovah doth attend and hear, And written is a book of memorial before Him Of those fearing Jehovah, And of those esteeming His name.
And they have been to Me, said Jehovah of Hosts, In the day that I am appointing — a peculiar treasure, And I have had pity on them, As one hath pity on his son who is serving him.
And ye have turned back and considered, Between the righteous and the wicked, Between the servant of God and him who is not His servant.
For, lo, the day hath come, burning as a furnace, And all the proud, and every wicked doer, have been stubble, And burnt them hath the day that came, Said Jehovah of Hosts, That there is not left to them root or branch,
And risen to you, ye who fear My name, Hath the sun of righteousness — and healing in its wings, And ye have gone forth, and have increased as calves of a stall.
And ye have trodden down the wicked, For they are ashes under the soles of your feet, In the day that I am appointing, Said Jehovah of Hosts.
Remember ye the law of Moses My servant, That I did command him in Horeb, For all Israel — statutes and judgments.
Lo, I am sending to you Elijah the prophet, Before the coming of the day of Jehovah, The great and the fearful.
And he hath turned back the heart of fathers to sons, And the heart of sons to their fathers, Before I come and have utterly smitten the land!
A roll of the birth of Jesus Christ, son of David, son of Abraham.
Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob begat Judah and his brethren,
and Judah begat Pharez and Zarah of Tamar, and Pharez begat Hezron, and Hezron begat Ram,
and Ram begat Amminadab, and Amminadab begat Nahshon, and Nahshon begat Salmon,
and Salmon begat Boaz of Rahab, and Boaz begat Obed of Ruth, and Obed begat Jesse,
and Jesse begat David the king. And David the king begat Solomon, of her [who had been] Uriah's,
and Solomon begat Rehoboam, and Rehoboam begat Abijah, and Abijah begat Asa,
and Asa begat Jehoshaphat, and Jehoshaphat begat Joram, and Joram begat Uzziah,
and Uzziah begat Jotham, and Jotham begat Ahaz, and Ahaz begat Hezekiah,
and Hezekiah begat Manasseh, and Manasseh begat Amon, and Amon begat Josiah,
and Josiah begat Jeconiah and his brethren, at the Babylonian removal.
And after the Babylonian removal, Jeconiah begat Shealtiel, and Shealtiel begat Zerubbabel,
and Zerubbabel begat Abiud, and Abiud begat Eliakim, and Eliakim begat Azor,
and Azor begat Sadok, and Sadok begat Achim, and Achim begat Eliud,
and Eliud begat Eleazar, and Eleazar begat Matthan, and Matthan begat Jacob,
and Jacob begat Joseph, the husband of Mary, of whom was begotten Jesus, who is named Christ.
All the generations, therefore, from Abraham unto David [are] fourteen generations, and from David unto the Babylonian removal fourteen generations, and from the Babylonian removal unto the Christ, fourteen generations.
And of Jesus Christ, the birth was thus: For his mother Mary having been betrothed to Joseph, before their coming together she was found to have conceived from the Holy Spirit,
and Joseph her husband being righteous, and not willing to make her an example, did wish privately to send her away.
And on his thinking of these things, lo, a messenger of the Lord in a dream appeared to him, saying, 'Joseph, son of David, thou mayest not fear to receive Mary thy wife, for that which in her was begotten [is] of the Holy Spirit,
and she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins.'
And all this hath come to pass, that it may be fulfilled that was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying,
'Lo, the virgin shall conceive, and she shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel,' which is, being interpreted 'With us [he is] God.'
And Joseph, having risen from the sleep, did as the messenger of the Lord directed him, and received his wife,
and did not know her till she brought forth her son — the first-born, and he called his name Jesus.
And Jesus having been born in Beth-Lehem of Judea, in the days of Herod the king, lo, mages from the east came to Jerusalem,
saying, 'Where is he who was born king of the Jews? for we saw his star in the east, and we came to bow to him.'
And Herod the king having heard, was stirred, and all Jerusalem with him,
and having gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he was inquiring from them where the Christ is born.
And they said to him, 'In Beth-Lehem of Judea, for thus it hath been written through the prophet,
And thou, Beth-Lehem, the land of Judah, thou art by no means the least among the leaders of Judah, for out of thee shall come one leading, who shall feed My people Israel.'
Then Herod, privately having called the mages, did inquire exactly from them the time of the appearing star,
and having sent them to Beth-Lehem, he said, 'Having gone — inquire ye exactly for the child, and whenever ye may have found, bring me back word, that I also having come may bow to him.'
And they, having heard the king, departed, and lo, the star, that they did see in the east, did go before them, till, having come, it stood over where the child was.
And having seen the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy,
and having come to the house, they found the child with Mary his mother, and having fallen down they bowed to him, and having opened their treasures, they presented to him gifts, gold, and frankincense, and myrrh,
and having been divinely warned in a dream not to turn back unto Herod, through another way they withdrew to their own region.
And on their having withdrawn, lo, a messenger of the Lord doth appear in a dream to Joseph, saying, 'Having risen, take the child and his mother, and flee to Egypt, and be thou there till I may speak to thee, for Herod is about to seek the child to destroy him.'
And he, having risen, took the child and his mother by night, and withdrew to Egypt,
and he was there till the death of Herod, that it might be fulfilled that was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying, 'Out of Egypt I did call My Son.'
Then Herod, having seen that he was deceived by the mages, was very wroth, and having sent forth, he slew all the male children in Beth-Lehem, and in all its borders, from two years and under, according to the time that he inquired exactly from the mages.
Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremiah the prophet, saying,
'A voice in Ramah was heard — lamentation and weeping and much mourning — Rachel weeping [for] her children, and she would not be comforted because they are not.'
And Herod having died, lo, a messenger of the Lord in a dream doth appear to Joseph in Egypt,
saying, 'Having risen, take the child and his mother, and be going to the land of Israel, for they have died — those seeking the life of the child.'
And he, having risen, took the child and his mother, and came to the land of Israel,
and having heard that Archelaus doth reign over Judea instead of Herod his father, he was afraid to go thither, and having been divinely warned in a dream, he withdrew to the parts of Galilee,
and coming, he dwelt in a city named Nazareth, that it might be fulfilled that was spoken through the prophets, that 'A Nazarene he shall be called.'
And in those days cometh John the Baptist, proclaiming in the wilderness of Judea,
and saying, 'Reform, for come nigh hath the reign of the heavens,'
for this is he who was spoken of by Isaiah the prophet, saying, 'A voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, straight make ye His paths.'
And this John had his clothing of camel's hair, and a girdle of skin round his loins, and his nourishment was locusts and honey of the field.
Then were going forth unto him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round about the Jordan,
and they were baptized in the Jordan by him, confessing their sins.
And having seen many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming about his baptism, he said to them, 'Brood of vipers! who did shew you to flee from the coming wrath?
bear, therefore, fruits worthy of the reformation,
and do not think to say in yourselves, A father we have — Abraham, for I say to you, that God is able out of these stones to raise children to Abraham,
and now also, the axe unto the root of the trees is laid, every tree therefore not bearing good fruit is hewn down, and to fire is cast.
'I indeed do baptize you with water to reformation, but he who after me is coming is mightier than I, of whom I am not worthy to bear the sandals, he shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire,
whose fan [is] in his hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse his floor, and will gather his wheat to the storehouse, but the chaff he will burn with fire unquenchable.'
Then cometh Jesus from Galilee upon the Jordan, unto John to be baptized by him,
but John was forbidding him, saying, 'I have need by thee to be baptized — and thou dost come unto me!'
But Jesus answering said to him, 'Suffer now, for thus it is becoming to us to fulfil all righteousness,' then he doth suffer him.
And having been baptized, Jesus went up immediately from the water, and lo, opened to him were the heavens, and he saw the Spirit of God descending as a dove, and coming upon him,
and lo, a voice out of the heavens, saying, 'This is My Son — the Beloved, in whom I did delight.'
Then Jesus was led up to the wilderness by the Spirit, to be tempted by the Devil,
and having fasted forty days and forty nights, afterwards he did hunger.
And the Tempter having come to him said, 'If Son thou art of God — speak that these stones may become loaves.'
But he answering said, 'It hath been written, Not upon bread alone doth man live, but upon every word coming forth from the mouth of God.'
Then doth the Devil take him to the [holy] city, and doth set him on the pinnacle of the temple,
and saith to him, 'If Son thou art of God — cast thyself down, for it hath been written, that, His messengers He shall charge concerning thee, and on hands they shall bear thee up, that thou mayest not dash on a stone thy foot.'
Jesus said to him again, 'It hath been written, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.'
Again doth the Devil take him to a very high mount, and doth shew to him all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them,
and saith to him, 'All these to thee I will give, if falling down thou mayest bow to me.'
Then saith Jesus to him, 'Go — Adversary, for it hath been written, The Lord thy God thou shalt bow to, and Him only thou shalt serve.'
Then doth the Devil leave him, and lo, messengers came and were ministering to him.
And Jesus having heard that John was delivered up, did withdraw to Galilee,
and having left Nazareth, having come, he dwelt at Capernaum that is by the sea, in the borders of Zebulun and Naphtalim,
that it might be fulfilled that was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying,
'Land of Zebulun and land of Naphtali, way of the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the nations! —
the people that is sitting in darkness saw a great light, and to those sitting in a region and shadow of death — light arose to them.'
From that time began Jesus to proclaim and to say, 'Reform ye, for come nigh hath the reign of the heavens.'
And Jesus, walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brothers, Simon named Peter and Andrew his brother, casting a drag into the sea — for they were fishers —
and he saith to them, 'Come ye after me, and I will make you fishers of men,'
and they, immediately, having left the nets, did follow him.
And having advanced thence, he saw other two brothers, James of Zebedee, and John his brother, in the boat with Zebedee their father, refitting their nets, and he called them,
and they, immediately, having left the boat and their father, did follow him.
And Jesus was going about all Galilee teaching in their synagogues, and proclaiming the good news of the reign, and healing every disease, and every malady among the people,
and his fame went forth to all Syria, and they brought to him all having ailments, pressed with manifold sicknesses and pains, and demoniacs, and lunatics, and paralytics, and he healed them.
And there followed him many multitudes from Galilee, and Decapolis, and Jerusalem, and Judea, and beyond the Jordan.
And having seen the multitudes, he went up to the mount, and he having sat down, his disciples came to him,
and having opened his mouth, he was teaching them, saying:
'Happy the poor in spirit — because theirs is the reign of the heavens.
'Happy the mourning — because they shall be comforted.
'Happy the meek — because they shall inherit the land.
'Happy those hungering and thirsting for righteousness — because they shall be filled.
'Happy the kind — because they shall find kindness.
'Happy the clean in heart — because they shall see God.
'Happy the peacemakers — because they shall be called Sons of God.
'Happy those persecuted for righteousness' sake — because theirs is the reign of the heavens.
'Happy are ye whenever they may reproach you, and may persecute, and may say any evil thing against you falsely for my sake —
rejoice ye and be glad, because your reward [is] great in the heavens, for thus did they persecute the prophets who were before you.
'Ye are the salt of the land, but if the salt may lose savour, in what shall it be salted? for nothing is it good henceforth, except to be cast without, and to be trodden down by men.
'Ye are the light of the world, a city set upon a mount is not able to be hid;
nor do they light a lamp, and put it under the measure, but on the lamp-stand, and it shineth to all those in the house;
so let your light shine before men, that they may see your good works, and may glorify your Father who [is] in the heavens.
'Do not suppose that I came to throw down the law or the prophets — I did not come to throw down, but to fulfil;
for, verily I say to you, till that the heaven and the earth may pass away, one iota or one tittle may not pass away from the law, till that all may come to pass.
'Whoever therefore may loose one of these commands — the least — and may teach men so, least he shall be called in the reign of the heavens, but whoever may do and may teach [them], he shall be called great in the reign of the heavens.
'For I say to you, that if your righteousness may not abound above that of the scribes and Pharisees, ye may not enter to the reign of the heavens.
'Ye heard that it was said to the ancients: Thou shalt not kill, and whoever may kill shall be in danger of the judgment;
but I — I say to you, that every one who is angry at his brother without cause, shall be in danger of the judgment, and whoever may say to his brother, Empty fellow! shall be in danger of the sanhedrim, and whoever may say, Rebel! shall be in danger of the gehenna of the fire.
'If, therefore, thou mayest bring thy gift to the altar, and there mayest remember that thy brother hath anything against thee,
leave there thy gift before the altar, and go — first be reconciled to thy brother, and then having come bring thy gift.
'Be agreeing with thy opponent quickly, while thou art in the way with him, that the opponent may not deliver thee to the judge, and the judge may deliver thee to the officer, and to prison thou mayest be cast,
verily I say to thee, thou mayest not come forth thence till that thou mayest pay the last farthing.
'Ye heard that it was said to the ancients: Thou shalt not commit adultery;
but I — I say to you, that every one who is looking on a woman to desire her, did already commit adultery with her in his heart.
'But, if thy right eye doth cause thee to stumble, pluck it out and cast from thee, for it is good to thee that one of thy members may perish, and not thy whole body be cast to gehenna.
'And, if thy right hand doth cause thee to stumble, cut it off, and cast from thee, for it is good to thee that one of thy members may perish, and not thy whole body be cast to gehenna.
'And it was said, That whoever may put away his wife, let him give to her a writing of divorce;
but I — I say to you, that whoever may put away his wife, save for the matter of whoredom, doth make her to commit adultery; and whoever may marry her who hath been put away doth commit adultery.
'Again, ye heard that it was said to the ancients: Thou shalt not swear falsely, but thou shalt pay to the Lord thine oaths;
but I — I say to you, not to swear at all; neither by the heaven, because it is the throne of God,
nor by the earth, because it is His footstool, nor by Jerusalem, because it is a city of a great king,
nor by thy head mayest thou swear, because thou art not able one hair to make white or black;
but let your word be, Yes, Yes, No, No, and that which is more than these is of the evil.
'Ye heard that it was said: Eye for eye, and tooth for tooth;
but I — I say to you, not to resist the evil, but whoever shall slap thee on thy right cheek, turn to him also the other;
and whoever is willing to take thee to law, and thy coat to take — suffer to him also the cloak.
'And whoever shall impress thee one mile, go with him two,
to him who is asking of thee be giving, and him who is willing to borrow from thee thou mayest not turn away.
'Ye heard that it was said: Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and shalt hate thine enemy;
but I — I say to you, Love your enemies, bless those cursing you, do good to those hating you, and pray for those accusing you falsely, and persecuting you,
that ye may be sons of your Father in the heavens, because His sun He doth cause to rise on evil and good, and He doth send rain on righteous and unrighteous.
'For, if ye may love those loving you, what reward have ye? do not also the tax-gatherers the same?
and if ye may salute your brethren only, what do ye abundant? do not also the tax-gatherers so?
ye shall therefore be perfect, as your Father who [is] in the heavens is perfect.
'Take heed your kindness not to do before men, to be seen by them, and if not — reward ye have not from your Father who [is] in the heavens;
whenever, therefore, thou mayest do kindness, thou mayest not sound a trumpet before thee as the hypocrites do, in the synagogues, and in the streets, that they may have glory from men; verily I say to you — they have their reward!
'But thou, doing kindness, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doth,
that thy kindness may be in secret, and thy Father who is seeing in secret Himself shall reward thee manifestly.
'And when thou mayest pray, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites, because they love in the synagogues, and in the corners of the broad places — standing — to pray, that they may be seen of men; verily I say to you, that they have their reward.
'But thou, when thou mayest pray, go into thy chamber, and having shut thy door, pray to thy Father who [is] in secret, and thy Father who is seeing in secret, shall reward thee manifestly.
'And — praying — ye may not use vain repetitions like the nations, for they think that in their much speaking they shall be heard,
be ye not therefore like to them, for your Father doth know those things that ye have need of before your asking him;
thus therefore pray ye: 'Our Father who [art] in the heavens! hallowed be Thy name.
'Thy reign come: Thy will come to pass, as in heaven also on the earth.
'Our appointed bread give us to-day.
'And forgive us our debts, as also we forgive our debtors.
'And mayest Thou not lead us to temptation, but deliver us from the evil, because Thine is the reign, and the power, and the glory — to the ages. Amen.
'For, if ye may forgive men their trespasses He also will forgive you — your Father who [is] in the heavens;
but if ye may not forgive men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.
'And when ye may fast, be ye not as the hypocrites, of sour countenances, for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear to men fasting; verily I say to you, that they have their reward.
'But thou, fasting, anoint thy head, and wash thy face,
that thou mayest not appear to men fasting, but to thy Father who [is] in secret, and thy Father, who is seeing in secret, shall reward thee manifestly.
'Treasure not up to yourselves treasures on the earth, where moth and rust disfigure, and where thieves break through and steal,
but treasure up to yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth disfigure, and where thieves do not break through nor steal,
for where your treasure is, there will be also your heart.
'The lamp of the body is the eye, if, therefore, thine eye may be perfect, all thy body shall be enlightened,
but if thine eye may be evil, all thy body shall be dark; if, therefore, the light that [is] in thee is darkness — the darkness, how great!
'None is able to serve two lords, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will hold to the one, and despise the other; ye are not able to serve God and Mammon.
'Because of this I say to you, be not anxious for your life, what ye may eat, and what ye may drink, nor for your body, what ye may put on. Is not the life more than the nourishment, and the body than the clothing?
look to the fowls of the heaven, for they do not sow, nor reap, nor gather into storehouses, and your heavenly Father doth nourish them; are not ye much better than they?
'And who of you, being anxious, is able to add to his age one cubit?
and about clothing why are ye anxious? consider well the lilies of the field; how do they grow? they do not labour, nor do they spin;
and I say to you, that not even Solomon in all his glory was arrayed as one of these.
'And if the herb of the field, that to-day is, and to-morrow is cast to the furnace, God doth so clothe — not much more you, O ye of little faith?
therefore ye may not be anxious, saying, What may we eat? or, What may we drink? or, What may we put round?
for all these do the nations seek for, for your heavenly Father doth know that ye have need of all these;
but seek ye first the reign of God and His righteousness, and all these shall be added to you.
Be not therefore anxious for the morrow, for the morrow shall be anxious for its own things; sufficient for the day [is] the evil of it.
'Judge not, that ye may not be judged,
for in what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged, and in what measure ye measure, it shall be measured to you.
'And why dost thou behold the mote that [is] in thy brother's eye, and the beam that [is] in thine own eye dost not consider?
or, how wilt thou say to thy brother, Suffer I may cast out the mote from thine eye, and lo, the beam [is] in thine own eye?
Hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of thine own eye, and then thou shalt see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye.
'Ye may not give that which is [holy] to the dogs, nor cast your pearls before the swine, that they may not trample them among their feet, and having turned — may rend you.
'Ask, and it shall be given to you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened to you;
for every one who is asking doth receive, and he who is seeking doth find, and to him who is knocking it shall be opened.
'Or what man is of you, of whom, if his son may ask a loaf — a stone will he present to him?
and if a fish he may ask — a serpent will he present to him?
if, therefore, ye being evil, have known good gifts to give to your children, how much more shall your Father who [is] in the heavens give good things to those asking him?
'All things, therefore, whatever ye may will that men may be doing to you, so also do to them, for this is the law and the prophets.
'Go ye in through the strait gate, because wide [is] the gate, and broad the way that is leading to the destruction, and many are those going in through it;
how strait [is] the gate, and compressed the way that is leading to the life, and few are those finding it!
'But, take heed of the false prophets, who come unto you in sheep's clothing, and inwardly are ravening wolves.
From their fruits ye shall know them; do [men] gather from thorns grapes? or from thistles figs?
so every good tree doth yield good fruits, but the bad tree doth yield evil fruits.
A good tree is not able to yield evil fruits, nor a bad tree to yield good fruits.
Every tree not yielding good fruit is cut down and is cast to fire:
therefore from their fruits ye shall know them.
'Not every one who is saying to me Lord, lord, shall come into the reign of the heavens; but he who is doing the will of my Father who is in the heavens.
Many will say to me in that day, Lord, lord, have we not in thy name prophesied? and in thy name cast out demons? and in thy name done many mighty things?
and then I will acknowledge to them, that — I never knew you, depart from me ye who are working lawlessness.
'Therefore, every one who doth hear of me these words, and doth do them, I will liken him to a wise man who built his house upon the rock;
and the rain did descend, and the streams came, and the winds blew, and they beat on that house, and it fell not, for it had been founded on the rock.
'And every one who is hearing of me these words, and is not doing them, shall be likened to a foolish man who built his house upon the sand;
and the rain did descend, and the streams came, and the winds blew, and they beat on that house, and it fell, and its fall was great.'
And it came to pass, when Jesus ended these words, the multitudes were astonished at his teaching,
for he was teaching them as having authority, and not as the scribes.
And when he came down from the mount, great multitudes did follow him,
and lo, a leper having come, was bowing to him, saying, 'Sir, if thou art willing, thou art able to cleanse me;'
and having stretched forth the hand, Jesus touched him, saying, 'I will, be thou cleansed,' and immediately his leprosy was cleansed.
And Jesus saith to him, 'See, thou mayest tell no one, but go, thyself shew to the priest, and bring the gift that Moses commanded for a testimony to them.'
And Jesus having entered into Capernaum, there came to him a centurion calling upon him,
and saying, 'Sir, my young man hath been laid in the house a paralytic, fearfully afflicted,'
and Jesus saith to him, 'I, having come, will heal him.'
And the centurion answering said, 'Sir, I am not worthy that thou mayest enter under my roof, but only say a word, and my servant shall be healed;
for I also am a man under authority, having under myself soldiers, and I say to this one, Go, and he goeth, and to another, Be coming, and he cometh, and to my servant, Do this, and he doth [it].'
And Jesus having heard, did wonder, and said to those following, 'Verily I say to you, not even in Israel so great faith have I found;
and I say to you, that many from east and west shall come and recline (at meat) with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the reign of the heavens,
but the sons of the reign shall be cast forth to the outer darkness — there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of the teeth.'
And Jesus said to the centurion, 'Go, and as thou didst believe let it be to thee;' and his young man was healed in that hour.
And Jesus having come into the house of Peter, saw his mother-in-law laid, and fevered,
and he touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she arose, and was ministering to them.
And evening having come, they brought to him many demoniacs, and he did cast out the spirits with a word, and did heal all who were ill,
that it might be fulfilled that was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying, 'Himself took our infirmities, and the sicknesses he did bear.'
And Jesus having seen great multitudes about him, did command to depart to the other side;
and a certain scribe having come, said to him, 'Teacher, I will follow thee wherever thou mayest go;'
and Jesus saith to him, 'The foxes have holes, and the birds of the heaven places of rest, but the Son of Man hath not where he may lay the head.'
And another of his disciples said to him, 'Sir, permit me first to depart and to bury my father;'
and Jesus said to him, 'Follow me, and suffer the dead to bury their own dead.'
And when he entered into the boat his disciples did follow him,
and lo, a great tempest arose in the sea, so that the boat was being covered by the waves, but he was sleeping,
and his disciples having come to him, awoke him, saying, 'Sir, save us; we are perishing.'
And he saith to them, 'Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?' Then having risen, he rebuked the winds and the sea, and there was a great calm;
and the men wondered, saying, 'What kind — is this, that even the wind and the sea do obey him?'
And he having come to the other side, to the region of the Gergesenes, there met him two demoniacs, coming forth out of the tombs, very fierce, so that no one was able to pass over by that way,
and lo, they cried out, saying, 'What — to us and to thee, Jesus, Son of God? didst thou come hither, before the time, to afflict us?'
And there was far off from them a herd of many swine feeding,
and the demons were calling on him, saying, 'If thou dost cast us forth, permit us to go away to the herd of the swine;'
and he saith to them, 'Go.' And having come forth, they went to the herd of the swine, and lo, the whole herd of the swine rushed down the steep, to the sea, and died in the waters,
and those feeding did flee, and, having gone to the city, they declared all, and the matter of the demoniacs.
And lo, all the city came forth to meet Jesus, and having seen him, they called on [him] that he might depart from their borders.
And having gone to the boat, he passed over, and came to his own city,
and lo, they were bringing to him a paralytic, laid upon a couch, and Jesus having seen their faith, said to the paralytic, 'Be of good courage, child, thy sins have been forgiven thee.'
And lo, certain of the scribes said within themselves, 'This one doth speak evil.'
And Jesus, having known their thoughts, said, 'Why think ye evil in your hearts?
for which is easier? to say, The sins have been forgiven to thee; or to say, Rise, and walk?
'But, that ye may know that the Son of Man hath power upon the earth to forgive sins — (then saith he to the paralytic) — having risen, take up thy couch, and go to thy house.'
And he, having risen, went to his house,
and the multitudes having seen, wondered, and glorified God, who did give such power to men.
And Jesus passing by thence, saw a man sitting at the tax-office, named Matthew, and saith to him, 'Be following me,' and he, having risen, did follow him.
And it came to pass, he reclining (at meat) in the house, that lo, many tax-gatherers and sinners having come, were lying (at meat) with Jesus and his disciples,
and the Pharisees having seen, said to his disciples, 'Wherefore with the tax-gatherers and sinners doth your teacher eat?'
And Jesus having heard, said to them, 'They who are whole have no need of a physician, but they who are ill;
but having gone, learn ye what is, Kindness I will, and not sacrifice, for I did not come to call righteous men, but sinners, to reformation.'
Then come to him do the disciples of John, saying, 'Wherefore do we and the Pharisees fast much, and thy disciples fast not?'
And Jesus said to them, 'Can the sons of the bride-chamber mourn, so long as the bridegroom is with them? but days shall come when the bridegroom may be taken from them, and then they shall fast.
'And no one doth put a patch of undressed cloth on an old garment, for its filling up doth take from the garment, and a worse rent is made.
'Nor do they put new wine into old skins, and if not — the skins burst, and the wine doth run out, and the skins are destroyed, but they put new wine into new skins, and both are preserved together.'
While he is speaking these things to them, lo, a ruler having come, was bowing to him, saying that 'My daughter just now died, but, having come, lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live.'
And Jesus having risen, did follow him, also his disciples,
and lo, a woman having an issue of blood twelve years, having come to him behind, did touch the fringe of his garments,
for she said within herself, 'If only I may touch his garment, I shall be saved.'
And Jesus having turned about, and having seen her, said, 'Be of good courage, daughter, thy faith hath saved thee,' and the woman was saved from that hour.
And Jesus having come to the house of the ruler, and having seen the minstrels and the multitude making tumult,
he saith to them, 'Withdraw, for the damsel did not die, but doth sleep,' and they were deriding him;
but, when the multitude was put forth, having gone in, he took hold of her hand, and the damsel arose,
and the fame of this went forth to all the land.
And Jesus passing on thence, two blind men followed him, calling and saying, 'Deal kindly with us, Son of David.'
And he having come to the house, the blind men came to him, and Jesus saith to them, 'Believe ye that I am able to do this?' They say to him, 'Yes, sir.'
Then touched he their eyes, saying, 'According to your faith let it be to you,'
and their eyes were opened, and Jesus strictly charged them, saying, 'See, let no one know;'
but they, having gone forth, did spread his fame in all that land.
And as they are coming forth, lo, they brought to him a man dumb, a demoniac,
and the demon having been cast out, the dumb spake, and the multitude did wonder, saying that 'It was never so seen in Israel:'
but the Pharisees said, 'By the ruler of the demons he doth cast out the demons.'
And Jesus was going up and down all the cities and the villages, teaching in their synagogues, and proclaiming the good news of the reign, and healing every sickness and every malady among the people.
And having seen the multitudes, he was moved with compassion for them, that they were faint and cast aside, as sheep not having a shepherd,
then saith he to his disciples, 'The harvest indeed [is] abundant, but the workmen few;
beseech ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he may put forth workmen to His harvest.'
And having called to him his twelve disciples, he gave to them power over unclean spirits, so as to be casting them out, and to be healing every sickness, and every malady.
And of the twelve apostles the names are these: first, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James of Zebedee, and John his brother;
Philip, and Bartholomew; Thomas, and Matthew the tax-gatherer; James of Alpheus, and Lebbeus who was surnamed Thaddeus;
Simon the Cananite, and Judas Iscariot, who did also deliver him up.
These twelve did Jesus send forth, having given command to them, saying, 'To the way of the nations go not away, and into a city of the Samaritans go not in,
and be going rather unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
'And, going on, proclaim saying that, the reign of the heavens hath come nigh;
infirm ones be healing, lepers be cleansing, dead be raising, demons be casting out — freely ye did receive, freely give.
'Provide not gold, nor silver, nor brass in your girdles,
nor scrip for the way, nor two coats, nor sandals, nor staff — for the workman is worthy of his nourishment.
'And into whatever city or village ye may enter, inquire ye who in it is worthy, and there abide, till ye may go forth.
And coming to the house salute it,
and if indeed the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it; and if it be not worthy, let your peace turn back to you.
'And whoever may not receive you nor hear your words, coming forth from that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet,
verily I say to you, It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city.
'Lo, I do send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves, be ye therefore wise as the serpents, and simple as the doves.
And, take ye heed of men, for they will give you up to sanhedrims, and in their synagogues they will scourge you,
and before governors and kings ye shall be brought for my sake, for a testimony to them and to the nations.
'And whenever they may deliver you up, be not anxious how or what ye may speak, for it shall be given you in that hour what ye shall speak;
for ye are not the speakers, but the Spirit of your Father that is speaking in you.
'And brother shall deliver up brother to death, and father child, and children shall rise up against parents, and shall put them to death,
and ye shall be hated by all because of my name, but he who hath endured to the end, he shall be saved.
'And whenever they may persecute you in this city, flee to the other, for verily I say to you, ye may not have completed the cities of Israel till the Son of Man may come.
'A disciple is not above the teacher, nor a servant above his lord;
sufficient to the disciple that he may be as his teacher, and the servant as his lord; if the master of the house they did call Beelzeboul, how much more those of his household?
'Ye may not, therefore, fear them, for there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed, and hid, that shall not be known;
that which I tell you in the darkness, speak in the light, and that which you hear at the ear, proclaim on the house-tops.
'And be not afraid of those killing the body, and are not able to kill the soul, but fear rather Him who is able both soul and body to destroy in gehenna.
'Are not two sparrows sold for an assar? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father;
and of you — even the hairs of the head are all numbered;
be not therefore afraid, than many sparrows ye are better.
'Every one, therefore, who shall confess in me before men, I also will confess in him before my Father who is in the heavens;
and whoever shall deny me before men, I also will deny him before my Father who is in the heavens.
'Ye may not suppose that I came to put peace on the earth; I did not come to put peace, but a sword;
for I came to set a man at variance against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law,
and the enemies of a man are those of his household.
'He who is loving father or mother above me, is not worthy of me, and he who is loving son or daughter above me, is not worthy of me,
and whoever doth not receive his cross and follow after me, is not worthy of me.
'He who found his life shall lose it, and he who lost his life for my sake shall find it.
'He who is receiving you doth receive me, and he who is receiving me doth receive Him who sent me,
he who is receiving a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive a prophet's reward, and he who is receiving a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward,
and whoever may give to drink to one of these little ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, verily I say to you, he may not lose his reward.'
And it came to pass, when Jesus ended directing his twelve disciples, he departed thence to teach and to preach in their cities.
And John having heard in the prison the works of the Christ, having sent two of his disciples,
said to him, 'Art thou He who is coming, or for another do we look?'
And Jesus answering said to them, 'Having gone, declare to John the things that ye hear and see,
blind receive sight, and lame walk, lepers are cleansed, and deaf hear, dead are raised, and poor have good news proclaimed,
and happy is he who may not be stumbled in me.'
And as they are going, Jesus began to say to the multitudes concerning John, 'What went ye out to the wilderness to view? — a reed shaken by the wind?
'But what went ye out to see? — a man clothed in soft garments? lo, those wearing the soft things are in the kings' houses.
'But what went ye out to see? — a prophet? yes, I say to you, and more than a prophet,
for this is he of whom it hath been written, Lo, I do send My messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee.
Verily I say to you, there hath not risen, among those born of women, a greater than John the Baptist, but he who is least in the reign of the heavens is greater than he.
'And, from the days of John the Baptist till now, the reign of the heavens doth suffer violence, and violent men do take it by force,
for all the prophets and the law till John did prophesy,
and if ye are willing to receive [it], he is Elijah who was about to come;
he who is having ears to hear — let him hear.
'And to what shall I liken this generation? it is like little children in market-places, sitting and calling to their comrades,
and saying, We piped unto you, and ye did not dance, we lamented to you, and ye did not smite the breast.
'For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He hath a demon;
the Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, Lo, a man, a glutton, and a wine-drinker, a friend of tax-gatherers and sinners, and wisdom was justified of her children.'
Then began he to reproach the cities in which were done most of his mighty works, because they did not reform.
'Woe to thee, Chorazin! woe to thee, Bethsaida! because, if in Tyre and Sidon had been done the mighty works that were done in you, long ago in sackcloth and ashes they had reformed;
but I say to you, to Tyre and Sidon it shall be more tolerable in a day of judgment than for you.
'And thou, Capernaum, which unto the heaven wast exalted, unto hades shalt be brought down, because if in Sodom had been done the mighty works that were done in thee, it had remained unto this day;
but I say to you, to the land of Sodom it shall be more tolerable in a day of judgment than to thee.'
At that time Jesus answering said, 'I do confess to Thee, Father, Lord of the heavens and of the earth, that thou didst hide these things from wise and understanding ones, and didst reveal them to babes.
Yes, Father, because so it was good pleasure before Thee.
'All things were delivered to me by my Father, and none doth know the Son, except the Father, nor doth any know the Father, except the Son, and he to whom the Son may wish to reveal [Him].
'Come unto me, all ye labouring and burdened ones, and I will give you rest,
take up my yoke upon you, and learn from me, because I am meek and humble in heart, and ye shall find rest to your souls,
for my yoke [is] easy, and my burden is light.'
At that time did Jesus go on the sabbaths through the corn, and his disciples were hungry, and they began to pluck ears, and to eat,
and the Pharisees having seen, said to him, 'Lo, thy disciples do that which it is not lawful to do on a sabbath.'
And he said to them, 'Did ye not read what David did, when he was hungry, himself and those with him —
how he went into the house of God, and the loaves of the presentation did eat, which it is not lawful to him to eat, nor to those with him, except to the priests alone?
'Or did ye not read in the Law, that on the sabbaths the priests in the temple do profane the sabbath, and are blameless?
and I say to you, that a greater than the temple is here;
and if ye had known what is: Kindness I will, and not sacrifice — ye had not condemned the blameless,
for the son of man is lord even of the sabbath.'
And having departed thence, he went to their synagogue,
and lo, there was a man having the hand withered, and they questioned him, saying, 'Is it lawful to heal on the sabbaths?' that they might accuse him.
And he said to them, 'What man shall be of you, who shall have one sheep, and if this may fall on the sabbaths into a ditch, will not lay hold on it and raise [it]?
How much better, therefore, is a man than a sheep? — so that it is lawful on the sabbaths to do good.'
Then saith he to the man, 'Stretch forth thy hand,' and he stretched [it] forth, and it was restored whole as the other.
And the Pharisees having gone forth, held a consultation against him, how they might destroy him,
and Jesus having known, withdrew thence, and there followed him great multitudes, and he healed them all,
and did charge them that they might not make him manifest,
that it might be fulfilled that was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying,
'Lo, My servant, whom I did choose, My beloved, in whom My soul did delight, I will put My Spirit upon him, and judgment to the nations he shall declare,
he shall not strive nor cry, nor shall any hear in the broad places his voice,
a bruised reed he shall not break, and smoking flax he shall not quench, till he may put forth judgment to victory,
and in his name shall nations hope.'
Then was brought to him a demoniac, blind and dumb, and he healed him, so that the blind and dumb both spake and saw.
And all the multitudes were amazed, and said, 'Is this the Son of David?'
but the Pharisees having heard, said, 'This one doth not cast out demons, except by Beelzeboul, ruler of the demons.'
And Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said to them, 'Every kingdom having been divided against itself is desolated, and no city or house having been divided against itself, doth stand,
and if the Adversary doth cast out the Adversary, against himself he was divided, how then doth his kingdom stand?
'And if I, by Beelzeboul, do cast out the demons, your sons — by whom do they cast out? because of this they — they shall be your judges.
'But if I, by the Spirit of God, do cast out the demons, then come already unto you did the reign of God.
'Or how is one able to go into the house of the strong man, and to plunder his goods, if first he may not bind the strong man? and then his house he will plunder.
'He who is not with me is against me, and he who is not gathering with me, doth scatter.
Because of this I say to you, all sin and evil speaking shall be forgiven to men, but the evil speaking of the Spirit shall not be forgiven to men.
And whoever may speak a word against the Son of Man it shall be forgiven to him, but whoever may speak against the Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this age, nor in that which is coming.
'Either make the tree good, and its fruit good, or make the tree bad, and its fruit bad, for from the fruit is the tree known.
'Brood of vipers! how are ye able to speak good things — being evil? for out of the abundance of the heart doth the mouth speak.
The good man out of the good treasure of the heart doth put forth the good things, and the evil man out of the evil treasure doth put forth evil things.
'And I say to you, that every idle word that men may speak, they shall give for it a reckoning in a day of judgment;
for from thy words thou shalt be declared righteous, and from thy words thou shalt be declared unrighteous.'
Then answered certain of the scribes and Pharisees, saying, 'Teacher, we will to see a sign from thee.'
And he answering said to them, 'A generation, evil and adulterous, doth seek a sign, and a sign shall not be given to it, except the sign of Jonah the prophet;
for, as Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights, so shall the Son of Man be in the heart of the earth three days and three nights.
'Men of Nineveh shall stand up in the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it, for they reformed at the proclamation of Jonah, and lo, a greater than Jonah here!
'A queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and lo, a greater than Solomon here!
'And, when the unclean spirit may go forth from the man, it doth walk through dry places seeking rest, and doth not find;
then it saith, I will turn back to my house whence I came forth; and having come, it findeth [it] unoccupied, swept, and adorned:
then doth it go, and take with itself seven other spirits more evil than itself, and having gone in they dwell there, and the last of that man doth become worse than the first; so shall it be also to this evil generation.'
And while he was yet speaking to the multitudes, lo, his mother and brethren had stood without, seeking to speak to him,
and one said to him, 'Lo, thy mother and thy brethren do stand without, seeking to speak to thee.'
And he answering said to him who spake to him, 'Who is my mother? and who are my brethren?'
And having stretched forth his hand toward his disciples, he said, 'Lo, my mother and my brethren!
for whoever may do the will of my Father who is in the heavens, he is my brother, and sister, and mother.'
And in that day Jesus, having gone forth from the house, was sitting by the sea,
and gathered together unto him were many multitudes, so that he having gone into the boat did sit down, and all the multitude on the beach did stand,
and he spake to them many things in similes, saying: 'Lo, the sower went forth to sow,
and in his sowing, some indeed fell by the way, and the fowls did come and devour them,
and others fell upon the rocky places, where they had not much earth, and immediately they sprang forth, through not having depth of earth,
and the sun having risen they were scorched, and through not having root, they withered,
and others fell upon the thorns, and the thorns did come up and choke them,
and others fell upon the good ground, and were giving fruit, some indeed a hundredfold, and some sixty, and some thirty.
He who is having ears to hear — let him hear.'
And the disciples having come near, said to him, 'Wherefore in similes dost thou speak to them?'
And he answering said to them that — 'To you it hath been given to know the secrets of the reign of the heavens, and to these it hath not been given,
for whoever hath, it shall be given to him, and he shall have overabundance, and whoever hath not, even that which he hath shall be taken from him.
'Because of this, in similes do I speak to them, because seeing they do not see, and hearing they do not hear, nor understand,
and fulfilled on them is the prophecy of Isaiah, that saith, With hearing ye shall hear, and ye shall not understand, and seeing ye shall see, and ye shall not perceive,
for made gross was the heart of this people, and with the ears they heard heavily, and their eyes they did close, lest they might see with the eyes, and with the ears might hear, and with the heart understand, and turn back, and I might heal them.
'And happy are your eyes because they see, and your ears because they hear,
for verily I say to you, that many prophets and righteous men did desire to see that which ye look on, and they did not see, and to hear that which ye hear, and they did not hear.
'Ye, therefore, hear ye the simile of the sower:
Every one hearing the word of the reign, and not understanding — the evil one doth come, and doth catch that which hath been sown in his heart; this is that sown by the way.
'And that sown on the rocky places, this is he who is hearing the word, and immediately with joy is receiving it,
and he hath not root in himself, but is temporary, and persecution or tribulation having happened because of the word, immediately he is stumbled.
'And that sown toward the thorns, this is he who is hearing the word, and the anxiety of this age, and the deceitfulness of the riches, do choke the word, and it becometh unfruitful.
'And that sown on the good ground: this is he who is hearing the word, and is understanding, who indeed doth bear fruit, and doth make, some indeed a hundredfold, and some sixty, and some thirty.'
Another simile he set before them, saying: 'The reign of the heavens was likened to a man sowing good seed in his field,
and, while men are sleeping, his enemy came and sowed darnel in the midst of the wheat, and went away,
and when the herb sprang up, and yielded fruit, then appeared also the darnel.
'And the servants of the householder, having come near, said to him, Sir, good seed didst thou not sow in thy field? whence then hath it the darnel?
And he saith to them, A man, an enemy, did this; and the servants said to him, Wilt thou, then, [that] having gone away we may gather it up?
'And he said, No, lest — gathering up the darnel — ye root up with it the wheat,
suffer both to grow together till the harvest, and in the time of the harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather up first the darnel, and bind it in bundles, to burn it, and the wheat gather up into my storehouse.'
Another simile he set before them, saying: 'The reign of the heavens is like to a grain of mustard, which a man having taken, did sow in his field,
which less, indeed, is than all the seeds, but when it may be grown, is greatest of the herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the heaven do come and rest in its branches.'
Another simile spake he to them: 'The reign of the heavens is like to leaven, which a woman having taken, hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.'
All these things spake Jesus in similes to the multitudes, and without a simile he was not speaking to them,
that it might be fulfilled that was spoken through the prophet, saying, 'I will open in similes my mouth, I will utter things having been hidden from the foundation of the world.'
Then having let away the multitudes, Jesus came to the house, and his disciples came near to him, saying, 'Explain to us the simile of the darnel of the field.'
And he answering said to them, 'He who is sowing the good seed is the Son of Man,
and the field is the world, and the good seed, these are the sons of the reign, and the darnel are the sons of the evil one,
and the enemy who sowed them is the devil, and the harvest is a full end of the age, and the reapers are messengers.
'As, then, the darnel is gathered up, and is burned with fire, so shall it be in the full end of this age,
the Son of Man shall send forth his messengers, and they shall gather up out of his kingdom all the stumbling-blocks, and those doing the unlawlessness,
and shall cast them to the furnace of the fire; there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of the teeth.
'Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the reign of their Father. He who is having ears to hear — let him hear.
'Again, the reign of the heavens is like to treasure hid in the field, which a man having found did hide, and from his joy goeth, and all, as much as he hath, he selleth, and buyeth that field.
'Again, the reign of the heavens is like to a man, a merchant, seeking goodly pearls,
who having found one pearl of great price, having gone away, hath sold all, as much as he had, and bought it.
'Again, the reign of the heavens is like to a net that was cast into the sea, and did gather together of every kind,
which, when it was filled, having drawn up again upon the beach, and having sat down, they gathered the good into vessels, and the bad they did cast out,
so shall it be in the full end of the age, the messengers shall come forth and separate the evil out of the midst of the righteous,
and shall cast them to the furnace of the fire, there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of the teeth.'
Jesus saith to them, 'Did ye understand all these?' They say to him, 'Yes, sir.'
And he said to them, 'Because of this every scribe having been discipled in regard to the reign of the heavens, is like to a man, a householder, who doth bring forth out of his treasure things new and old.'
And it came to pass, when Jesus finished these similes, he removed thence,
and having come to his own country, he was teaching them in their synagogue, so that they were astonished, and were saying, 'Whence to this one this wisdom and the mighty works?
is not this the carpenter's son? is not his mother called Mary, and his brethren James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas?
and his sisters — are they not all with us? whence, then, to this one all these?'
and they were stumbled at him. And Jesus said to them, 'A prophet is not without honour except in his own country, and in his own house:'
and he did not there many mighty works, because of their unbelief.
At that time did Herod the tetrarch hear the fame of Jesus,
and said to his servants, 'This is John the Baptist, he did rise from the dead, and because of this the mighty energies are working in him.'
For Herod having laid hold on John, did bind him, and did put him in prison, because of Herodias his brother Philip's wife,
for John was saying to him, 'It is not lawful to thee to have her,'
and, willing to kill him, he feared the multitude, because as a prophet they were holding him.
But the birthday of Herod being kept, the daughter of Herodias danced in the midst, and did please Herod,
whereupon with an oath he professed to give her whatever she might ask.
And she having been instigated by her mother — 'Give me (says she) here upon a plate the head of John the Baptist;
and the king was grieved, but because of the oaths and of those reclining with him, he commanded [it] to be given;
and having sent, he beheaded John in the prison,
and his head was brought upon a plate, and was given to the damsel, and she brought [it] nigh to her mother.
And his disciples having come, took up the body, and buried it, and having come, they told Jesus,
and Jesus having heard, withdrew thence in a boat to a desolate place by himself, and the multitudes having heard did follow him on land from the cities.
And Jesus having come forth, saw a great multitude, and was moved with compassion upon them, and did heal their infirm;
and evening having come, his disciples came to him, saying, 'The place is desolate, and the hour hath now past, let away the multitudes that, having gone to the villages, they may buy to themselves food.'
And Jesus said to them, 'They have no need to go away — give ye them to eat.'
And they say to him, 'We have not here except five loaves, and two fishes.'
And he said, 'Bring ye them to me hither.'
And having commanded the multitudes to recline upon the grass, and having taken the five loaves and the two fishes, having looked up to the heaven, he did bless, and having broken, he gave the loaves to the disciples, and the disciples to the multitudes,
and they did all eat, and were filled, and they took up what was over of the broken pieces twelve hand-baskets full;
and those eating were about five thousand men, apart from women and children.
And immediately Jesus constrained his disciples to go into the boat, and to go before him to the other side, till he might let away the multitudes;
and having let away the multitudes, he went up to the mountain by himself to pray, and evening having come, he was there alone,
and the boat was now in the midst of the sea, distressed by the waves, for the wind was contrary.
And in the fourth watch of the night Jesus went away to them, walking upon the sea,
and the disciples having seen him walking upon the sea, were troubled saying — 'It is an apparition,' and from the fear they cried out;
and immediately Jesus spake to them, saying, 'Be of good courage, I am [he], be not afraid.'
And Peter answering him said, 'Sir, if it is thou, bid me come to thee upon the waters;'
and he said, 'Come;' and having gone down from the boat, Peter walked upon the waters to come unto Jesus,
but seeing the wind vehement, he was afraid, and having begun to sink, he cried out, saying, 'Sir, save me.'
And immediately Jesus, having stretched forth the hand, laid hold of him, and saith to him, 'Little faith! for what didst thou waver?'
and they having gone to the boat the wind lulled,
and those in the boat having come, did bow to him, saying, 'Truly — God's Son art thou.'
And having passed over, they came to the land of Gennesaret,
and having recognized him, the men of that place sent forth to all that region round about, and they brought to him all who were ill,
and were calling on him that they might only touch the fringe of his garment, and as many as did touch were saved.
Then come unto Jesus do they from Jerusalem — scribes and Pharisees — saying,
'Wherefore do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? for they do not wash their hands when they may eat bread.'
And he answering said to them, 'Wherefore also do ye transgress the command of God because of your tradition?
for God did command, saying, Honour thy father and mother; and, He who is speaking evil of father or mother — let him die the death;
but ye say, Whoever may say to father or mother, An offering [is] whatever thou mayest be profited by me; —
and he may not honour his father or his mother, and ye did set aside the command of God because of your tradition.
'Hypocrites, well did Isaiah prophesy of you, saying,
This people doth draw nigh to Me with their mouth, and with the lips it doth honour Me, but their heart is far off from Me;
and in vain do they worship Me, teaching teachings — commands of men.'
And having called near the multitude, he said to them, 'Hear and understand:
not that which is coming into the mouth doth defile the man, but that which is coming forth from the mouth, this defileth the man.'
Then his disciples having come near, said to him, 'Hast thou known that the Pharisees, having heard the word, were stumbled?'
And he answering said, 'Every plant that my heavenly Father did not plant shall be rooted up;
let them alone, guides they are — blind of blind; and if blind may guide blind, both into a ditch shall fall.'
And Peter answering said to him, 'Explain to us this simile.'
And Jesus said, 'Are ye also yet without understanding?
do ye not understand that all that is going into the mouth doth pass into the belly, and into the drain is cast forth?
but the things coming forth from the mouth from the heart do come forth, and these defile the man;
for out of the heart come forth evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, whoredoms, thefts, false witnessings, evil speakings:
these are the things defiling the man; but to eat with unwashen hands doth not defile the man.'
And Jesus having come forth thence, withdrew to the parts of Tyre and Sidon,
and lo, a woman, a Canaanitess, from those borders having come forth, did call to him, saying, 'Deal kindly with me, Sir — Son of David; my daughter is miserably demonized.'
And he did not answer her a word; and his disciples having come to him, were asking him, saying — 'Let her away, because she crieth after us;'
and he answering said, 'I was not sent except to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.'
And having come, she was bowing to him, saying, 'Sir, help me;'
and he answering said, 'It is not good to take the children's bread, and to cast to the little dogs.'
And she said, 'Yes, sir, for even the little dogs do eat of the crumbs that are falling from their lords' table;'
then answering, Jesus said to her, 'O woman, great [is] thy faith, let it be to thee as thou wilt;' and her daughter was healed from that hour.
And Jesus having passed thence, came nigh unto the sea of Galilee, and having gone up to the mountain, he was sitting there,
and there came to him great multitudes, having with them lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others, and they did cast them at the feet of Jesus, and he healed them,
so that the multitudes did wonder, seeing dumb ones speaking, maimed whole, lame walking, and blind seeing; and they glorified the God of Israel.
And Jesus having called near his disciples, said, 'I have compassion upon the multitude, because now three days they continue with me, and they have not what they may eat; and to let them away fasting I will not, lest they faint in the way.'
And his disciples say to him, 'Whence to us, in a wilderness, so many loaves, as to fill so great a multitude?'
And Jesus saith to them, 'How many loaves have ye?' and they said, 'Seven, and a few little fishes.'
And he commanded the multitudes to sit down upon the ground,
and having taken the seven loaves and the fishes, having given thanks, he did break, and gave to his disciples, and the disciples to the multitude.
And they did all eat, and were filled, and they took up what was over of the broken pieces seven baskets full,
and those eating were four thousand men, apart from women and children.
And having let away the multitudes, he went into the boat, and did come to the borders of Magdala.
And the Pharisees and Sadducees having come, tempting, did question him, to shew to them a sign from the heaven,
and he answering said to them, 'Evening having come, ye say, Fair weather, for the heaven is red,
and at morning, Foul weather to-day, for the heaven is red — gloomy; hypocrites, the face of the heavens indeed ye do know to discern, but the signs of the times ye are not able!
'A generation evil and adulterous doth seek a sign, and a sign shall not be given to it, except the sign of Jonah the prophet;' and having left them he went away.
And his disciples having come to the other side, forgot to take loaves,
and Jesus said to them, 'Beware, and take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees;'
and they were reasoning in themselves, saying, 'Because we took no loaves.'
And Jesus having known, said to them, 'Why reason ye in yourselves, ye of little faith, because ye took no loaves?
do ye not yet understand, nor remember the five loaves of the five thousand, and how many hand-baskets ye took up?
nor the seven loaves of the four thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?
how do ye not understand that I did not speak to you of bread — to take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees?'
Then they understood that he did not say to take heed of the leaven of the bread, but of the teaching, of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
And Jesus, having come to the parts of Caesarea Philippi, was asking his disciples, saying, 'Who do men say me to be — the Son of Man?'
and they said, 'Some, John the Baptist, and others, Elijah, and others, Jeremiah, or one of the prophets.'
He saith to them, 'And ye — who do ye say me to be?'
and Simon Peter answering said, 'Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.'
And Jesus answering said to him, 'Happy art thou, Simon Bar-Jona, because flesh and blood did not reveal [it] to thee, but my Father who is in the heavens.
'And I also say to thee, that thou art a rock, and upon this rock I will build my assembly, and gates of Hades shall not prevail against it;
and I will give to thee the keys of the reign of the heavens, and whatever thou mayest bind upon the earth shall be having been bound in the heavens, and whatever thou mayest loose upon the earth shall be having been loosed in the heavens.'
Then did he charge his disciples that they may say to no one that he is Jesus the Christ.
From that time began Jesus to shew to his disciples that it is necessary for him to go away to Jerusalem, and to suffer many things from the elders, and chief priests, and scribes, and to be put to death, and the third day to rise.
And having taken him aside, Peter began to rebuke him, saying, 'Be kind to thyself, sir; this shall not be to thee;'
and he having turned, said to Peter, 'Get thee behind me, adversary! thou art a stumbling-block to me, for thou dost not mind the things of God, but the things of men.'
Then said Jesus to his disciples, 'If any one doth will to come after me, let him disown himself, and take up his cross, and follow me,
for whoever may will to save his life, shall lose it, and whoever may lose his life for my sake shall find it,
for what is a man profited if he may gain the whole world, but of his life suffer loss? or what shall a man give as an exchange for his life?
'For, the Son of Man is about to come in the glory of his Father, with his messengers, and then he will reward each, according to his work.
Verily I say to you, there are certain of those standing here who shall not taste of death till they may see the Son of Man coming in his reign.'
And after six days Jesus taketh Peter, and James, and John his brother, and doth bring them up to a high mount by themselves,
and he was transfigured before them, and his face shone as the sun, and his garments did become white as the light,
and lo, appear to them did Moses and Elijah, talking together with him.
And Peter answering said to Jesus, 'Sir, it is good to us to be here; if thou wilt, we may make here three booths — for thee one, and for Moses one, and one for Elijah.'
While he is yet speaking, lo, a bright cloud overshadowed them, and lo, a voice out of the cloud, saying, 'This is My Son, — the Beloved, in whom I did delight; hear him.'
And the disciples having heard, did fall upon their face, and were exceedingly afraid,
and Jesus having come near, touched them, and said, 'Rise, be not afraid,'
and having lifted up their eyes, they saw no one, except Jesus only.
And as they are coming down from the mount, Jesus charged them, saying, 'Say to no one the vision, till the Son of Man out of the dead may rise.'
And his disciples questioned him, saying, 'Why then do the scribes say that Elijah it behoveth to come first?'
And Jesus answering said to them, 'Elijah doth indeed come first, and shall restore all things,
and I say to you — Elijah did already come, and they did not know him, but did with him whatever they would, so also the Son of Man is about to suffer by them.'
Then understood the disciples that concerning John the Baptist he spake to them.
And when they came unto the multitude, there came to him a man, kneeling down to him,
and saying, 'Sir, deal kindly with my son, for he is lunatic, and doth suffer miserably, for often he doth fall into the fire, and often into the water,
and I brought him near to thy disciples, and they were not able to heal him.'
And Jesus answering said, 'O generation, unstedfast and perverse, till when shall I be with you? till when shall I bear you? bring him to me hither;'
and Jesus rebuked him, and the demon went out of him, and the lad was healed from that hour.
Then the disciples having come to Jesus by himself, said, 'Wherefore were we not able to cast him out?'
And Jesus said to them, 'Through your want of faith; for verily I say to you, if ye may have faith as a grain of mustard, ye shall say to this mount, Remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove, and nothing shall be impossible to you,
and this kind doth not go forth except in prayer and fasting.'
And while they are living in Galilee, Jesus said to them, 'The Son of Man is about to be delivered up to the hands of men,
and they shall kill him, and the third day he shall rise,' and they were exceeding sorry.
And they having come to Capernaum, those receiving the didrachms came near to Peter, and said, 'Your teacher — doth he not pay the didrachms?' He saith, 'Yes.'
And when he came into the house, Jesus anticipated him, saying, 'What thinkest thou, Simon? the kings of the earth — from whom do they receive custom or poll-tax? from their sons or from the strangers?'
Peter saith to him, 'From the strangers.' Jesus said to him, 'Then are the sons free;
but, that we may not cause them to stumble, having gone to the sea, cast a hook, and the fish that hath come up first take thou up, and having opened its mouth, thou shalt find a stater, that having taken, give to them for me and thee.'
At that hour came the disciples near to Jesus, saying, 'Who, now, is greater in the reign of the heavens?'
And Jesus having called near a child, did set him in the midst of them,
and said, 'Verily I say to you, if ye may not be turned and become as the children, ye may not enter into the reign of the heavens;
whoever then may humble himself as this child, he is the greater in the reign of the heavens.
'And he who may receive one such child in my name, doth receive me,
and whoever may cause to stumble one of those little ones who are believing in me, it is better for him that a weighty millstone may be hanged upon his neck, and he may be sunk in the depth of the sea.
'Woe to the world from the stumbling-blocks! for there is a necessity for the stumbling-blocks to come, but woe to that man through whom the stumbling-block doth come!
'And if thy hand or thy foot doth cause thee to stumble, cut them off and cast from thee; it is good for thee to enter into the life lame or maimed, rather than having two hands or two feet, to be cast to the fire the age-during.
'And if thine eye doth cause thee to stumble, pluck it out and cast from thee; it is good for thee one-eyed to enter into the life, rather than having two eyes to be cast to the gehenna of the fire.
'Beware! — ye may not despise one of these little ones, for I say to you, that their messengers in the heavens do always behold the face of my Father who is in the heavens,
for the Son of Man did come to save the lost.
'What think ye? if a man may have an hundred sheep, and there may go astray one of them, doth he not — having left the ninety-nine, having gone on the mountains — seek that which is gone astray?
and if it may come to pass that he doth find it, verily I say to you, that he doth rejoice over it more than over the ninety-nine that have not gone astray;
so it is not will in presence of your Father who is in the heavens, that one of these little ones may perish.
'And if thy brother may sin against thee, go and show him his fault between thee and him alone, if he may hear thee, thou didst gain thy brother;
and if he may not hear, take with thee yet one or two, that by the mouth of two witnesses or three every word may stand.
'And if he may not hear them, say [it] to the assembly, and if also the assembly he may not hear, let him be to thee as the heathen man and the tax-gatherer.
'Verily I say to you, Whatever things ye may bind upon the earth shall be having been bound in the heavens, and whatever things ye may loose on the earth shall be having been loosed in the heavens.
'Again, I say to you, that, if two of you may agree on the earth concerning anything, whatever they may ask — it shall be done to them from my Father who is in the heavens,
for where there are two or three gathered together — to my name, there am I in the midst of them.'
Then Peter having come near to him, said, 'Sir, how often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him — till seven times?'
Jesus saith to him, 'I do not say to thee till seven times, but till seventy times seven.
'Because of this was the reign of the heavens likened to a man, a king, who did will to take reckoning with his servants,
and he having begun to take account, there was brought near to him one debtor of a myriad of talents,
and he having nothing to pay, his lord did command him to be sold, and his wife, and the children, and all, whatever he had, and payment to be made.
The servant then, having fallen down, was bowing to him, saying, Sir, have patience with me, and I will pay thee all;
and the lord of that servant having been moved with compassion did release him, and the debt he forgave him.
'And, that servant having come forth, found one of his fellow-servants who was owing him an hundred denaries, and having laid hold, he took him by the throat, saying, Pay me that which thou owest.
His fellow-servant then, having fallen down at his feet, was calling on him, saying, Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all;
and he would not, but having gone away, he cast him into prison, till he might pay that which was owing.
'And his fellow-servants having seen the things that were done, were grieved exceedingly, and having come, shewed fully to their lord all the things that were done;
then having called him, his lord saith to him, Evil servant! all that debt I did forgive thee, seeing thou didst call upon me,
did it not behove also thee to have dealt kindly with thy fellow-servant, as I also dealt kindly with thee?
'And having been wroth, his lord delivered him to the inquisitors, till he might pay all that was owing to him;
so also my heavenly Father will do to you, if ye may not forgive each one his brother from your hearts their trespasses.'
And it came to pass, when Jesus finished these words, he removed from Galilee, and did come to the borders of Judea, beyond the Jordan,
and great multitudes followed him, and he healed them there.
And the Pharisees came near to him, tempting him, and saying to him, 'Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?'
And he answering said to them, 'Did ye not read, that He who made [them], from the beginning a male and a female made them,
and said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and cleave to his wife, and they shall be — the two — for one flesh?
so that they are no more two, but one flesh; what therefore God did join together, let no man put asunder.'
They say to him, 'Why then did Moses command to give a roll of divorce, and to put her away?'
He saith to them — 'Moses for your stiffness of heart did suffer you to put away your wives, but from the beginning it hath not been so.
'And I say to you, that, whoever may put away his wife, if not for whoredom, and may marry another, doth commit adultery; and he who did marry her that hath been put away, doth commit adultery.'
His disciples say to him, 'If the case of the man with the woman is so, it is not good to marry.'
And he said to them, 'All do not receive this word, but those to whom it hath been given;
for there are eunuchs who from the mother's womb were so born; and there are eunuchs who were made eunuchs by men; and there are eunuchs who kept themselves eunuchs because of the reign of the heavens: he who is able to receive [it] — let him receive.'
Then were brought near to him children that he might put hands on them and pray, and the disciples rebuked them.
But Jesus said, 'Suffer the children, and forbid them not, to come unto me, for of such is the reign of the heavens;'
and having laid on them [his] hands, he departed thence.
And lo, one having come near, said to him, 'Good teacher, what good thing shall I do, that I may have life age-during?'
And he said to him, 'Why me dost thou call good? no one [is] good except One — God; but if thou dost will to enter into the life, keep the commands.'
He saith to him, 'What kind?' And Jesus said, 'Thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt not steal, thou shalt not bear false witness,
honour thy father and mother, and, thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.'
The young man saith to him, 'All these did I keep from my youth; what yet do I lack?'
Jesus said to him, 'If thou dost will to be perfect, go away, sell what thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven, and come, follow me.'
And the young man, having heard the word, went away sorrowful, for he had many possessions;
and Jesus said to his disciples, 'Verily I say to you, that hardly shall a rich man enter into the reign of the heavens;
and again I say to you, it is easier for a camel through the eye of a needle to go, than for a rich man to enter into the reign of God.'
And his disciples having heard, were amazed exceedingly, saying, 'Who, then, is able to be saved?'
And Jesus having earnestly beheld, said to them, 'With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.'
Then Peter answering said to him, 'Lo, we did leave all, and follow thee, what then shall we have?'
And Jesus said to them, 'Verily I say to you, that ye who did follow me, in the regeneration, when the Son of Man may sit upon a throne of his glory, shall sit — ye also — upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel;
and every one who left houses, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or fields, for my name's sake, an hundredfold shall receive, and life age-during shall inherit;
and many first shall be last, and last first.
'For the reign of the heavens is like to a man, a householder, who went forth with the morning to hire workmen for his vineyard,
and having agreed with the workmen for a denary a day, he sent them into his vineyard.
'And having gone forth about the third hour, he saw others standing in the market-place idle,
and to these he said, Go ye — also ye — to the vineyard, and whatever may be righteous I will give you;
and they went away. 'Again, having gone forth about the sixth and the ninth hour, he did in like manner.
And about the eleventh hour, having gone forth, he found others standing idle, and saith to them, Why here have ye stood all the day idle?
they say to him, Because no one did hire us; he saith to them, Go ye — ye also — to the vineyard, and whatever may be righteous ye shall receive.
'And evening having come, the lord of the vineyard saith to his steward, Call the workmen, and pay them the reward, having begun from the last — unto the first.
And they of about the eleventh hour having come, did receive each a denary.
'And the first having come, did suppose that they shall receive more, and they received, they also, each a denary,
and having received [it], they were murmuring against the householder, saying,
that These, the last, wrought one hour, and thou didst make them equal to us, who were bearing the burden of the day — and the heat.
'And he answering said to one of them, Comrade, I do no unrighteousness to thee; for a denary didst not thou agree with me?
take that which is thine, and go; and I will to give to this, the last, also as to thee;
is it not lawful to me to do what I will in mine own? is thine eye evil because I am good?
So the last shall be first, and the first last, for many are called, and few chosen.'
And Jesus going up to Jerusalem, took the twelve disciples by themselves in the way, and said to them,
'Lo, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man shall be delivered to the chief priests and scribes,
and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him to the nations to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify, and the third day he will rise again.'
Then came near to him the mother of the sons of Zebedee, with her sons, bowing and asking something from him,
and he said to her, 'What wilt thou?' She saith to him, 'Say, that they may sit — these my two sons — one on thy right hand, and one on the left, in thy reign.'
And Jesus answering said, 'Ye have not known what ye ask for yourselves; are ye able to drink of the cup that I am about to drink? and with the baptism that I am baptized with, to be baptized?' They say to him, 'We are able.'
And he saith to them, 'Of my cup indeed ye shall drink, and with the baptism that I am baptized with ye shall be baptized; but to sit on my right hand and on my left is not mine to give, but — to those for whom it hath been prepared by my father.'
And the ten having heard, were much displeased with the two brothers,
and Jesus having called them near, said, 'Ye have known that the rulers of the nations do exercise lordship over them, and those great do exercise authority over them,
but not so shall it be among you, but whoever may will among you to become great, let him be your ministrant;
and whoever may will among you to be first, let him be your servant;
even as the Son of Man did not come to be ministered to, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.'
And they going forth from Jericho, there followed him a great multitude,
and lo, two blind men sitting by the way, having heard that Jesus doth pass by, cried, saying, 'Deal kindly with us, sir — Son of David.'
And the multitude charged them that they might be silent, and they cried out the more, saying, 'Deal kindly with us sir — Son of David.'
And having stood, Jesus called them, and said, 'What will ye [that] I may do to you?'
they say to him, 'Sir, that our eyes may be opened;'
and having been moved with compassion, Jesus touched their eyes, and immediately their eyes received sight, and they followed him.
And when they came nigh to Jerusalem, and came to Bethphage, unto the mount of the Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples,
saying to them, 'Go on to the village over-against you, and immediately ye shall find an ass bound, and a colt with her — having loosed, bring ye to me;
and if any one may say anything to you, ye shall say, that the lord hath need of them, and immediately he will send them.'
And all this came to pass, that it might be fulfilled that was spoken through the prophet, saying,
'Tell ye the daughter of Zion, Lo, thy king doth come to thee, meek, and mounted on an ass, and a colt, a foal of a beast of burden.'
And the disciples having gone and having done as Jesus commanded them,
brought the ass and the colt, and did put on them their garments, and set [him] upon them;
and the very great multitude spread their own garments in the way, and others were cutting branches from the trees, and were strewing in the way,
and the multitudes who were going before, and who were following, were crying, saying, 'Hosanna to the Son of David, blessed is he who is coming in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest.'
And he having entered into Jerusalem, all the city was moved, saying, 'Who is this?'
And the multitudes said, 'This is Jesus the prophet, who [is] from Nazareth of Galilee.'
And Jesus entered into the temple of God, and did cast forth all those selling and buying in the temple, and the tables of the money-changers he overturned, and the seats of those selling the doves,
and he saith to them, 'It hath been written, My house a house of prayer shall be called, but ye did make it a den of robbers.'
And there came to him blind and lame men in the temple, and he healed them,
and the chief priests and the scribes having seen the wonderful things that he did, and the children crying in the temple, and saying, 'Hosanna to the Son of David,' were much displeased;
and they said to him, 'Hearest thou what these say?' And Jesus saith to them, 'Yes, did ye never read, that, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings Thou didst prepare praise?'
And having left them, he went forth out of the city to Bethany, and did lodge there,
and in the morning turning back to the city, he hungered,
and having seen a certain fig-tree on the way, he came to it, and found nothing in it except leaves only, and he saith to it, 'No more from thee may fruit be — to the age;' and forthwith the fig-tree withered.
And the disciples having seen, did wonder, saying, 'How did the fig-tree forthwith wither?'
And Jesus answering said to them, 'Verily I say to you, If ye may have faith, and may not doubt, not only this of the fig-tree shall ye do, but even if to this mount ye may say, Be lifted up and be cast into the sea, it shall come to pass;
and all — as much as ye may ask in the prayer, believing, ye shall receive.'
And he having come to the temple, there came to him when teaching the chief priests and the elders of the people, saying, 'By what authority dost thou do these things? and who gave thee this authority?'
And Jesus answering said to them, 'I will ask you — I also — one word, which if ye may tell me, I also will tell you by what authority I do these things;
the baptism of John, whence was it? — from heaven, or from men?' And they were reasoning with themselves, saying, 'If we should say, From heaven; he will say to us, Wherefore, then, did ye not believe him?
and if we should say, From men, we fear the multitude, for all hold John as a prophet.'
And answering Jesus they said, 'We have not known.' He said to them — he also — 'Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.
'And what think ye? A man had two children, and having come to the first, he said, Child, go, to-day be working in my vineyard.'
And he answering said, 'I will not,' but at last, having repented, he went.
'And having come to the second, he said in the same manner, and he answering said, I [go], sir, and went not;
which of the two did the will of the father?' They say to him, 'The first.' Jesus saith to them, 'Verily I say to you, that the tax-gatherers and the harlots do go before you into the reign of God,
for John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye did not believe him, and the tax-gatherers and the harlots did believe him, and ye, having seen, repented not at last — to believe him.
'Hear ye another simile: There was a certain man, a householder, who planted a vineyard, and did put a hedge round it, and digged in it a wine-press, and built a tower, and gave it out to husbandmen, and went abroad.
'And when the season of the fruits came nigh, he sent his servants unto the husbandmen, to receive the fruits of it,
and the husbandmen having taken his servants, one they scourged, and one they killed, and one they stoned.
'Again he sent other servants more than the first, and they did to them in the same manner.
'And at last he sent unto them his son, saying, They will reverence my son;
and the husbandmen having seen the son, said among themselves, This is the heir, come, we may kill him, and may possess his inheritance;
and having taken him, they cast [him] out of the vineyard, and killed him;
whenever therefore the lord of the vineyard may come, what will he do to these husbandmen?'
They say to him, 'Evil men — he will evilly destroy them, and the vineyard will give out to other husbandmen, who will give back to him the fruits in their seasons.'
Jesus saith to them, 'Did ye never read in the Writings, A stone that the builders disallowed, it became head of a corner; from the Lord hath this come to pass, and it is wonderful in our eyes.
'Because of this I say to you, that the reign of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth its fruit;
and he who is falling on this stone shall be broken, and on whomsoever it may fall it will crush him to pieces.'
And the chief priests and the Pharisees having heard his similes, knew that of them he speaketh,
and seeking to lay hold on him, they feared the multitudes, seeing they were holding him as a prophet.
And Jesus answering, again spake to them in similes, saying,
'The reign of the heavens was likened to a man, a king, who made marriage-feasts for his son,
and he sent forth his servants to call those having been called to the marriage-feasts, and they were not willing to come.
'Again he sent forth other servants, saying, Say to those who have been called: Lo, my dinner I prepared, my oxen and the fatlings have been killed, and all things [are] ready, come ye to the marriage-feasts;
and they, having disregarded [it], went away, the one to his own field, and the other to his merchandise;
and the rest, having laid hold on his servants, did insult and slay [them].
'And the king having heard, was wroth, and having sent forth his soldiers, he destroyed those murderers, and their city he set on fire;
then saith he to his servants, The marriage-feast indeed is ready, and those called were not worthy,
be going, then, on to the cross-ways, and as many as ye may find, call ye to the marriage-feasts.
'And those servants, having gone forth to the ways, did gather all, as many as they found, both bad and good, and the marriage-feast apartment was filled with those reclining.
'And the king having come in to view those reclining, saw there a man not clothed with clothing of the marriage-feast,
and he saith to him, Comrade, how didst thou come in hither, not having clothing of the marriage-feast? and he was speechless.
'Then said the king to the ministrants, Having bound his feet and hands, take him up and cast forth to the outer darkness, there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of the teeth;
for many are called, and few chosen.'
Then the Pharisees having gone, took counsel how they might ensnare him in words,
and they send to him their disciples with the Herodians, saying, 'Teacher, we have known that thou art true, and the way of God in truth thou dost teach, and thou art not caring for any one, for thou dost not look to the face of men;
tell us, therefore, what dost thou think? is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar or not?'
And Jesus having known their wickedness, said, 'Why me do ye tempt, hypocrites?
show me the tribute-coin?' and they brought to him a denary;
and he saith to them, 'Whose [is] this image and the inscription?'
they say to him, 'Caesar's;' then saith he to them, 'Render therefore the things of Caesar to Caesar, and the things of God to God;'
and having heard they wondered, and having left him they went away.
In that day there came near to him Sadducees, who are saying there is not a rising again, and they questioned him, saying,
'Teacher, Moses said, If any one may die not having children, his brother shall marry his wife, and shall raise up seed to his brother.
'And there were with us seven brothers, and the first having married did die, and not having seed, he left his wife to his brother;
in like manner also the second, and the third, unto the seventh,
and last of all died also the woman;
therefore in the rising again, of which of the seven shall she be wife — for all had her?'
And Jesus answering said to them, 'Ye go astray, not knowing the Writings, nor the power of God;
for in the rising again they do not marry, nor are they given in marriage, but are as messengers of God in heaven.
'And concerning the rising again of the dead, did ye not read that which was spoken to you by God, saying,
I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not a God of dead men, but of living.'
And having heard, the multitudes were astonished at his teaching;
and the Pharisees, having heard that he did silence the Sadducees, were gathered together unto him;
and one of them, a lawyer, did question, tempting him, and saying,
'Teacher, which [is] the great command in the Law?'
And Jesus said to him, 'Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thine understanding —
this is a first and great command;
and the second [is] like to it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself;
on these — the two commands — all the law and the prophets do hang.'
And the Pharisees having been gathered together, Jesus did question them,
saying, 'What do ye think concerning the Christ? of whom is he son?' They say to him, 'Of David.'
He saith to them, 'How then doth David in the Spirit call him lord, saying,
The Lord said to my lord, Sit at my right hand, till I may make thine enemies thy footstool?
If then David doth call him lord, how is he his son?'
And no one was able to answer him a word, nor durst any from that day question him any more.
Then Jesus spake to the multitudes, and to his disciples,
saying, 'On the seat of Moses sat down the scribes and the Pharisees;
all, then, as much as they may say to you to observe, observe and do, but according to their works do not, for they say, and do not;
for they bind together burdens heavy and grievous to be borne, and lay upon the shoulders of men, but with their finger they will not move them.
'And all their works they do to be seen by men, and they make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the fringes of their garments,
they love also the chief couches in the supper, and the chief seats in the synagogues,
and the salutations in the market-places, and to be called by men, Rabbi, Rabbi.
'And ye — ye may not be called Rabbi, for one is your director — the Christ, and all ye are brethren;
and ye may not call [any] your father on the earth, for one is your Father, who is in the heavens,
nor may ye be called directors, for one is your director — the Christ.
And the greater of you shall be your ministrant,
and whoever shall exalt himself shall be humbled, and whoever shall humble himself shall be exalted.
'Woe to you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye shut up the reign of the heavens before men, for ye do not go in, nor those going in do ye suffer to enter.
'Woe to you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye eat up the houses of the widows, and for a pretence make long prayers, because of this ye shall receive more abundant judgment.
'Woe to you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye go round the sea and the dry land to make one proselyte, and whenever it may happen — ye make him a son of gehenna twofold more than yourselves.
'Woe to you, blind guides, who are saying, Whoever may swear by the sanctuary, it is nothing, but whoever may swear by the gold of the sanctuary — is debtor!
Fools and blind! for which [is] greater, the gold, or the sanctuary that is sanctifying the gold?
'And, whoever may swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whoever may swear by the gift that is upon it — is debtor!
Fools and blind! for which [is] greater, the gift, or the altar that is sanctifying the gift?
'He therefore who did swear by the altar, doth swear by it, and by all things on it;
and he who did swear by the sanctuary, doth swear by it, and by Him who is dwelling in it;
and he who did swear by the heaven, doth swear by the throne of God, and by Him who is sitting upon it.
'Woe to you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye give tithe of the mint, and the dill, and the cumin, and did neglect the weightier things of the Law — the judgment, and the kindness, and the faith; these it behoved [you] to do, and those not to neglect.
'Blind guides! who are straining out the gnat, and the camel are swallowing.
'Woe to you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye make clean the outside of the cup and the plate, and within they are full of rapine and incontinence.
'Blind Pharisee! cleanse first the inside of the cup and the plate, that the outside of them also may become clean.
'Woe to you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye are like to whitewashed sepulchres, which outwardly indeed do appear beautiful, and within are full of bones of dead men, and of all uncleanness;
so also ye outwardly indeed do appear to men righteous, and within ye are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.
'Woe to you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye build the sepulchres of the prophets, and adorn the tombs of the righteous,
and say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.
So that ye testify to yourselves, that ye are sons of them who did murder the prophets;
and ye — ye fill up the measure of your fathers.
'Serpents! brood of vipers! how may ye escape from the judgment of the gehenna?
'Because of this, lo, I send to you prophets, and wise men, and scribes, and of them ye will kill and crucify, and of them ye will scourge in your synagogues, and will pursue from city to city;
that on you may come all the righteous blood being poured out on the earth from the blood of Abel the righteous, unto the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the sanctuary and the altar:
verily I say to you, all these things shall come upon this generation.
'Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that art killing the prophets, and stoning those sent unto thee, how often did I will to gather thy children together, as a hen doth gather her own chickens under the wings, and ye did not will.
Lo, left desolate to you is your house;
for I say to you, ye may not see me henceforth, till ye may say, Blessed [is] he who is coming in the name of the Lord.'
And having gone forth, Jesus departed from the temple, and his disciples came near to show him the buildings of the temple,
and Jesus said to them, 'Do ye not see all these? verily I say to you, There may not be left here a stone upon a stone, that shall not be thrown down.'
And when he is sitting on the mount of the Olives, the disciples came near to him by himself, saying, 'Tell us, when shall these be? and what [is] the sign of thy presence, and of the full end of the age?'
And Jesus answering said to them, 'Take heed that no one may lead you astray,
for many shall come in my name, saying, I am the Christ, and they shall lead many astray,
and ye shall begin to hear of wars, and reports of wars; see, be not troubled, for it behoveth all [these] to come to pass, but the end is not yet.
'For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in divers places;
and all these [are] the beginning of sorrows;
then they shall deliver you up to tribulation, and shall kill you, and ye shall be hated by all the nations because of my name;
and then shall many be stumbled, and they shall deliver up one another, and shall hate one another.
'And many false prophets shall arise, and shall lead many astray;
and because of the abounding of the lawlessness, the love of the many shall become cold;
but he who did endure to the end, he shall be saved;
and this good news of the reign shall be proclaimed in all the world, for a testimony to all the nations; and then shall the end arrive.
'Whenever, therefore, ye may see the abomination of the desolation, that was spoken of through Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy place (whoever is reading let him observe)
then those in Judea — let them flee to the mounts;
he on the house-top — let him not come down to take up any thing out of his house;
and he in the field — let him not turn back to take his garments.
'And woe to those with child, and to those giving suck in those days;
and pray ye that your flight may not be in winter, nor on a sabbath;
for there shall be then great tribulation, such as was not from the beginning of the world till now, no, nor may be.
And if those days were not shortened, no flesh would have been saved; but because of the chosen, shall those days be shortened.
'Then if any one may say to you, Lo, here [is] the Christ! or here! ye may not believe;
for there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and they shall give great signs and wonders, so as to lead astray, if possible, also the chosen.
Lo, I did tell you beforehand.
'If therefore they may say to you, Lo, in the wilderness he is, ye may not go forth; lo, in the inner chambers, ye may not believe;
for as the lightning doth come forth from the east, and doth appear unto the west, so shall be also the presence of the Son of Man;
for wherever the carcase may be, there shall the eagles be gathered together.
'And immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from the heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken;
and then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in the heaven; and then shall all the tribes of the earth smite the breast, and they shall see the Son of Man coming upon the clouds of the heaven, with power and much glory;
and he shall send his messengers with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his chosen from the four winds, from the ends of the heavens unto the ends thereof.
'And from the fig-tree learn ye the simile: When already its branch may have become tender, and the leaves it may put forth, ye know that summer [is] nigh,
so also ye, when ye may see all these, ye know that it is nigh — at the doors.
Verily I say to you, this generation may not pass away till all these may come to pass.
The heaven and the earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.
'And concerning that day and the hour no one hath known — not even the messengers of the heavens — except my Father only;
and as the days of Noah — so shall be also the presence of the Son of Man;
for as they were, in the days before the flood, eating, and drinking, marrying, and giving in marriage, till the day Noah entered into the ark,
and they did not know till the flood came and took all away; so shall be also the presence of the Son of Man.
Then two men shall be in the field, the one is received, and the one is left;
two women shall be grinding in the mill, one is received, and one is left.
'Watch ye therefore, because ye have not known in what hour your Lord doth come;
and this know, that if the master of the house had known in what watch the thief doth come, he had watched, and not suffered his house to be broken through;
because of this also ye, become ye ready, because in what hour ye do not think, the Son of Man doth come.
'Who, then, is the servant, faithful and wise, whom his lord did set over his household, to give them the nourishment in season?
Happy that servant, whom his lord, having come, shall find doing so;
verily I say to you, that over all his substance he will set him.
'And, if that evil servant may say in his heart, My Lord doth delay to come,
and may begin to beat the fellow-servants, and to eat and to drink with the drunken,
the lord of that servant will arrive in a day when he doth not expect, and in an hour of which he doth not know,
and will cut him off, and his portion with the hypocrites will appoint; there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of the teeth.
'Then shall the reign of the heavens be likened to ten virgins, who, having taken their lamps, went forth to meet the bridegroom;
and five of them were prudent, and five foolish;
they who were foolish having taken their lamps, did not take with themselves oil;
and the prudent took oil in their vessels, with their lamps.
'And the bridegroom tarrying, they all nodded and were sleeping,
and in the middle of the night a cry was made, Lo, the bridegroom doth come; go ye forth to meet him.
'Then rose all those virgins, and trimmed their lamps,
and the foolish said to the prudent, Give us of your oil, because our lamps are going out;
and the prudent answered, saying — Lest there may not be sufficient for us and you, go ye rather unto those selling, and buy for yourselves.
'And while they are going away to buy, the bridegroom came, and those ready went in with him to the marriage-feasts, and the door was shut;
and afterwards come also do the rest of the virgins, saying, Sir, sir, open to us;
and he answering said, Verily I say to you, I have not known you.
'Watch therefore, for ye have not known the day nor the hour in which the Son of Man doth come.
'For — as a man going abroad did call his own servants, and did deliver to them his substance,
and to one he gave five talents, and to another two, and to another one, to each according to his several ability, went abroad immediately.
'And he who did receive the five talents, having gone, wrought with them, and made other five talents;
in like manner also he who [received] the two, he gained, also he, other two;
and he who did receive the one, having gone away, digged in the earth, and hid his lord's money.
'And after a long time cometh the lord of those servants, and taketh reckoning with them;
and he who did receive the five talents having come, brought other five talents, saying, 'Sir, five talents thou didst deliver to me; lo, other five talents did I gain besides them.
'And his lord said to him, Well done, servant, good and faithful, over a few things thou wast faithful, over many things I will set thee; enter into the joy of thy lord.
'And he who also did receive the two talents having come, said, Sir, two talents thou didst deliver to me; lo, other two talents I did gain besides them.
'His lord said to him, Well done, servant, good and faithful, over a few things thou wast faithful, over many things I will set thee; enter into the joy of thy lord.
'And he also who hath received the one talent having come, said, Sir, I knew thee, that thou art a hard man, reaping where thou didst not sow, and gathering from whence thou didst not scatter;
and having been afraid, having gone away, I hid thy talent in the earth; lo, thou hast thine own!
'And his lord answering said to him, Evil servant, and slothful, thou hadst known that I reap where I did not sow, and I gather whence I did not scatter!
it behoved thee then to put my money to the money-lenders, and having come I had received mine own with increase.
'Take therefore from him the talent, and give to him having the ten talents,
for to every one having shall be given, and he shall have overabundance, and from him who is not having, even that which he hath shall be taken from him;
and the unprofitable servant cast ye forth to the outer darkness; there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of the teeth.
'And whenever the Son of Man may come in his glory, and all the holy messengers with him, then he shall sit upon a throne of his glory;
and gathered together before him shall be all the nations, and he shall separate them from one another, as the shepherd doth separate the sheep from the goats,
and he shall set the sheep indeed on his right hand, and the goats on the left.
'Then shall the king say to those on his right hand, Come ye, the blessed of my Father, inherit the reign that hath been prepared for you from the foundation of the world;
for I did hunger, and ye gave me to eat; I did thirst, and ye gave me to drink; I was a stranger, and ye received me;
naked, and ye put around me; I was infirm, and ye looked after me; in prison I was, and ye came unto me.
'Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when did we see thee hungering, and we nourished? or thirsting, and we gave to drink?
and when did we see thee a stranger, and we received? or naked, and we put around?
and when did we see thee infirm, or in prison, and we came unto thee?
'And the king answering, shall say to them, Verily I say to you, Inasmuch as ye did [it] to one of these my brethren — the least — to me ye did [it].
Then shall he say also to those on the left hand, Go ye from me, the cursed, to the fire, the age-during, that hath been prepared for the Devil and his messengers;
for I did hunger, and ye gave me not to eat; I did thirst, and ye gave me not to drink;
a stranger I was, and ye did not receive me; naked, and ye put not around me; infirm, and in prison, and ye did not look after me.
'Then shall they answer, they also, saying, Lord, when did we see thee hungering, or thirsting, or a stranger, or naked, or infirm, or in prison, and we did not minister to thee?
'Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say to you, Inasmuch as ye did [it] not to one of these, the least, ye did [it] not to me.
And these shall go away to punishment age-during, but the righteous to life age-during.'
And it came to pass, when Jesus finished all these words, he said to his disciples,
'Ye have known that after two days the passover cometh, and the Son of Man is delivered up to be crucified.'
Then were gathered together the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders of the people, to the court of the chief priest who was called Caiaphas;
and they consulted together that they might take Jesus by guile, and kill [him],
and they said, 'Not in the feast, that there may not be a tumult among the people.'
And Jesus having been in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,
there came to him a woman having an alabaster box of ointment, very precious, and she poured on his head as he is reclining (at meat).
And having seen [it], his disciples were much displeased, saying, 'To what purpose [is] this waste?
for this ointment could have been sold for much, and given to the poor.'
And Jesus having known, said to them, 'Why do ye give trouble to the woman? for a good work she wrought for me;
for the poor always ye have with you, and me ye have not always;
for she having put this ointment on my body — for my burial she did [it].
Verily I say to you, Wherever this good news may be proclaimed in the whole world, what this [one] did shall also be spoken of — for a memorial of her.'
Then one of the twelve, who is called Judas Iscariot, having gone unto the chief priests, said,
'What are ye willing to give me, and I will deliver him up to you?' and they weighed out to him thirty silverlings,
and from that time he was seeking a convenient season to deliver him up.
And on the first [day] of the unleavened food came the disciples near to Jesus, saying to him, 'Where wilt thou [that] we may prepare for thee to eat the passover?'
and he said, 'Go away to the city, unto such a one, and say to him, The Teacher saith, My time is nigh; near thee I keep the passover, with my disciples;'
and the disciples did as Jesus appointed them, and prepared the passover.
And evening having come, he was reclining (at meat) with the twelve,
and while they are eating, he said, 'Verily I say to you, that one of you shall deliver me up.'
And being grieved exceedingly, they began to say to him, each of them, 'Is it I, Sir?'
And he answering said, 'He who did dip with me the hand in the dish, he will deliver me up;
the Son of Man doth indeed go, as it hath been written concerning him, but woe to that man through whom the Son of Man is delivered up! good it were for him if that man had not been born.'
And Judas — he who delivered him up — answering said, 'Is it I, Rabbi?' He saith to him, 'Thou hast said.'
And while they were eating, Jesus having taken the bread, and having blessed, did brake, and was giving to the disciples, and said, 'Take, eat, this is my body;'
and having taken the cup, and having given thanks, he gave to them, saying, 'Drink ye of it — all;
for this is my blood of the new covenant, that for many is being poured out — to remission of sins;
and I say to you, that I may not drink henceforth on this produce of the vine, till that day when I may drink it with you new in the reign of my Father.'
And having sung a hymn, they went forth to the mount of the Olives;
then saith Jesus to them, 'All ye shall be stumbled at me this night; for it hath been written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad;
but, after my having risen, I will go before you to Galilee.'
And Peter answering said to him, 'Even if all shall be stumbled at thee, I will never be stumbled.'
Jesus said to him, 'Verily I say to thee, that, this night, before cock-crowing, thrice thou wilt deny me.'
Peter saith to him, 'Even if it may be necessary for me to die with thee, I will not deny thee;' in like manner also said all the disciples.
Then come with them doth Jesus to a place called Gethsemane, and he saith to the disciples, 'Sit ye here, till having gone away, I shall pray yonder.'
And having taken Peter, and the two sons of Zebedee, he began to be sorrowful, and to be very heavy;
then saith he to them, 'Exceedingly sorrowful is my soul — unto death; abide ye here, and watch with me.'
And having gone forward a little, he fell on his face, praying, and saying, 'My Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me; nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou.'
And he cometh unto the disciples, and findeth them sleeping, and he saith to Peter, 'So! ye were not able one hour to watch with me!
watch, and pray, that ye may not enter into temptation: the spirit indeed is forward, but the flesh weak.'
Again, a second time, having gone away, he prayed, saying, 'My Father, if this cup cannot pass away from me except I drink it, Thy will be done;'
and having come, he findeth them again sleeping, for their eyes were heavy.
And having left them, having gone away again, he prayed a third time, saying the same word;
then cometh he unto his disciples, and saith to them, 'Sleep on henceforth, and rest! lo, the hour hath come nigh, and the Son of Man is delivered up to the hands of sinners.
Rise, let us go; lo, he hath come nigh who is delivering me up.'
And while he is yet speaking, lo, Judas, one of the twelve did come, and with him a great multitude, with swords and sticks, from the chief priests and elders of the people.
And he who did deliver him up did give them a sign, saying, 'Whomsoever I will kiss, it is he: lay hold on him;'
and immediately, having come to Jesus, he said, 'Hail, Rabbi,' and kissed him;
and Jesus said to him, 'Comrade, for what art thou present?' Then having come near, they laid hands on Jesus, and took hold on him.
And lo, one of those with Jesus, having stretched forth the hand, drew his sword, and having struck the servant of the chief priest, he took off his ear.
Then saith Jesus to him, 'Turn back thy sword to its place; for all who did take the sword, by the sword shall perish;
dost thou think that I am not able now to call upon my Father, and He will place beside me more than twelve legions of messengers?
how then may the Writings be fulfilled, that thus it behoveth to happen?'
In that hour said Jesus to the multitudes, 'As against a robber ye did come forth, with swords and sticks, to take me! daily with you I was sitting teaching in the temple, and ye did not lay hold on me;
but all this hath come to pass, that the Writings of the prophets may be fulfilled;' then all the disciples, having left him, fled.
And those laying hold on Jesus led [him] away unto Caiaphas the chief priest, where the scribes and the elders were gathered together,
and Peter was following him afar off, unto the court of the chief priest, and having gone in within, he was sitting with the officers, to see the end.
And the chief priests, and the elders, and all the council, were seeking false witness against Jesus, that they might put him to death,
and they did not find; and many false witnesses having come near, they did not find; and at last two false witnesses having come near,
said, 'This one said, I am able to throw down the sanctuary of God, and after three days to build it.'
And the chief priest having stood up, said to him, 'Nothing thou dost answer! what do these witness against thee?
and Jesus was silent. And the chief priest answering said to him, 'I adjure thee, by the living God, that thou mayest say to us, if thou art the Christ — the Son of God.'
Jesus saith to him, 'Thou hast said; nevertheless I say to you, hereafter ye shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the power, and coming upon the clouds, of the heaven.'
Then the chief priest rent his garments, saying, — 'He hath spoken evil; what need have we yet of witnesses? lo, now ye heard his evil speaking;
what think ye?' and they answering said, 'He is worthy of death.'
Then did they spit in his face and buffet him, and others did slap,
saying, 'Declare to us, O Christ, who he is that struck thee?'
And Peter without was sitting in the court, and there came near to him a certain maid, saying, 'And thou wast with Jesus of Galilee!'
And he denied before all, saying, 'I have not known what thou sayest.'
And he having gone forth to the porch, another female saw him, and saith to those there, 'And this one was with Jesus of Nazareth;'
and again did he deny with an oath — 'I have not known the man.'
And after a little those standing near having come, said to Peter, 'Truly thou also art of them, for even thy speech doth make thee manifest.'
Then began he to anathematise, and to swear — 'I have not known the man;' and immediately did a cock crow,
and Peter remembered the saying of Jesus, he having said to him — 'Before cock-crowing, thrice thou wilt deny me;' and having gone without, he did weep bitterly.
And morning having come, all the chief priests and the elders of the people took counsel against Jesus, so as to put him to death;
and having bound him, they did lead away, and delivered him up to Pontius Pilate, the governor.
Then Judas — he who delivered him up — having seen that he was condemned, having repented, brought back the thirty silverlings to the chief priests, and to the elders, saying,
'I did sin, having delivered up innocent blood;' and they said, 'What — to us? thou shalt see!'
and having cast down the silverlings in the sanctuary, he departed, and having gone away, he did strangle himself.
And the chief priests having taken the silverlings, said, 'It is not lawful to put them to the treasury, seeing it is the price of blood;'
and having taken counsel, they bought with them the field of the potter, for the burial of strangers;
therefore was that field called, 'Field of blood,' unto this day.
Then was fulfilled that spoken through Jeremiah the prophet, saying, 'And I took the thirty silverlings, the price of him who hath been priced, whom they of the sons of Israel did price,
and gave them for the field of the potter, as the Lord did appoint to me.'
And Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor did question him, saying, 'Art thou the king of the Jews!' And Jesus said to him, 'Thou sayest.'
And in his being accused by the chief priests and the elders, he did not answer any thing,
then saith Pilate to him, 'Dost thou not hear how many things they witness against thee?'
And he did not answer him, not even to one word, so that the governor did wonder greatly.
And at the feast the governor had been accustomed to release one to the multitude, a prisoner, whom they willed,
and they had then a noted prisoner, called Barabbas,
they therefore having been gathered together, Pilate said to them, 'Whom will ye I shall release to you? Barabbas or Jesus who is called Christ?'
for he had known that because of envy they had delivered him up.
And as he is sitting on the tribunal, his wife sent unto him, saying, 'Nothing — to thee and to that righteous one, for many things did I suffer to-day in a dream because of him.'
And the chief priests and the elders did persuade the multitudes that they might ask for themselves Barabbas, and might destroy Jesus;
and the governor answering said to them, 'Which of the two will ye [that] I shall release to you?' And they said, 'Barabbas.'
Pilate saith to them, 'What then shall I do with Jesus who is called Christ?' They all say to him, 'Let be crucified!'
And the governor said, 'Why, what evil did he?' and they were crying out the more, saying, 'Let be crucified.'
And Pilate having seen that it profiteth nothing, but rather a tumult is made, having taken water, he did wash the hands before the multitude, saying, 'I am innocent from the blood of this righteous one; ye — ye shall see;'
and all the people answering said, 'His blood [is] upon us, and upon our children!'
Then did he release to them Barabbas, and having scourged Jesus, he delivered [him] up that he may be crucified;
then the soldiers of the governor having taken Jesus to the Praetorium, did gather to him all the band;
and having unclothed him, they put around him a crimson cloak,
and having plaited him a crown out of thorns they put [it] on his head, and a reed in his right hand, and having kneeled before him, they were mocking him, saying, 'Hail, the king of the Jews.'
And having spit on him, they took the reed, and were smiting on his head;
and when they had mocked him, they took off from him the cloak, and put on him his own garments, and led him away to crucify [him].
And coming forth, they found a man, a Cyrenian, by name Simon: him they impressed that he might bear his cross;
and having come to a place called Golgotha, that is called Place of a Skull,
they gave him to drink vinegar mixed with gall, and having tasted, he would not drink.
And having crucified him, they divided his garments, casting a lot, that it might be fulfilled that was spoken by the prophet, 'They divided my garments to themselves, and over my vesture they cast a lot;'
and sitting down, they were watching him there,
and they put up over his head, his accusation written, 'This is Jesus, the king of the Jews.'
Then crucified with him are two robbers, one on the right hand, and one on the left,
and those passing by were speaking evil of him, wagging their heads,
and saying, 'Thou that art throwing down the sanctuary, and in three days building [it], save thyself; if Son thou art of God, come down from the cross.'
And in like manner also the chief priests mocking, with the scribes and elders, said,
'Others he saved; himself he is not able to save! If he be King of Israel, let him come down now from the cross, and we will believe him;
he hath trusted on God, let Him now deliver him, if He wish him, because he said — Son of God I am;'
with the same also the robbers, who were crucified with him, were reproaching him.
And from the sixth hour darkness came over all the land unto the ninth hour,
and about the ninth hour Jesus cried out with a great voice, saying, 'Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani?' that is, 'My God, my God, why didst Thou forsake me?'
And certain of those standing there having heard, said — 'Elijah he doth call;'
and immediately, one of them having run, and having taken a spunge, having filled [it] with vinegar, and having put [it] on a reed, was giving him to drink,
but the rest said, 'Let alone, let us see if Elijah doth come — about to save him.'
And Jesus having again cried with a great voice, yielded the spirit;
and lo, the vail of the sanctuary was rent in two from top unto bottom, and the earth did quake, and the rocks were rent,
and the tombs were opened, and many bodies of the saints who have fallen asleep, arose,
and having come forth out of the tombs after his rising, they went into the holy city, and appeared to many.
And the centurion, and those with him watching Jesus, having seen the earthquake, and the things that were done, were exceedingly afraid, saying, 'Truly this was God's Son.'
And there were there many women beholding from afar, who did follow Jesus from Galilee, ministering to him,
among whom was Mary the Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and of Joses, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.
And evening having come, there came a rich man, from Arimathea, named Joseph, who also himself was discipled to Jesus,
he having gone near to Pilate, asked for himself the body of Jesus; then Pilate commanded the body to be given back.
And having taken the body, Joseph wrapped it in clean linen,
and laid it in his new tomb, that he hewed in the rock, and having rolled a great stone to the door of the tomb, he went away;
and there were there Mary the Magdalene, and the other Mary, sitting over-against the sepulchre.
And on the morrow that is after the preparation, were gathered together the chief priests, and the Pharisees, unto Pilate,
saying, 'Sir, we have remembered that that deceiver said while yet living, After three days I do rise;
command, then, the sepulchre to be made secure till the third day, lest his disciples, having come by night, may steal him away, and may say to the people, He rose from the dead, and the last deceit shall be worse than the first.'
And Pilate said to them, 'Ye have a watch, go away, make secure — as ye have known;'
and they, having gone, did make the sepulchre secure, having sealed the stone, together with the watch.
And on the eve of the sabbaths, at the dawn, toward the first of the sabbaths, came Mary the Magdalene, and the other Mary, to see the sepulchre,
and lo, there came a great earthquake, for a messenger of the Lord, having come down out of heaven, having come, did roll away the stone from the door, and was sitting upon it,
and his countenance was as lightning, and his clothing white as snow,
and from the fear of him did the keepers shake, and they became as dead men.
And the messenger answering said to the women, 'Fear not ye, for I have known that Jesus, who hath been crucified, ye seek;
he is not here, for he rose, as he said; come, see the place where the Lord was lying;
and having gone quickly, say ye to his disciples, that he rose from the dead; and lo, he doth go before you to Galilee, there ye shall see him; lo, I have told you.'
And having gone forth quickly from the tomb, with fear and great joy, they ran to tell to his disciples;
and as they were going to tell to his disciples, then lo, Jesus met them, saying, 'Hail!' and they having come near, laid hold of his feet, and did bow to him.
Then saith Jesus to them, 'Fear ye not, go away, tell to my brethren that they may go away to Galilee, and there they shall see me.'
And while they are going on, lo, certain of the watch having come to the city, told to the chief priests all the things that happened,
and having been gathered together with the elders, counsel also having taken, they gave much money to the soldiers,
saying, 'Say ye, that his disciples having come by night, stole him — we being asleep;
and if this be heard by the governor, we will persuade him, and you keep free from anxiety.'
And they, having received the money, did as they were taught, and this account was spread abroad among Jews till this day.
And the eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mount where Jesus appointed them,
and having seen him, they bowed to him, but some did waver.
And having come near, Jesus spake to them, saying, 'Given to me was all authority in heaven and on earth;
having gone, then, disciple all the nations, (baptizing them — to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit,
teaching them to observe all, whatever I did command you,) and lo, I am with you all the days — till the full end of the age.'
A beginning of the good news of Jesus Christ, Son of God.
As it hath been written in the prophets, 'Lo, I send My messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee,' —
'A voice of one calling in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, straight make ye his paths,' —
John came baptizing in the wilderness, and proclaiming a baptism of reformation — to remission of sins,
and there were going forth to him all the region of Judea, and they of Jerusalem, and they were all baptized by him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.
And John was clothed with camel's hair, and a girdle of skin around his loins, and eating locusts and honey of the field,
and he proclaimed, saying, 'He doth come — who is mightier than I — after me, of whom I am not worthy — having stooped down — to loose the latchet of his sandals;
I indeed did baptize you with water, but he shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit.'
And it came to pass in those days, Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized by John at the Jordan;
and immediately coming up from the water, he saw the heavens dividing, and the Spirit as a dove coming down upon him;
and a voice came out of the heavens, 'Thou art My Son — the Beloved, in whom I did delight.'
And immediately doth the Spirit put him forth to the wilderness,
and he was there in the wilderness forty days, being tempted by the Adversary, and he was with the beasts, and the messengers were ministering to him.
And after the delivering up of John, Jesus came to Galilee, proclaiming the good news of the reign of God,
and saying — 'Fulfilled hath been the time, and the reign of God hath come nigh, reform ye, and believe in the good news.'
And, walking by the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon, and Andrew his brother, casting a drag into the sea, for they were fishers,
and Jesus said to them, 'Come ye after me, and I shall make you to become fishers of men;'
and immediately, having left their nets, they followed him.
And having gone on thence a little, he saw James of Zebedee, and John his brother, and they were in the boat refitting the nets,
and immediately he called them, and, having left their father Zebedee in the boat with the hired servants, they went away after him.
And they go on to Capernaum, and immediately, on the sabbaths, having gone into the synagogue, he was teaching,
and they were astonished at his teaching, for he was teaching them as having authority, and not as the scribes.
And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit, and he cried out,
saying, 'Away! what — to us and to thee, Jesus the Nazarene? thou didst come to destroy us; I have known thee who thou art — the Holy One of God.'
And Jesus rebuked him, saying, 'Be silenced, and come forth out of him,'
and the unclean spirit having torn him, and having cried with a great voice, came forth out of him,
and they were all amazed, so as to reason among themselves, saying, 'What is this? what new teaching [is] this? that with authority also the unclean spirits he commandeth, and they obey him!'
And the fame of him went forth immediately to all the region, round about, of Galilee.
And immediately, having come forth out of the synagogue, they went to the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John,
and the mother-in-law of Simon was lying fevered, and immediately they tell him about her,
and having come near, he raised her up, having laid hold of her hand, and the fever left her immediately, and she was ministering to them.
And evening having come, when the sun did set, they brought unto him all who were ill, and who were demoniacs,
and the whole city was gathered together near the door,
and he healed many who were ill of manifold diseases, and many demons he cast forth, and was not suffering the demons to speak, because they knew him.
And very early, it being yet night, having risen, he went forth, and went away to a desert place, and was there praying;
and Simon and those with him went in quest of him,
and having found him, they say to him, — 'All do seek thee;'
and he saith to them, 'We may go to the next towns, that there also I may preach, for for this I came forth.'
And he was preaching in their synagogues, in all Galilee, and is casting out the demons,
and there doth come to him a leper, calling on him, and kneeling to him, and saying to him — 'If thou mayest will, thou art able to cleanse me.'
And Jesus having been moved with compassion, having stretched forth the hand, touched him, and saith to him, 'I will; be thou cleansed;'
and he having spoken, immediately the leprosy went away from him, and he was cleansed.
And having sternly charged him, immediately he put him forth,
and saith to him, 'See thou mayest say nothing to any one, but go away, thyself shew to the priest, and bring near for thy cleansing the things Moses directed, for a testimony to them.'
And he, having gone forth, began to proclaim much, and to spread abroad the thing, so that no more he was able openly to enter into the city, but he was without in desert places, and they were coming unto him from every quarter.
And again he entered into Capernaum, after [some] days, and it was heard that he is in the house,
and immediately many were gathered together, so that there was no more room, not even at the door, and he was speaking to them the word.
And they come unto him, bringing a paralytic, borne by four,
and not being able to come near to him because of the multitude, they uncovered the roof where he was, and, having broken [it] up, they let down the couch on which the paralytic was lying,
and Jesus having seen their faith, saith to the paralytic, 'Child, thy sins have been forgiven thee.'
And there were certain of the scribes there sitting, and reasoning in their hearts,
'Why doth this one thus speak evil words? who is able to forgive sins except one — God?'
And immediately Jesus, having known in his spirit that they thus reason in themselves, said to them, 'Why these things reason ye in your hearts?
which is easier, to say to the paralytic, The sins have been forgiven to thee? or to say, Rise, and take up thy couch, and walk?
'And, that ye may know that the Son of Man hath authority on the earth to forgive sins — (he saith to the paralytic) —
I say to thee, Rise, and take up thy couch, and go away to thy house;'
and he rose immediately, and having taken up the couch, he went forth before all, so that all were astonished, and do glorify God, saying — 'Never thus did we see.'
And he went forth again by the sea, and all the multitude was coming unto him, and he was teaching them,
and passing by, he saw Levi of Alpheus sitting at the tax-office, and saith to him, 'Be following me,' and he, having risen, did follow him.
And it came to pass, in his reclining (at meat) in his house, that many tax-gatherers and sinners were reclining (at meat) with Jesus and his disciples, for there were many, and they followed him.
And the scribes and the Pharisees, having seen him eating with the tax-gatherers and sinners, said to his disciples, 'Why — that with the tax-gatherers and sinners he doth eat and drink?'
And Jesus, having heard, saith to them, 'They who are strong have no need of a physician, but they who are ill; I came not to call righteous men, but sinners to reformation.'
And the disciples of John and those of the Pharisees were fasting, and they come and say to him, 'Wherefore do the disciples of John and those of the Pharisees fast, and thy disciples do not fast?'
And Jesus said to them, 'Are the sons of the bride-chamber able, while the bridegroom is with them, to fast? so long time as they have the bridegroom with them they are not able to fast;
but days shall come when the bridegroom may be taken from them, and then they shall fast — in those days.
'And no one a patch of undressed cloth doth sew on an old garment, and if not — the new filling it up doth take from the old and the rent doth become worse;
and no one doth put new wine into old skins, and if not — the new wine doth burst the skins, and the wine is poured out, and the skins will be destroyed; but new wine into new skins is to be put.'
And it came to pass — he is going along on the sabbaths through the corn-fields — and his disciples began to make a way, plucking the ears,
and the Pharisees said to him, 'Lo, why do they on the sabbaths that which is not lawful?'
And he said to them, 'Did ye never read what David did, when he had need and was hungry, he and those with him?
how he went into the house of God, (at 'Abiathar the chief priest,') and the loaves of the presentation did eat, which it is not lawful to eat, except to the priests, and he gave also to those who were with him?'
And he said to them, 'The sabbath for man was made, not man for the sabbath,
so that the son of man is lord also of the sabbath.'
And he entered again into the synagogue, and there was there a man having the hand withered,
and they were watching him, whether on the sabbaths he will heal him, that they might accuse him.
And he saith to the man having the hand withered, 'Rise up in the midst.'
And he saith to them, 'Is it lawful on the sabbaths to do good, or to do evil? life to save, or to kill?' but they were silent.
And having looked round upon them with anger, being grieved for the hardness of their heart, he saith to the man, 'Stretch forth thy hand;' and he stretched forth, and his hand was restored whole as the other;
and the Pharisees having gone forth, immediately, with the Herodians, were taking counsel against him how they might destroy him.
And Jesus withdrew with his disciples unto the sea, and a great multitude from Galilee followed him, and from Judea,
and from Jerusalem, and from Idumea and beyond the Jordan; and they about Tyre and Sidon — a great multitude — having heard how great things he was doing, came unto him.
And he said to his disciples that a little boat may wait on him, because of the multitude, that they may not press upon him,
for he did heal many, so that they threw themselves on him, in order to touch him — as many as had plagues;
and the unclean spirits, when they were seeing him, were falling down before him, and were crying, saying — 'Thou art the Son of God;'
and many times he was charging them that they might not make him manifest.
And he goeth up to the mountain, and doth call near whom he willed, and they went away to him;
and he appointed twelve, that they may be with him, and that he may send them forth to preach,
and to have power to heal the sicknesses, and to cast out the demons.
And he put on Simon the name Peter;
and James of Zebedee, and John the brother of James, and he put on them names — Boanerges, that is, 'Sons of thunder;'
and Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and James of Alpheus, and Thaddeus, and Simon the Cananite,
and Judas Iscariot, who did also deliver him up; and they come into a house.
And come together again doth a multitude, so that they are not able even to eat bread;
and his friends having heard, went forth to lay hold on him, for they said that he was beside himself,
and the scribes who [are] from Jerusalem having come down, said — 'He hath Beelzeboul,' and — 'By the ruler of the demons he doth cast out the demons.'
And, having called them near, in similes he said to them, 'How is the Adversary able to cast out the Adversary?
and if a kingdom against itself be divided, that kingdom cannot be made to stand;
and if a house against itself be divided, that house cannot be made to stand;
and if the Adversary did rise against himself, and hath been divided, he cannot be made to stand, but hath an end.
'No one is able the vessels of the strong man — having entered into his house — to spoil, if first he may not bind the strong man, and then his house he will spoil.
'Verily I say to you, that all the sins shall be forgiven to the sons of men, and evil speakings with which they might speak evil,
but whoever may speak evil in regard to the Holy Spirit hath not forgiveness — to the age, but is in danger of age-during judgment;'
because they said, 'He hath an unclean spirit.'
Then come do his brethren and mother, and standing without, they sent unto him, calling him,
and a multitude was sitting about him, and they said to him, 'Lo, thy mother and thy brethren without do seek thee.'
And he answered them, saying, 'Who is my mother, or my brethren?'
And having looked round in a circle to those sitting about him, he saith, 'Lo, my mother and my brethren!
for whoever may do the will of God, he is my brother, and my sister, and mother.'
And again he began to teach by the sea, and there was gathered unto him a great multitude, so that he, having gone into the boat, sat in the sea, and all the multitude was near the sea, on the land,
and he taught them many things in similes, and he said to them in his teaching:
'Hearken, lo, the sower went forth to sow;
and it came to pass, in the sowing, some fell by the way, and the fowls of the heaven did come and devour it;
and other fell upon the rocky ground, where it had not much earth, and immediately it sprang forth, because of not having depth of earth,
and the sun having risen, it was scorched, and because of not having root it did wither;
and other fell toward the thorns, and the thorns did come up, and choke it, and fruit it gave not;
and other fell to the good ground, and was giving fruit, coming up and increasing, and it bare, one thirty-fold, and one sixty, and one an hundred.'
And he said to them, 'He who is having ears to hear — let him hear.'
And when he was alone, those about him, with the twelve, did ask him of the simile,
and he said to them, 'To you it hath been given to know the secret of the reign of God, but to those who are without, in similes are all the things done;
that seeing they may see and not perceive, and hearing they may hear and not understand, lest they may turn, and the sins may be forgiven them.'
And he saith to them, 'Have ye not known this simile? and how shall ye know all the similes?
He who is sowing doth sow the word;
and these are they by the way where the word is sown: and whenever they may hear, immediately cometh the Adversary, and he taketh away the word that hath been sown in their hearts.
'And these are they, in like manner, who on the rocky ground are sown: who, whenever they may hear the word, immediately with joy do receive it,
and have not root in themselves, but are temporary; afterward tribulation or persecution having come because of the word, immediately they are stumbled.
'And these are they who toward the thorns are sown: these are they who are hearing the word,
and the anxieties of this age, and the deceitfulness of the riches, and the desires concerning the other things, entering in, choke the word, and it becometh unfruitful.
'And these are they who on the good ground have been sown: who do hear the word, and receive, and do bear fruit, one thirty-fold, and one sixty, and one an hundred.'
And he said to them, 'Doth the lamp come that under the measure it may be put, or under the couch — not that it may be put on the lamp-stand?
for there is not anything hid that may not be manifested, nor was anything kept hid but that it may come to light.
If any hath ears to hear — let him hear.'
And he said to them, 'Take heed what ye hear; in what measure ye measure, it shall be measured to you; and to you who hear it shall be added;
for whoever may have, there shall be given to him, and whoever hath not, also that which he hath shall be taken from him.'
And he said, 'Thus is the reign of God: as if a man may cast the seed on the earth,
and may sleep, and may rise night and day, and the seed spring up and grow, he hath not known how;
for of itself doth the earth bear fruit, first a blade, afterwards an ear, afterwards full corn in the ear;
and whenever the fruit may yield itself, immediately he doth send forth the sickle, because the harvest hath come.'
And he said, 'To what may we liken the reign of God, or in what simile may we compare it?
As a grain of mustard, which, whenever it may be sown on the earth, is less than any of the seeds that are on the earth;
and whenever it may be sown, it cometh up, and doth become greater than any of the herbs, and doth make great branches, so that under its shade the fowls of the heaven are able to rest.'
And with many such similes he was speaking to them the word, as they were able to hear,
and without a simile he was not speaking to them, and by themselves, to his disciples he was expounding all.
And he saith to them on that day, evening having come, 'We may pass over to the other side;'
and having let away the multitude, they take him up as he was in the boat, and other little boats also were with him.
And there cometh a great storm of wind, and the waves were beating on the boat, so that it is now being filled,
and he himself was upon the stern, upon the pillow sleeping, and they wake him up, and say to him, 'Teacher, art thou not caring that we perish?'
And having waked up, he rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, 'Peace, be stilled;' and the wind did lull, and there was a great calm:
and he said to them, 'Why are ye so fearful? how have ye not faith?'
and they feared a great fear, and said one to another, 'Who, then, is this, that even the wind and the sea do obey him?'
And they came to the other side of the sea, to the region of the Gadarenes,
and he having come forth out of the boat, immediately there met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit,
who had his dwelling in the tombs, and not even with chains was any one able to bind him,
because that he many times with fetters and chains had been bound, and pulled in pieces by him had been the chains, and the fetters broken in pieces, and none was able to tame him,
and always, night and day, in the mountains, and in the tombs he was, crying and cutting himself with stones.
And, having seen Jesus from afar, he ran and bowed before him,
and having called with a loud voice, he said, 'What — to me and to thee, Jesus, Son of God the Most High? I adjure thee by God, mayest thou not afflict me!'
(for he said to him, 'Come forth, spirit unclean, out of the man,')
and he was questioning him, 'What [is] thy name?' and he answered, saying, 'Legion [is] my name, because we are many;'
and he was calling on him much, that he may not send them out of the region.
And there was there, near the mountains, a great herd of swine feeding,
and all the demons did call upon him, saying, 'Send us to the swine, that into them we may enter;'
and immediately Jesus gave them leave, and having come forth, the unclean spirits did enter into the swine, and the herd did rush down the steep place to the sea — and they were about two thousand — and they were choked in the sea.
And those feeding the swine did flee, and told in the city, and in the fields, and they came forth to see what it is that hath been done;
and they come unto Jesus, and see the demoniac, sitting, and clothed, and right-minded — him having had the legion — and they were afraid;
and those having seen [it], declared to them how it had come to pass to the demoniac, and about the swine;
and they began to call upon him to go away from their borders.
And he having gone into the boat, the demoniac was calling on him that he may be with him,
and Jesus did not suffer him, but saith to him, 'Go away to thy house, unto thine own [friends], and tell them how great things the Lord did to thee, and dealt kindly with thee;
and he went away, and began to proclaim in the Decapolis how great things Jesus did to him, and all were wondering.
And Jesus having passed over in the boat again to the other side, there was gathered a great multitude to him, and he was near the sea,
and lo, there doth come one of the chiefs of the synagogue, by name Jairus, and having seen him, he doth fall at his feet,
and he was calling upon him much, saying — 'My little daughter is at the last extremity — that having come, thou mayest lay on her [thy] hands, so that she may be saved, and she shall live;'
and he went away with him. And there was following him a great multitude, and they were thronging him,
and a certain woman, having an issue of blood twelve years,
and many things having suffered under many physicians, and having spent all that she had, and having profited nothing, but rather having come to the worse,
having heard about Jesus, having come in the multitude behind, she touched his garment,
for she said — 'If even his garments I may touch, I shall be saved;'
and immediately was the fountain of her blood dried up, and she knew in the body that she hath been healed of the plague.
And immediately Jesus having known in himself that out of him power had gone forth, having turned about in the multitude, said, 'Who did touch my garments?'
and his disciples said to him, 'Thou seest the multitude thronging thee, and thou sayest, 'Who did touch me!'
And he was looking round to see her who did this,
and the woman, having been afraid, and trembling, knowing what was done on her, came, and fell down before him, and told him all the truth,
and he said to her, 'Daughter, thy faith hath saved thee; go away in peace, and be whole from thy plague.'
As he is yet speaking, there come from the chief of the synagogue's [house, certain], saying — 'Thy daughter did die, why still dost thou harass the Teacher?'
And Jesus immediately, having heard the word that is spoken, saith to the chief of the synagogue, 'Be not afraid, only believe.'
And he did not suffer any one to follow with him, except Peter, and James, and John the brother of James;
and he cometh to the house of the chief of the synagogue, and seeth a tumult, much weeping and wailing;
and having gone in he saith to them, 'Why do ye make a tumult, and weep? the child did not die, but doth sleep;
and they were laughing at him. And he, having put all forth, doth take the father of the child, and the mother, and those with him, and goeth in where the child is lying,
and, having taken the hand of the child, he saith to her, 'Talitha cumi;' which is, being interpreted, 'Damsel (I say to thee), arise.'
And immediately the damsel arose, and was walking, for she was twelve years [old]; and they were amazed with a great amazement,
and he charged them much, that no one may know this thing, and he said that there be given to her to eat.
And he went forth thence, and came to his own country, and his disciples do follow him,
and sabbath having come, he began in the synagogue to teach, and many hearing were astonished, saying, 'Whence hath this one these things? and what the wisdom that was given to him, that also such mighty works through his hands are done?
Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, and brother of James, and Joses, and Judas, and Simon? and are not his sisters here with us?' — and they were being stumbled at him.
And Jesus said to them — 'A prophet is not without honour, except in his own country, and among his kindred, and in his own house;'
and he was not able there any mighty work to do, except on a few infirm people having put hands he did heal [them];
and he wondered because of their unbelief. And he was going round the villages, in a circle, teaching,
and he doth call near the twelve, and he began to send them forth two by two, and he was giving them power over the unclean spirits,
and he commanded them that they may take nothing for the way, except a staff only — no scrip, no bread, no brass in the girdle,
but having been shod with sandals, and ye may not put on two coats.
And he said to them, 'Whenever ye may enter into a house, there remain till ye may depart thence,
and as many as may not receive you, nor hear you, going out thence, shake off the dust that is under your feet for a testimony to them; verily I say to you, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom or Gomorrah in a day of judgment than for that city.'
And having gone forth they were preaching that [men] might reform,
and many demons they were casting out, and they were anointing with oil many infirm, and they were healing [them].
And the king Herod heard, (for his name became public,) and he said — 'John the Baptist out of the dead was raised, and because of this the mighty powers are working in him.'
Others said — 'It is Elijah,' and others said — 'It is a prophet, or as one of the prophets.'
And Herod having heard, said — 'He whom I did behead — John — this is he; he was raised out of the dead.'
For Herod himself, having sent forth, did lay hold on John, and bound him in the prison, because of Herodias the wife of Philip his brother, because he married her,
for John said to Herod — 'It is not lawful to thee to have the wife of thy brother;'
and Herodias was having a quarrel with him, and was willing to kill him, and was not able,
for Herod was fearing John, knowing him a man righteous and holy, and was keeping watch over him, and having heard him, was doing many things, and hearing him gladly.
And a seasonable day having come, when Herod on his birthday was making a supper to his great men, and to the chiefs of thousands, and to the first men of Galilee,
and the daughter of that Herodias having come in, and having danced, and having pleased Herod and those reclining (at meat) with him, the king said to the damsel, 'Ask of me whatever thou wilt, and I will give to thee,'
and he sware to her — 'Whatever thou mayest ask me, I will give to thee — unto the half of my kingdom.'
And she, having gone forth, said to her mother, 'What shall I ask for myself?' and she said, 'The head of John the Baptist;'
and having come in immediately with haste unto the king, she asked, saying, 'I will that thou mayest give me presently, upon a plate, the head of John the Baptist.'
And the king — made very sorrowful — because of the oaths and of those reclining (at meat) with him, would not put her away,
and immediately the king having sent a guardsman, did command his head to be brought,
and he having gone, beheaded him in the prison, and brought his head upon a plate, and did give it to the damsel, and the damsel did give it to her mother;
and having heard, his disciples came and took up his corpse, and laid it in the tomb.
And the apostles are gathered together unto Jesus, and they told him all, and how many things they did, and how many things they taught,
and he said to them, 'Come ye yourselves apart to a desert place, and rest a little,' for those coming and those going were many, and not even to eat had they opportunity,
and they went away to a desert place, in the boat, by themselves.
And the multitudes saw them going away, and many recognised him, and by land from all the cities they ran thither, and went before them, and came together to him,
and having come forth, Jesus saw a great multitude, and was moved with compassion on them, that they were as sheep not having a shepherd, and he began to teach many things.
And now the hour being advanced, his disciples having come near to him, say, — 'The place is desolate, and the hour is now advanced,
let them away, that, having gone away to the surrounding fields and villages, they may buy to themselves loaves, for what they may eat they have not.'
And he answering said to them, 'Give ye them to eat,' and they say to him, 'Having gone away, may we buy two hundred denaries' worth of loaves, and give to them to eat?'
And he saith to them, 'How many loaves have ye? go and see;' and having known, they say, 'Five, and two fishes.'
And he commanded them to make all recline in companies upon the green grass,
and they sat down in squares, by hundreds, and by fifties.
And having taken the five loaves and the two fishes, having looked up to the heaven, he blessed, and brake the loaves, and was giving to his disciples, that they may set before them, and the two fishes divided he to all,
and they did all eat, and were filled,
and they took up of broken pieces twelve hand-baskets full, and of the fishes,
and those eating of the loaves were about five thousand men.
And immediately he constrained his disciples to go into the boat, and to go before to the other side, unto Bethsaida, till he may let the multitude away,
and having taken leave of them, he went away to the mountain to pray.
And evening having come, the boat was in the midst of the sea, and he alone upon the land;
and he saw them harassed in the rowing, for the wind was against them, and about the fourth watch of the night he doth come to them walking on the sea, and wished to pass by them.
And they having seen him walking on the sea, thought [it] to be an apparition, and cried out,
for they all saw him, and were troubled, and immediately he spake with them, and saith to them, 'Take courage, I am [he], be not afraid.'
And he went up unto them to the boat, and the wind lulled, and greatly out of measure were they amazed in themselves, and were wondering,
for they understood not concerning the loaves, for their heart hath been hard.
And having passed over, they came upon the land of Gennesaret, and drew to the shore,
and they having come forth out of the boat, immediately having recognised him,
having run about through all that region round about, they began upon the couches to carry about those ill, where they were hearing that he is,
and wherever he was going, to villages, or cities, or fields, in the market-places they were laying the infirm, and were calling upon him, that they may touch if it were but the fringe of his garment, and as many as were touching him were saved.
And gathered together unto him are the Pharisees, and certain of the scribes, having come from Jerusalem,
and having seen certain of his disciples with defiled hands — that is, unwashed — eating bread, they found fault;
for the Pharisees, and all the Jews, if they do not wash the hands to the wrist, do not eat, holding the tradition of the elders,
and, [coming] from the market-place, if they do not baptize themselves, they do not eat; and many other things there are that they received to hold, baptisms of cups, and pots, and brazen vessels, and couches.
Then question him do the Pharisees and the scribes, 'Wherefore do thy disciples not walk according to the tradition of the elders, but with unwashed hands do eat the bread?'
and he answering said to them — 'Well did Isaiah prophesy concerning you, hypocrites, as it hath been written, This people with the lips doth honour Me, and their heart is far from Me;
and in vain do they worship Me, teaching teachings, commands of men;
for, having put away the command of God, ye hold the tradition of men, baptisms of pots and cups; and many other such like things ye do.'
And he said to them, 'Well do ye put away the command of God that your tradition ye may keep;
for Moses said, Honour thy father and thy mother; and, He who is speaking evil of father or mother — let him die the death;
and ye say, If a man may say to father or to mother, Korban (that is, a gift), [is] whatever thou mayest be profited out of mine,
and no more do ye suffer him to do anything for his father or for his mother,
setting aside the word of God for your tradition that ye delivered; and many such like things ye do.'
And having called near all the multitude, he said to them, 'Hearken to me, ye all, and understand;
there is nothing from without the man entering into him that is able to defile him, but the things coming out from him, those are the things defiling the man.
If any hath ears to hear — let him hear.'
And when he entered into a house from the multitude, his disciples were questioning him about the simile,
and he saith to them, 'So also ye are without understanding! Do ye not perceive that nothing from without entering into the man is able to defile him?
because it doth not enter into his heart, but into the belly, and into the drain it doth go out, purifying all the meats.'
And he said — 'That which is coming out from the man, that doth defile the man;
for from within, out of the heart of men, the evil reasonings do come forth, adulteries, whoredoms, murders,
thefts, covetous desires, wickedness, deceit, arrogance, an evil eye, evil speaking, pride, foolishness;
all these evils do come forth from within, and they defile the man.'
And from thence having risen, he went away to the borders of Tyre and Sidon, and having entered into the house, he wished none to know, and he was not able to be hid,
for a woman having heard about him, whose little daughter had an unclean spirit, having come, fell at his feet, —
and the woman was a Greek, a Syro-Phenician by nation — and was asking him, that the demon he may cast forth out of her daughter.
And Jesus said to her, 'Suffer first the children to be filled, for it is not good to take the children's bread, and to cast [it] to the little dogs.'
And she answered and saith to him, 'Yes, sir; for the little dogs also under the table do eat of the children's crumbs.'
And he said to her, 'Because of this word go; the demon hath gone forth out of thy daughter;'
and having come away to her house, she found the demon gone forth, and the daughter laid upon the couch.
And again, having gone forth from the coasts of Tyre and Sidon, he came unto the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis,
and they bring to him a deaf, stuttering man, and they call on him that he may put the hand on him.
And having taken him away from the multitude by himself, he put his fingers to his ears, and having spit, he touched his tongue,
and having looked to the heaven, he sighed, and saith to him, 'Ephphatha,' that is, 'Be thou opened;'
and immediately were his ears opened, and the string of his tongue was loosed, and he was speaking plain.
And he charged them that they may tell no one, but the more he was charging them, the more abundantly they were proclaiming [it],
and they were being beyond measure astonished, saying, 'Well hath he done all things; both the deaf he doth make to hear, and the dumb to speak.'
In those days the multitude being very great, and not having what they may eat, Jesus having called near his disciples, saith to them,
'I have compassion upon the multitude, because now three days they do continue with me, and they have not what they may eat;
and if I shall let them away fasting to their home, they will faint in the way, for certain of them are come from far.'
And his disciples answered him, 'Whence shall any one be able these here to feed with bread in a wilderness?'
And he was questioning them, 'How many loaves have ye?' and they said, 'Seven.'
And he commanded the multitude to sit down upon the ground, and having taken the seven loaves, having given thanks, he brake, and was giving to his disciples that they may set before [them]; and they did set before the multitude.
And they had a few small fishes, and having blessed, he said to set them also before [them];
and they did eat and were filled, and they took up that which was over of broken pieces — seven baskets;
and those eating were about four thousand. And he let them away,
and immediately having entered into the boat with his disciples, he came to the parts of Dalmanutha,
and the Pharisees came forth, and began to dispute with him, seeking from him a sign from the heaven, tempting him;
and having sighed deeply in his spirit, he saith, 'Why doth this generation seek after a sign? Verily I say to you, no sign shall be given to this generation.'
And having left them, having entered again into the boat, he went away to the other side;
and they forgot to take loaves, and except one loaf they had nothing with them in the boat,
and he was charging them, saying, 'Take heed, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the leaven of Herod,'
and they were reasoning with one another, saying — 'Because we have no loaves.'
And Jesus having known, saith to them, 'Why do ye reason, because ye have no loaves? do ye not yet perceive, nor understand, yet have ye your heart hardened?
Having eyes, do ye not see? and having ears, do ye not hear? and do ye not remember?
When the five loaves I did brake to the five thousand, how many hand-baskets full of broken pieces took ye up?' they say to him, 'Twelve.'
'And when the seven to the four thousand, how many hand-baskets full of broken pieces took ye up?' and they said, 'Seven.'
And he said to them, 'How do ye not understand?'
And he cometh to Bethsaida, and they bring to him one blind, and call upon him that he may touch him,
and having taken the hand of the blind man, he led him forth without the village, and having spit on his eyes, having put [his] hands on him, he was questioning him if he doth behold anything:
and he, having looked up, said, 'I behold men, as I see trees, walking.'
Afterwards again he put [his] hands on his eyes, and made him look up, and he was restored, and discerned all things clearly,
and he sent him away to his house, saying, 'Neither to the village mayest thou go, nor tell [it] to any in the village.'
And Jesus went forth, and his disciples, to the villages of Caesarea Philippi, and in the way he was questioning his disciples, saying to them, 'Who do men say me to be?'
And they answered, 'John the Baptist, and others Elijah, but others one of the prophets.'
And he saith to them, 'And ye — who do ye say me to be?' and Peter answering saith to him, 'Thou art the Christ.'
And he strictly charged them that they may tell no one about it,
and began to teach them, that it behoveth the Son of Man to suffer many things, and to be rejected by the elders, and chief priests, and scribes, and to be killed, and after three days to rise again;
and openly he was speaking the word. And Peter having taken him aside, began to rebuke him,
and he, having turned, and having looked on his disciples, rebuked Peter, saying, 'Get behind me, Adversary, because thou dost not mind the things of God, but the things of men.'
And having called near the multitude, with his disciples, he said to them, 'Whoever doth will to come after me — let him disown himself, and take up his cross, and follow me;
for whoever may will to save his life shall lose it; and whoever may lose his life for my sake and for the good news' sake, he shall save it;
for what shall it profit a man, if he may gain the whole world, and forfeit his life?
Or what shall a man give as an exchange for his life?
for whoever may be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of Man also shall be ashamed of him, when he may come in the glory of his Father, with the holy messengers.'
And he said to them, 'Verily I say to you, That there are certain of those standing here, who may not taste of death till they see the reign of God having come in power.'
And after six days doth Jesus take Peter, and James, and John, and bringeth them up to a high mount by themselves, alone, and he was transfigured before them,
and his garments became glittering, white exceedingly, as snow, so as a fuller upon the earth is not able to whiten [them].
And there appeared to them Elijah with Moses, and they were talking with Jesus.
And Peter answering saith to Jesus, 'Rabbi, it is good to us to be here; and we may make three booths, for thee one, and for Moses one, and for Elijah one:'
for he was not knowing what he might say, for they were greatly afraid.
And there came a cloud overshadowing them, and there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, 'This is My Son — the Beloved, hear ye him;'
and suddenly, having looked around, they saw no one any more, but Jesus only with themselves.
And as they are coming down from the mount, he charged them that they may declare to no one the things that they saw, except when the Son of Man may rise out of the dead;
and the thing they kept to themselves, questioning together what the rising out of the dead is.
And they were questioning him, saying, that the scribes say that Elijah it behoveth to come first.
And he answering said to them, 'Elijah indeed, having come first, doth restore all things; and how hath it been written concerning the Son of Man, that many things he may suffer, and be set at nought?
But I say to you, That also Elijah hath come, and they did to him what they willed, as it hath been written of him.'
And having come unto the disciples, he saw a great multitude about them, and scribes questioning with them,
and immediately, all the multitude having seen him, were amazed, and running near, were saluting him.
And he questioned the scribes, 'What dispute ye with them?'
and one out of the multitude answering said, 'Teacher, I brought my son unto thee, having a dumb spirit;
and wherever it doth seize him, it doth tear him, and he foameth, and gnasheth his teeth, and pineth away; and I spake to thy disciples that they may cast it out, and they were not able.'
And he answering him, said, 'O generation unbelieving, till when shall I be with you? till when shall I suffer you? bring him unto me;'
and they brought him unto him, and he having seen him, immediately the spirit tare him, and he, having fallen upon the earth, was wallowing — foaming.
And he questioned his father, 'How long time is it since this came to him?' and he said, 'From childhood,
and many times also it cast him into fire, and into water, that it might destroy him; but if thou art able to do anything, help us, having compassion on us.'
And Jesus said to him, 'If thou art able to believe! all things are possible to the one that is believing;'
and immediately the father of the child, having cried out, with tears said, 'I believe, sir; be helping mine unbelief.'
Jesus having seen that a multitude doth run together, rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to it, 'Spirit — dumb and deaf — I charge thee, come forth out of him, and no more thou mayest enter into him;'
and having cried, and rent him much, it came forth, and he became as dead, so that many said that he was dead,
but Jesus, having taken him by the hand, lifted him up, and he arose.
And he having come into the house, his disciples were questioning him by himself — 'Why were we not able to cast it forth?'
And he said to them, 'This kind is able to come forth with nothing except with prayer and fasting.'
And having gone forth thence, they were passing through Galilee, and he did not wish that any may know,
for he was teaching his disciples, and he said to them, 'The Son of Man is being delivered to the hands of men, and they shall kill him, and having been killed the third day he shall rise,'
but they were not understanding the saying, and they were afraid to question him.
And he came to Capernaum, and being in the house, he was questioning them, 'What were ye reasoning in the way among yourselves?'
and they were silent, for with one another they did reason in the way who is greater;
and having sat down he called the twelve, and he saith to them, 'If any doth will to be first, he shall be last of all, and minister of all.'
And having taken a child, he set him in the midst of them, and having taken him in his arms, said to them,
'Whoever may receive one of such children in my name, doth receive me, and whoever may receive me, doth not receive me, but Him who sent me.'
And John did answer him, saying, 'Teacher, we saw a certain one in thy name casting out demons, who doth not follow us, and we forbade him, because he doth not follow us.'
And Jesus said, 'Forbid him not, for there is no one who shall do a mighty work in my name, and shall be able readily to speak evil of me:
for he who is not against us is for us;
for whoever may give you to drink a cup of water in my name, because ye are Christ's, verily I say to you, he may not lose his reward;
and whoever may cause to stumble one of the little ones believing in me, better is it for him if a millstone is hanged about his neck, and he hath been cast into the sea.
'And if thy hand may cause thee to stumble, cut it off; it is better for thee maimed to enter into the life, than having the two hands, to go away to the gehenna, to the fire — the unquenchable —
where their worm is not dying, and the fire is not being quenched.
'And if thy foot may cause thee to stumble, cut it off; it is better for thee to enter into the life lame, than having the two feet to be cast to the gehenna, to the fire — the unquenchable —
where their worm is not dying, and the fire is not being quenched.
And if thine eye may cause thee to stumble, cast it out; it is better for thee one-eyed to enter into the reign of God, than having two eyes, to be cast to the gehenna of the fire —
where their worm is not dying, and the fire is not being quenched;
for every one with fire shall be salted, and every sacrifice with salt shall be salted.
The salt [is] good, but if the salt may become saltless, in what will ye season [it]? Have in yourselves salt, and have peace in one another.'
And having risen thence, he doth come to the coasts of Judea, through the other side of the Jordan, and again do multitudes come together unto him, and, as he had been accustomed, again he was teaching them.
And the Pharisees, having come near, questioned him, if it is lawful for a husband to put away a wife, tempting him,
and he answering said to them, 'What did Moses command you?'
and they said, 'Moses suffered to write a bill of divorce, and to put away.'
And Jesus answering said to them, 'For the stiffness of your heart he wrote you this command,
but from the beginning of the creation, a male and a female God did make them;
on this account shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall cleave unto his wife,
and they shall be — the two — for one flesh; so that they are no more two, but one flesh;
what therefore God did join together, let not man put asunder.'
And in the house again his disciples of the same thing questioned him,
and he saith to them, 'Whoever may put away his wife, and may marry another, doth commit adultery against her;
and if a woman may put away her husband, and is married to another, she committeth adultery.'
And they were bringing to him children, that he might touch them, and the disciples were rebuking those bringing them,
and Jesus having seen, was much displeased, and he said to them, 'Suffer the children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the reign of God;
verily I say to you, whoever may not receive the reign of God, as a child — he may not enter into it;'
and having taken them in his arms, having put [his] hands upon them, he was blessing them.
And as he is going forth into the way, one having run and having kneeled to him, was questioning him, 'Good teacher, what may I do, that life age-during I may inherit?'
And Jesus said to him, 'Why me dost thou call good? no one [is] good except One — God;
the commands thou hast known: Thou mayest not commit adultery, Thou mayest do no murder, Thou mayest not steal, Thou mayest not bear false witness, Thou mayest not defraud, Honour thy father and mother.'
And he answering said to him, 'Teacher, all these did I keep from my youth.'
And Jesus having looked upon him, did love him, and said to him, 'One thing thou dost lack; go away, whatever thou hast — sell, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven, and come, be following me, having taken up the cross.'
And he — gloomy at the word — went away sorrowing, for he was having many possessions.
And Jesus having looked round, saith to his disciples, 'How hardly shall they who have riches enter into the reign of God!'
And the disciples were astonished at his words, and Jesus again answering saith to them, 'Children, how hard is it to those trusting on the riches to enter into the reign of God!
It is easier for a camel through the eye of the needle to enter, than for a rich man to enter into the reign of God.'
And they were astonished beyond measure, saying unto themselves, 'And who is able to be saved?'
And Jesus, having looked upon them, saith, 'With men it is impossible, but not with God; for all things are possible with God.'
And Peter began to say to him, 'Lo, we left all, and we followed thee.'
And Jesus answering said, 'Verily I say to you, there is no one who left house, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or fields, for my sake, and for the good news',
who may not receive an hundredfold now in this time, houses, and brothers, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and fields, with persecutions, and in the age that is coming, life age-during;
and many first shall be last, and the last first.'
And they were in the way going up to Jerusalem, and Jesus was going before them, and they were amazed, and following they were afraid. And having again taken the twelve, he began to tell them the things about to happen to him,
— 'Lo, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man shall be delivered to the chief priests, and to the scribes, and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him to the nations,
and they shall mock him, and scourge him, and spit on him, and kill him, and the third day he shall rise again.'
And there come near to him James and John, the sons of Zebedee, saying, 'Teacher, we wish that whatever we may ask for ourselves, thou mayest do for us;'
and he said to them, 'What do ye wish me to do for you?'
and they said to him, 'Grant to us that, one on thy right hand and one on thy left, we may sit in thy glory;'
and Jesus said to them, 'Ye have not known what ye ask; are ye able to drink of the cup that I drink of, and with the baptism that I am baptized with — to be baptized?'
And they said to him, 'We are able;' and Jesus said to them, 'Of the cup indeed that I drink of, ye shall drink, and with the baptism that I am baptized with, ye shall be baptized;
but to sit on my right and on my left, is not mine to give, but — to those for whom it hath been prepared.'
And the ten having heard, began to be much displeased at James and John,
but Jesus having called them near, saith to them, 'Ye have known that they who are considered to rule the nations do exercise lordship over them, and their great ones do exercise authority upon them;
but not so shall it be among you; but whoever may will to become great among you, he shall be your minister,
and whoever of you may will to become first, he shall be servant of all;
for even the Son of Man came not to be ministered to, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.'
And they come to Jericho, and as he is going forth from Jericho, with his disciples and a great multitude, a son of Timaeus — Bartimaeus the blind — was sitting beside the way begging,
and having heard that it is Jesus the Nazarene, he began to cry out, and to say, 'The Son of David — Jesus! deal kindly with me;'
and many were rebuking him, that he might keep silent, but the more abundantly he cried out, 'Son of David, deal kindly with me.'
And Jesus having stood, he commanded him to be called, and they call the blind man, saying to him, 'Take courage, rise, he doth call thee;'
and he, having cast away his garment, having risen, did come unto Jesus.
And answering, Jesus saith to him, 'What wilt thou I may do to thee?' and the blind man said to him, 'Rabboni, that I may see again;'
and Jesus said to him, 'Go, thy faith hath saved thee:' and immediately he saw again, and was following Jesus in the way.
And when they come nigh to Jerusalem, to Bethphage, and Bethany, unto the mount of the Olives, he sendeth forth two of his disciples,
and saith to them, 'Go away to the village that is over-against you, and immediately, entering into it, ye shall find a colt tied, on which no one of men hath sat, having loosed it, bring [it]:
and if any one may say to you, Why do ye this? say ye that the lord hath need of it, and immediately he will send it hither.'
And they went away, and found the colt tied at the door without, by the two ways, and they loose it,
and certain of those standing there said to them, 'What do ye — loosing the colt?'
and they said to them as Jesus commanded, and they suffered them.
And they brought the colt unto Jesus, and did cast upon it their garments, and he sat upon it,
and many did spread their garments in the way, and others were cutting down branches from the trees, and were strewing in the way.
And those going before and those following were crying out, saying, 'Hosanna! blessed [is] he who is coming in the name of the Lord;
blessed is the coming reign, in the name of the Lord, of our father David; Hosanna in the highest.'
And Jesus entered into Jerusalem, and into the temple, and having looked round on all things, it being now evening, he went forth to Bethany with the twelve.
And on the morrow, they having come forth from Bethany, he hungered,
and having seen a fig-tree afar off having leaves, he came, if perhaps he shall find anything in it, and having come to it, he found nothing except leaves, for it was not a time of figs,
and Jesus answering said to it, 'No more from thee — to the age — may any eat fruit;' and his disciples were hearing.
And they come to Jerusalem, and Jesus having gone into the temple, began to cast forth those selling and buying in the temple, and the tables of the money-changers and the seats of those selling the doves, he overthrew,
and he did not suffer that any might bear a vessel through the temple,
and he was teaching, saying to them, 'Hath it not been written — My house a house of prayer shall be called for all the nations, and ye did make it a den of robbers?'
And the scribes and the chief priests heard, and they were seeking how they shall destroy him, for they were afraid of him, because all the multitude was astonished at his teaching;
and when evening came, he was going forth without the city.
And in the morning, passing by, they saw the fig-tree having been dried up from the roots,
and Peter having remembered saith to him, 'Rabbi, lo, the fig-tree that thou didst curse is dried up.'
And Jesus answering saith to them, 'Have faith of God;
for verily I say to you, that whoever may say to this mount, Be taken up, and be cast into the sea, and may not doubt in his heart, but may believe that the things that he saith do come to pass, it shall be to him whatever he may say.
Because of this I say to you, all whatever — praying — ye do ask, believe that ye receive, and it shall be to you.
'And whenever ye may stand praying, forgive, if ye have anything against any one, that your Father also who is in the heavens may forgive you your trespasses;
and, if ye do not forgive, neither will your Father who is in the heavens forgive your trespasses.'
And they come again to Jerusalem, and in the temple, as he is walking, there come unto him the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders,
and they say to him, 'By what authority dost thou these things? and who gave thee this authority that these things thou mayest do?'
And Jesus answering said to them, 'I will question you — I also — one word; and answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do these things;
the baptism of John — from heaven was it? or from men? answer me.'
And they were reasoning with themselves, saying, 'If we may say, From heaven, he will say, Wherefore, then, did ye not believe him?
But if we may say, From men,' — they were fearing the people, for all were holding John that he was indeed a prophet;
and answering they say to Jesus, 'We have not known;' and Jesus answering saith to them, 'Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.'
And he began to speak to them in similes: 'A man planted a vineyard, and put a hedge around, and digged an under-wine-vat, and built a tower, and gave it out to husbandmen, and went abroad;
and he sent unto the husbandmen at the due time a servant, that from the husbandmen he may receive from the fruit of the vineyard,
and they, having taken him, did severely beat [him], and did send him away empty.
'And again he sent unto them another servant, and at that one having cast stones, they wounded [him] in the head, and sent away — dishonoured.
'And again he sent another, and that one they killed; and many others, some beating, and some killing.
'Having yet therefore one son — his beloved — he sent also him unto them last, saying — They will reverence my son;
and those husbandmen said among themselves — This is the heir, come, we may kill him, and ours shall be the inheritance;
and having taken him, they did kill, and cast [him] forth without the vineyard.
'What therefore shall the lord of the vineyard do? he will come and destroy the husbandmen, and will give the vineyard to others.
And this Writing did ye not read: A stone that the builders rejected, it did become the head of a corner:
from the Lord was this, and it is wonderful in our eyes.'
And they were seeking to lay hold on him, and they feared the multitude, for they knew that against them he spake the simile, and having left him, they went away;
and they send unto him certain of the Pharisees and of the Herodians, that they may ensnare him in discourse,
and they having come, say to him, 'Teacher, we have known that thou art true, and thou art not caring for any one, for thou dost not look to the face of men, but in truth the way of God dost teach; is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar or not? may we give, or may we not give?'
And he, knowing their hypocrisy, said to them, 'Why me do ye tempt? bring me a denary, that I may see;'
and they brought, and he saith to them, 'Whose [is] this image, and the inscription?' and they said to him, 'Caesar's;'
and Jesus answering said to them, 'Give back the things of Caesar to Caesar, and the things of God to God;' and they did wonder at him.
And the Sadducees come unto him, who say there is not a rising again, and they questioned him, saying,
'Teacher, Moses wrote to us, that if any one's brother may die, and may leave a wife, and may leave no children, that his brother may take his wife, and raise up seed to his brother.
'There were then seven brothers, and the first took a wife, and dying, he left no seed;
and the second took her, and died, neither left he seed, and the third in like manner,
and the seven took her, and left no seed, last of all died also the woman;
in the rising again, then, whenever they may rise, of which of them shall she be wife — for the seven had her as wife?'
And Jesus answering said to them, 'Do ye not because of this go astray, not knowing the Writings, nor the power of God?
for when they may rise out of the dead, they neither marry nor are they given in marriage, but are as messengers who are in the heavens.
'And concerning the dead, that they rise: have ye not read in the Book of Moses (at The Bush), how God spake to him, saying, I [am] the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob;
he is not the God of dead men, but a God of living men; ye then go greatly astray.'
And one of the scribes having come near, having heard them disputing, knowing that he answered them well, questioned him, 'Which is the first command of all?'
and Jesus answered him — 'The first of all the commands [is], Hear, O Israel, the Lord is our God, the Lord is one;
and thou shalt love the Lord thy God out of all thy heart, and out of thy soul, and out of all thine understanding, and out of all thy strength — this [is] the first command;
and the second [is] like [it], this, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself; — greater than these there is no other command.'
And the scribe said to him, 'Well, Teacher, in truth thou hast spoken that there is one God, and there is none other but He;
and to love Him out of all the heart, and out of all the understanding, and out of all the soul, and out of all the strength, and to love one's neighbour as one's self, is more than all the whole burnt-offerings and the sacrifices.'
And Jesus, having seen him that he answered with understanding, said to him, 'Thou art not far from the reign of God;' and no one any more durst question him.
And Jesus answering said, teaching in the temple, 'How say the scribes that the Christ is son of David?
for David himself said in the Holy Spirit, The Lord said to my lord, Sit thou on My right hand, till I place thine enemies — thy footstool;
therefore David himself saith of him Lord, and whence is he his son?' And the great multitude were hearing him gladly,
and he was saying to them in his teaching, 'Beware of the scribes, who will in long robes to walk, and love salutations in the market-places,
and first seats in the synagogues, and first couches in suppers,
who are devouring the widows' houses, and for a pretence are making long prayers; these shall receive more abundant judgment.'
And Jesus having sat down over-against the treasury, was beholding how the multitude do put brass into the treasury, and many rich were putting in much,
and having come, a poor widow did put in two mites, which are a farthing.
And having called near his disciples, he saith to them, 'Verily I say to you, that this poor widow hath put in more than all those putting into the treasury;
for all, out of their abundance, put in, but she, out of her want, all that she had put in — all her living.'
And as he is going forth out of the temple, one of his disciples saith to him, 'Teacher, see! what stones! and what buildings!'
and Jesus answering said to him, 'Seest thou these great buildings? there may not be left a stone upon a stone, that may not be thrown down.'
And as he is sitting at the mount of the Olives, over-against the temple, Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, were questioning him by himself,
'Tell us when these things shall be? and what [is] the sign when all these may be about to be fulfilled?'
And Jesus answering them, began to say, 'Take heed lest any one may lead you astray,
for many shall come in my name, saying — I am [he], and many they shall lead astray;
and when ye may hear of wars and reports of wars, be not troubled, for these behove to be, but the end [is] not yet;
for nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and there shall be earthquakes in divers places, and there shall be famines and troubles; beginnings of sorrows [are] these.
'And take ye heed to yourselves, for they shall deliver you up to sanhedrims, and to synagogues, ye shall be beaten, and before governors and kings ye shall be set for my sake, for a testimony to them;
and to all the nations it behoveth first that the good news be proclaimed.
'And when they may lead you, delivering up, be not anxious beforehand what ye may speak, nor premeditate, but whatever may be given to you in that hour, that speak ye, for it is not ye who are speaking, but the Holy Spirit.
'And brother shall deliver up brother to death, and father child, and children shall rise up against parents, and shall put them to death,
and ye shall be hated by all because of my name, but he who hath endured to the end — he shall be saved.
'And when ye may see the abomination of the desolation, that was spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not, (whoever is reading let him understand), then those in Judea, let them flee to the mountains;
and he upon the house-top, let him not come down to the house, nor come in to take anything out of his house;
and he who is in the field, let him not turn to the things behind, to take up his garment.
'And woe to those with child, and to those giving suck, in those days;
and pray ye that your flight may not be in winter,
for those days shall be tribulation, such as hath not been from the beginning of the creation that God created, till now, and may not be;
and if the Lord did not shorten the days, no flesh had been saved; but because of the chosen, whom He did choose to Himself, He did shorten the days.
'And then, if any may say to you, Lo, here [is] the Christ, or, Lo, there, ye may not believe;
for there shall rise false Christs and false prophets, and they shall give signs and wonders, to seduce, if possible, also the chosen;
and ye, take heed; lo, I have foretold you all things.
'But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light,
and the stars of the heaven shall be falling, and the powers that are in the heavens shall be shaken.
'And then they shall see the Son of Man coming in clouds with much power and glory,
and then he shall send his messengers, and gather together his chosen from the four winds, from the end of the earth unto the end of heaven.
'And from the fig-tree learn ye the simile: when the branch may already become tender, and may put forth the leaves, ye know that nigh is the summer;
so ye, also, when these ye may see coming to pass, ye know that it is nigh, at the doors.
Verily I say to you, that this generation may not pass away till all these things may come to pass;
the heaven and the earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.
'And concerning that day and the hour no one hath known — not even the messengers who are in the heaven, not even the Son — except the Father.
Take heed, watch and pray, for ye have not known when the time is;
as a man who is gone abroad, having left his house, and given to his servants the authority, and to each one his work, did command also the porter that he may watch;
watch ye, therefore, for ye have not known when the lord of the house doth come, at even, or at midnight, or at cock-crowing, or at the morning;
lest, having come suddenly, he may find you sleeping;
and what I say to you, I say to all, Watch.'
And the passover and the unleavened food were after two days, and the chief priests and the scribes were seeking how, by guile, having taken hold of him, they might kill him;
and they said, 'Not in the feast, lest there shall be a tumult of the people.'
And he, being in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, at his reclining (at meat), there came a woman having an alabaster box of ointment, of spikenard, very precious, and having broken the alabaster box, did pour on his head;
and there were certain much displeased within themselves, and saying, 'For what hath this waste of the ointment been made?
for this could have been sold for more than three hundred denaries, and given to the poor;' and they were murmuring at her.
And Jesus said, 'Let her alone; why are ye giving her trouble? a good work she wrought on me;
for the poor always ye have with you, and whenever ye may will ye are able to do them good, but me ye have not always;
what she could she did, she anticipated to anoint my body for the embalming.
Verily I say to you, wherever this good news may be proclaimed in the whole world, what also this woman did shall be spoken of — for a memorial of her.'
And Judas the Iscariot, one of the twelve, went away unto the chief priests that he might deliver him up to them,
and having heard, they were glad, and promised to give him money, and he was seeking how, conveniently, he might deliver him up.
And the first day of the unleavened food, when they were killing the passover, his disciples say to him, 'Where wilt thou, [that,] having gone, we may prepare, that thou mayest eat the passover?'
And he sendeth forth two of his disciples, and saith to them, 'Go ye away to the city, and there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water, follow him;
and wherever he may go in, say ye to the master of the house — The Teacher saith, Where is the guest-chamber, where the passover, with my disciples, I may eat?
and he will shew you a large upper room, furnished, prepared — there make ready for us.'
And his disciples went forth, and came to the city, and found as he said to them, and they made ready the passover.
And evening having come, he cometh with the twelve,
and as they are reclining, and eating, Jesus said, 'Verily I say to you — one of you, who is eating with me — shall deliver me up.'
And they began to be sorrowful, and to say to him, one by one, 'Is it I?' and another, 'Is it I?'
And he answering said to them, 'One of the twelve who is dipping with me in the dish;
the Son of Man doth indeed go, as it hath been written concerning him, but woe to that man through whom the Son of Man is delivered up; good were it to him if that man had not been born.'
And as they are eating, Jesus having taken bread, having blessed, brake, and gave to them, and said, 'Take, eat; this is my body.'
And having taken the cup, having given thanks, he gave to them, and they drank of it — all;
and he said to them, 'This is my blood of the new covenant, which for many is being poured out;
verily I say to you, that no more may I drink of the produce of the vine till that day when I may drink it new in the reign of God.'
And having sung an hymn, they went forth to the mount of the Olives,
and Jesus saith to them — 'All ye shall be stumbled at me this night, because it hath been written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered abroad,
but after my having risen I will go before you to Galilee.'
And Peter said to him, 'And if all shall be stumbled, yet not I;'
And Jesus said to him, 'Verily I say to thee, that to-day, this night, before a cock shall crow twice, thrice thou shalt deny me.'
And he spake the more vehemently, 'If it may be necessary for me to die with thee — I will in no wise deny thee;' and in like manner also said they all.
And they come to a spot, the name of which [is] Gethsemane, and he saith to his disciples, 'Sit ye here till I may pray;'
and he taketh Peter, and James, and John with him, and began to be amazed, and to be very heavy,
and he saith to them, 'Exceeding sorrowful is my soul — to death; remain here, and watch.'
And having gone forward a little, he fell upon the earth, and was praying, that, if it be possible the hour may pass from him,
and he said, 'Abba, Father; all things are possible to Thee; make this cup pass from me; but, not what I will, but what Thou.'
And he cometh, and findeth them sleeping, and saith to Peter, 'Simon, thou dost sleep! thou wast not able to watch one hour!
Watch ye and pray, that ye may not enter into temptation; the spirit indeed is forward, but the flesh weak.'
And again having gone away, he prayed, the same word saying;
and having returned, he found them again sleeping, for their eyes were heavy, and they had not known what they might answer him.
And he cometh the third time, and saith to them, 'Sleep on henceforth, and rest — it is over; the hour did come; lo, the Son of Man is delivered up to the hands of the sinful;
rise, we may go, lo, he who is delivering me up hath come nigh.'
And immediately — while he is yet speaking — cometh near Judas, one of the twelve, and with him a great multitude, with swords and sticks, from the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders;
and he who is delivering him up had given a token to them, saying, 'Whomsoever I shall kiss, he it is, lay hold on him, and lead him away safely,'
and having come, immediately, having gone near him, he saith, 'Rabbi, Rabbi,' and kissed him.
And they laid on him their hands, and kept hold on him;
and a certain one of those standing by, having drawn the sword, struck the servant of the chief priest, and took off his ear.
And Jesus answering said to them, 'As against a robber ye came out, with swords and sticks, to take me!
daily I was with you in the temple teaching, and ye did not lay hold on me — but that the Writings may be fulfilled.'
And having left him they all fled;
and a certain young man was following him, having put a linen cloth about [his] naked body, and the young men lay hold on him,
and he, having left the linen cloth, did flee from them naked.
And they led away Jesus unto the chief priest, and come together to him do all the chief priests, and the elders, and the scribes;
and Peter afar off did follow him, to the inside of the hall of the chief priest, and he was sitting with the officers, and warming himself near the fire.
And the chief priests and all the sanhedrim were seeking against Jesus testimony — to put him to death, and they were not finding,
for many were bearing false testimony against him, and their testimonies were not alike.
And certain having risen up, were bearing false testimony against him, saying —
'We heard him saying — I will throw down this sanctuary made with hands, and by three days, another made without hands I will build;'
and neither so was their testimony alike.
And the chief priest, having risen up in the midst, questioned Jesus, saying, 'Thou dost not answer anything! what do these testify against thee?'
and he was keeping silent, and did not answer anything. Again the chief priest was questioning him, and saith to him, 'Art thou the Christ — the Son of the Blessed?'
and Jesus said, 'I am; and ye shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the power, and coming with the clouds, of the heaven.'
And the chief priest, having rent his garments, saith, 'What need have we yet of witnesses?
Ye heard the evil speaking, what appeareth to you?' and they all condemned him to be worthy of death,
and certain began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to buffet him, and to say to him, 'Prophesy;' and the officers were striking him with their palms.
And Peter being in the hall beneath, there doth come one of the maids of the chief priest,
and having seen Peter warming himself, having looked on him, she said, 'And thou wast with Jesus of Nazareth!'
and he denied, saying, 'I have not known [him], neither do I understand what thou sayest;' and he went forth without to the porch, and a cock crew.
And the maid having seen him again, began to say to those standing near — 'This is of them;'
and he was again denying. And after a little again, those standing near said to Peter, 'Truly thou art of them, for thou also art a Galilean, and thy speech is alike;'
and he began to anathematize, and to swear — 'I have not known this man of whom ye speak;'
and a second time a cock crew, and Peter remembered the saying that Jesus said to him — 'Before a cock crow twice, thou mayest deny me thrice;' and having thought thereon — he was weeping.
And immediately, in the morning, the chief priests having made a consultation, with the elders, and scribes, and the whole sanhedrim, having bound Jesus, did lead away, and delivered [him] to Pilate;
and Pilate questioned him, 'Art thou the king of the Jews?' and he answering said to him, 'Thou dost say [it].'
And the chief priests were accusing him of many things, [but he answered nothing.]
And Pilate again questioned him, saying, 'Thou dost not answer anything! lo, how many things they do testify against thee!'
and Jesus did no more answer anything, so that Pilate wondered.
And at every feast he was releasing to them one prisoner, whomsoever they were asking;
and there was [one] named Barabbas, bound with those making insurrection with him, who had in the insurrection committed murder.
And the multitude having cried out, began to ask for themselves as he was always doing to them,
and Pilate answered them, saying, 'Will ye [that] I shall release to you the king of the Jews?'
for he knew that because of envy the chief priests had delivered him up;
and the chief priests did move the multitude, that he might rather release Barabbas to them.
And Pilate answering, again said to them, 'What, then, will ye [that] I shall do to him whom ye call king of the Jews?'
and they again cried out, 'Crucify him.'
And Pilate said to them, 'Why — what evil did he?' and they cried out the more vehemently, 'Crucify him;'
and Pilate, wishing to content the multitude, released to them Barabbas, and delivered up Jesus — having scourged [him] — that he might be crucified.
And the soldiers led him away into the hall, which is Praetorium, and call together the whole band,
and clothe him with purple, and having plaited a crown of thorns, they put [it] on him,
and began to salute him, 'Hail, King of the Jews.'
And they were smiting him on the head with a reed, and were spitting on him, and having bent the knee, were bowing to him,
and when they [had] mocked him, they took the purple from off him, and clothed him in his own garments, and they led him forth, that they may crucify him.
And they impress a certain one passing by — Simon, a Cyrenian, coming from the field, the father of Alexander and Rufus — that he may bear his cross,
and they bring him to the place Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, 'Place of a skull;'
and they were giving him to drink wine mingled with myrrh, and he did not receive.
And having crucified him, they were dividing his garments, casting a lot upon them, what each may take;
and it was the third hour, and they crucified him;
and the inscription of his accusation was written above — 'The King of the Jews.'
And with him they crucify two robbers, one on the right hand, and one on his left,
and the Writing was fulfilled that is saying, 'And with lawless ones he was numbered.'
And those passing by were speaking evil of him, shaking their heads, and saying, 'Ah, the thrower down of the sanctuary, and in three days the builder!
save thyself, and come down from the cross!'
And in like manner also the chief priests, mocking with one another, with the scribes, said, 'Others he saved; himself he is not able to save.
The Christ! the king of Israel — let him come down now from the cross, that we may see and believe;' and those crucified with him were reproaching him.
And the sixth hour having come, darkness came over the whole land till the ninth hour,
and at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a great voice, saying, 'Eloi, Eloi, lamma sabachthani?' which is, being interpreted, 'My God, my God, why didst Thou forsake me?'
And certain of those standing by, having heard, said, 'Lo, Elijah he doth call;'
and one having run, and having filled a spunge with vinegar, having put [it] also on a reed, was giving him to drink, saying, 'Let alone, let us see if Elijah doth come to take him down.'
And Jesus having uttered a loud cry, yielded the spirit,
and the veil of the sanctuary was rent in two, from top to bottom,
and the centurion who was standing over-against him, having seen that, having so cried out, he yielded the spirit, said, 'Truly this man was Son of God.'
And there were also women afar off beholding, among whom was also Mary the Magdalene, and Mary of James the less, and of Joses, and Salome,
(who also, when he was in Galilee, were following him, and were ministering to him,) and many other women who came up with him to Jerusalem.
And now evening having come, seeing it was the preparation, that is, the fore-sabbath,
Joseph of Arimathea, an honourable counsellor, who also himself was waiting for the reign of God, came, boldly entered in unto Pilate, and asked the body of Jesus.
And Pilate wondered if he were already dead, and having called near the centurion, did question him if he were long dead,
and having known [it] from the centurion, he granted the body to Joseph.
And he, having brought fine linen, and having taken him down, wrapped him in the linen, and laid him in a sepulchre that had been hewn out of a rock, and he rolled a stone unto the door of the sepulchre,
and Mary the Magdalene, and Mary of Joses, were beholding where he is laid.
And the sabbath having past, Mary the Magdalene, and Mary of James, and Salome, bought spices, that having come, they may anoint him,
and early in the morning of the first of the sabbaths, they come unto the sepulchre, at the rising of the sun,
and they said among themselves, 'Who shall roll away for us the stone out of the door of the sepulchre?'
And having looked, they see that the stone hath been rolled away — for it was very great,
and having entered into the sepulchre, they saw a young man sitting on the right hand, arrayed in a long white robe, and they were amazed.
And he saith to them, 'Be not amazed, ye seek Jesus the Nazarene, the crucified: he did rise — he is not here; lo, the place where they laid him!
and go, say to his disciples, and Peter, that he doth go before you to Galilee; there ye shall see him, as he said to you.'
And, having come forth quickly, they fled from the sepulchre, and trembling and amazement had seized them, and to no one said they anything, for they were afraid.
And he, having risen in the morning of the first of the sabbaths, did appear first to Mary the Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven demons;
she having gone, told those who had been with him, mourning and weeping;
and they, having heard that he is alive, and was seen by her, did not believe.
And after these things, to two of them, as they are going into a field, walking, he was manifested in another form,
and they having gone, told to the rest; not even them did they believe.
Afterwards, as they are reclining (at meat), he was manifested to the eleven, and did reproach their unbelief and stiffness of heart, because they believed not those having seen him being raised;
and he said to them, 'Having gone to all the world, proclaim the good news to all the creation;
he who hath believed, and hath been baptized, shall be saved; and he who hath not believed, shall be condemned.
'And signs shall accompany those believing these things; in my name demons they shall cast out; with new tongues they shall speak;
serpents they shall take up; and if any deadly thing they may drink, it shall not hurt them; on the ailing they shall lay hands, and they shall be well.'
The Lord, then, indeed, after speaking to them, was received up to the heaven, and sat on the right hand of God;
and they, having gone forth, did preach everywhere, the Lord working with [them], and confirming the word, through the signs following. Amen.
Seeing that many did take in hand to set in order a narration of the matters that have been fully assured among us,
as they did deliver to us, who from the beginning became eye-witnesses, and officers of the Word, —
it seemed good also to me, having followed from the first after all things exactly, to write to thee in order, most noble Theophilus,
that thou mayest know the certainty of the things wherein thou wast instructed.
There was in the days of Herod, the king of Judea, a certain priest, by name Zacharias, of the course of Abijah, and his wife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name Elisabeth;
and they were both righteous before God, going on in all the commands and righteousnesses of the Lord blameless,
and they had no child, because that Elisabeth was barren, and both were advanced in their days.
And it came to pass, in his acting as priest, in the order of his course before God,
according to the custom of the priesthood, his lot was to make perfume, having gone into the sanctuary of the Lord,
and all the multitude of the people were praying without, at the hour of the perfume.
And there appeared to him a messenger of the Lord standing on the right side of the altar of the perfume,
and Zacharias, having seen, was troubled, and fear fell on him;
and the messenger said unto him, 'Fear not, Zacharias, for thy supplication was heard, and thy wife Elisabeth shall bear a son to thee, and thou shalt call his name John,
and there shall be joy to thee, and gladness, and many at his birth shall joy,
for he shall be great before the Lord, and wine and strong drink he may not drink, and of the Holy Spirit he shall be full, even from his mother's womb;
and many of the sons of Israel he shall turn to the Lord their God,
and he shall go before Him, in the spirit and power of Elijah, to turn hearts of fathers unto children, and disobedient ones to the wisdom of righteous ones, to make ready for the Lord, a people prepared.'
And Zacharias said unto the messenger, 'Whereby shall I know this? for I am aged, and my wife is advanced in her days?'
And the messenger answering said to him, 'I am Gabriel, who have been standing near before God, and I was sent to speak unto thee, and to proclaim these good news to thee,
and lo, thou shalt be silent, and not able to speak, till the day that these things shall come to pass, because thou didst not believe my words, that shall be fulfilled in their season.'
And the people were waiting for Zacharias, and wondering at his tarrying in the sanctuary,
and having come out, he was not able to speak to them, and they perceived that a vision he had seen in the sanctuary, and he was beckoning to them, and did remain dumb.
And it came to pass, when the days of his service were fulfilled, he went away to his house,
and after those days, his wife Elisabeth conceived, and hid herself five months, saying —
'Thus hath the Lord done to me, in days in which He looked upon [me], to take away my reproach among men.'
And in the sixth month was the messenger Gabriel sent by God, to a city of Galilee, the name of which [is] Nazareth,
to a virgin, betrothed to a man, whose name [is] Joseph, of the house of David, and the name of the virgin [is] Mary.
And the messenger having come in unto her, said, 'Hail, favoured one, the Lord [is] with thee; blessed [art] thou among women;'
and she, having seen, was troubled at his word, and was reasoning of what kind this salutation may be.
And the messenger said to her, 'Fear not, Mary, for thou hast found favour with God;
and lo, thou shalt conceive in the womb, and shalt bring forth a son, and call his name Jesus;
he shall be great, and Son of the Highest he shall be called, and the Lord God shall give him the throne of David his father,
and he shall reign over the house of Jacob to the ages; and of his reign there shall be no end.'
And Mary said unto the messenger, 'How shall this be, seeing a husband I do not know?'
And the messenger answering said to her, 'The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee, therefore also the holy-begotten thing shall be called Son of God;
and lo, Elisabeth, thy kinswoman, she also hath conceived a son in her old age, and this is the sixth month to her who was called barren;
because nothing shall be impossible with God.'
And Mary said, 'Lo, the maid-servant of the Lord; let it be to me according to thy saying,' and the messenger went away from her.
And Mary having arisen in those days, went to the hill-country, with haste, to a city of Judea,
and entered into the house of Zacharias, and saluted Elisabeth.
And it came to pass, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe did leap in her womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit,
and spake out with a loud voice, and said, 'Blessed [art] thou among women, and blessed [is] the fruit of thy womb;
and whence [is] this to me, that the mother of my Lord might come unto me?
for, lo, when the voice of thy salutation came to my ears, leap in gladness did the babe in my womb;
and happy [is] she who did believe, for there shall be a completion to the things spoken to her from the Lord.'
And Mary said, 'My soul doth magnify the Lord,
And my spirit was glad on God my Saviour,
Because He looked on the lowliness of His maid-servant, For, lo, henceforth call me happy shall all the generations,
For He who is mighty did to me great things, And holy [is] His name,
And His kindness [is] to generations of generations, To those fearing Him,
He did powerfully with His arm, He scattered abroad the proud in the thought of their heart,
He brought down the mighty from thrones, And He exalted the lowly,
The hungry He did fill with good, And the rich He sent away empty,
He received again Israel His servant, To remember kindness,
As He spake unto our fathers, To Abraham and to his seed — to the age.'
And Mary remained with her about three months, and turned back to her house.
And to Elisabeth was the time fulfilled for her bringing forth, and she bare a son,
and the neighbours and her kindred heard that the Lord was making His kindness great with her, and they were rejoicing with her.
And it came to pass, on the eighth day, they came to circumcise the child, and they were calling him by the name of his father, Zacharias,
and his mother answering said, 'No, but he shall be called John.'
And they said unto her — 'There is none among thy kindred who is called by this name,'
and they were making signs to his father, what he would wish him to be called,
and having asked for a tablet, he wrote, saying, 'John is his name;' and they did all wonder;
and his mouth was opened presently, and his tongue, and he was speaking, praising God.
And fear came upon all those dwelling around them, and in all the hill-country of Judea were all these sayings spoken of,
and all who heard did lay them up in their hearts, saying, 'What then shall this child be?' and the hand of the Lord was with him.
And Zacharias his father was filled with the Holy Spirit, and did prophesy, saying,
'Blessed [is] the Lord, the God of Israel, Because He did look upon, And wrought redemption for His people,
And did raise an horn of salvation to us, In the house of David His servant,
As He spake by the mouth of His holy prophets, Which have been from the age;
Salvation from our enemies, And out of the hand of all hating us,
To do kindness with our fathers, And to be mindful of His holy covenant,
An oath that He sware to Abraham our father,
To give to us, without fear, Out of the hand of our enemies having been delivered,
To serve Him, in holiness and righteousness Before Him, all the days of our life.
And thou, child, Prophet of the Highest Shalt thou be called; For thou shalt go before the face of the Lord, To prepare His ways.
To give knowledge of salvation to His people In remission of their sins,
Through the tender mercies of our God, In which the rising from on high did look upon us,
To give light to those sitting in darkness and death-shade, To guide our feet to a way of peace.'
And the child grew, and was strengthened in spirit, and he was in the deserts till the day of his shewing unto Israel.
And it came to pass in those days, there went forth a decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the world be enrolled —
this enrolment first came to pass when Cyrenius was governor of Syria —
and all were going to be enrolled, each to his proper city,
and Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, to Judea, to the city of David, that is called Bethlehem, because of his being of the house and family of David,
to enrol himself with Mary his betrothed wife, being with child.
And it came to pass, in their being there, the days were fulfilled for her bringing forth,
and she brought forth her son — the first-born, and wrapped him up, and laid him down in the manger, because there was not for them a place in the guest-chamber.
And there were shepherds in the same region, lodging in the field, and keeping the night-watches over their flock,
and lo, a messenger of the Lord stood over them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they feared a great fear.
And the messenger said to them, 'Fear not, for lo, I bring you good news of great joy, that shall be to all the people —
because there was born to you to-day a Saviour — who is Christ the Lord — in the city of David,
and this [is] to you the sign: Ye shall find a babe wrapped up, lying in the manger.'
And suddenly there came with the messenger a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God, and saying,
'Glory in the highest to God, and upon earth peace, among men — good will.'
And it came to pass, when the messengers were gone away from them to the heavens, that the men, the shepherds, said unto one another, 'We may go over indeed unto Bethlehem, and see this thing that hath come to pass, that the Lord did make known to us.'
And they came, having hasted, and found both Mary, and Joseph, and the babe lying in the manger,
and having seen, they made known abroad concerning the saying spoken to them concerning the child.
And all who heard, did wonder concerning the things spoken by the shepherds unto them;
and Mary was preserving all these things, pondering in her heart;
and the shepherds turned back, glorifying and praising God, for all those things they heard and saw, as it was spoken unto them.
And when eight days were fulfilled to circumcise the child, then was his name called Jesus, having been so called by the messenger before his being conceived in the womb.
And when the days of their purification were fulfilled, according to the law of Moses, they brought him up to Jerusalem, to present to the Lord,
as it hath been written in the Law of the Lord, — 'Every male opening a womb shall be called holy to the Lord,'
and to give a sacrifice, according to that said in the Law of the Lord, 'A pair of turtle-doves, or two young pigeons.'
And lo, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name [is] Simeon, and this man is righteous and devout, looking for the comforting of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was upon him,
and it hath been divinely told him by the Holy Spirit — not to see death before he may see the Christ of the Lord.
And he came in the Spirit to the temple, and in the parents bringing in the child Jesus, for their doing according to the custom of the law regarding him,
then he took him in his arms, and blessed God, and he said,
'Now Thou dost send away Thy servant, Lord, according to Thy word, in peace,
because mine eyes did see Thy salvation,
which Thou didst prepare before the face of all the peoples,
a light to the uncovering of nations, and the glory of Thy people Israel.'
And Joseph and his mother were wondering at the things spoken concerning him,
and Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother, 'Lo, this [one] is set for the falling and rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign spoken against —
(and also thine own soul shall a sword pass through) — that the reasonings of many hearts may be revealed.'
And there was Anna, a prophetess, daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher, she was much advanced in days, having lived with an husband seven years from her virginity,
and she [is] a widow of about eighty-four years, who did depart not from the temple, with fasts and supplications serving, night and day,
and she, at that hour, having come in, was confessing, likewise, to the Lord, and was speaking concerning him, to all those looking for redemption in Jerusalem.
And when they finished all things, according to the Law of the Lord, they turned back to Galilee, to their city Nazareth;
and the child grew and was strengthened in spirit, being filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was upon him.
And his parents were going yearly to Jerusalem, at the feast of the passover,
and when he became twelve years old, they having gone up to Jerusalem, according to the custom of the feast,
and having finished the days, in their returning the child Jesus remained behind in Jerusalem, and Joseph and his mother did not know,
and, having supposed him to be in the company, they went a day's journey, and were seeking him among the kindred and among the acquaintances,
and not having found him, they turned back to Jerusalem seeking him.
And it came to pass, after three days, they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers, both hearing them and questioning them,
and all those hearing him were astonished at his understanding and answers.
And, having seen him, they were amazed, and his mother said unto him, 'Child, why didst thou thus to us? lo, thy father and I, sorrowing, were seeking thee.'
And he said unto them, 'Why [is it] that ye were seeking me? did ye not know that in the things of my Father it behoveth me to be?'
and they did not understand the saying that he spake to them,
and he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and he was subject to them, and his mother was keeping all these sayings in her heart,
and Jesus was advancing in wisdom, and in stature, and in favour with God and men.
And in the fifteenth year of the government of Tiberius Caesar — Pontius Pilate being governor of Judea, and Herod tetrarch of Galilee, and Philip his brother, tetrarch of Ituraea and of the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene —
Annas and Caiaphas being chief priests — there came a word of God unto John the son of Zacharias, in the wilderness,
and he came to all the region round the Jordan, proclaiming a baptism of reformation — to remission of sins,
as it hath been written in the scroll of the words of Isaiah the prophet, saying, 'A voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, straight make ye His paths;
every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be made low, and the crooked shall become straightness, and the rough become smooth ways;
and all flesh shall see the salvation of God.'
Then said he to the multitudes coming forth to be baptised by him, 'Brood of vipers! who did prompt you to flee from the coming wrath?
make, therefore, fruits worthy of the reformation, and begin not to say within yourselves, We have a father — Abraham; for I say to you, that God is able out of these stones to raise children to Abraham;
and already also the axe unto the root of the trees is laid, every tree, therefore, not making good fruit is cut down, and to fire it is cast.'
And the multitudes were questioning him, saying, 'What, then, shall we do?'
and he answering saith to them, 'He having two coats — let him impart to him having none, and he having victuals — in like manner let him do.'
And there came also tax-gatherers to be baptised, and they said unto him, 'Teacher, what shall we do?'
and he said unto them, 'Exact no more than that directed you.'
And questioning him also were those warring, saying, 'And we, what shall we do?' and he said unto them, 'Do violence to no one, nor accuse falsely, and be content with your wages.'
And the people are looking forward, and all are reasoning in their hearts concerning John, whether or not he may be the Christ;
John answered, saying to all, 'I indeed with water do baptise you, but he cometh who is mightier than I, of whom I am not worthy to loose the latchet of his sandals — he shall baptise you with the Holy Spirit and with fire;
whose winnowing shovel [is] in his hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse his floor, and will gather the wheat to his storehouse, and the chaff he will burn with fire unquenchable.'
And, therefore, indeed with many other things, exhorting, he was proclaiming good news to the people,
and Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him concerning Herodias the wife of Philip his brother, and concerning all the evils that Herod did,
added also this to all, that he shut up John in the prison.
And it came to pass, in all the people being baptised, Jesus also being baptised, and praying, the heaven was opened,
and the Holy Spirit came down in a bodily appearance, as if a dove, upon him, and a voice came out of heaven, saying, 'Thou art My Son — the Beloved, in thee I did delight.'
And Jesus himself was beginning to be about thirty years of age, being, as was supposed, son of Joseph,
the [son] of Eli, the [son] of Matthat, the [son] of Levi, the [son] of Melchi, the [son] of Janna, the [son] of Joseph,
the [son] of Mattathias, the [son] of Amos, the [son] of Naum, the [son] of Esli,
the [son] of Naggai, the [son] of Maath, the [son] of Mattathias, the [son] of Semei, the [son] of Joseph, the [son] of Juda,
the [son] of Joanna, the [son] of Rhesa, the [son] of Zerubbabel, the [son] of Shealtiel,
the [son] of Neri, the [son] of Melchi, the [son] of Addi, the [son] of Cosam, the [son] of Elmodam, the [son] of Er,
the [son] of Jose, the [son] of Eliezer, the [son] of Jorim, the [son] of Matthat,
the [son] of Levi, the [son] of Simeon, the [son] of Juda, the [son] of Joseph, the [son] of Jonan, the [son] of Eliakim,
the [son] of Melea, the [son] of Mainan, the [son] of Mattatha, the [son] of Nathan,
the [son] of David, the [son] of Jesse, the [son] of Obed, the [son] of Booz, the [son] of Salmon, the [son] of Nahshon,
the [son] of Amminadab, the [son] of Aram, the [son] of Esrom, the [son] of Pharez,
the [son] of Judah, the [son] of Jacob, the [son] of Isaac, the [son] of Abraham, the [son] of Terah, the [son] of Nahor,
the [son] of Serug, the [son] of Reu, the [son] of Peleg, the [son] of Eber,
the [son] of Salah, the [son] of Cainan, the [son] of Arphaxad, the [son] of Shem, the [son] of Noah, the [son] of Lamech,
the [son] of Methuselah, the [son] of Enoch, the [son] of Jared, the [son] of Mahalaleel,
the [son] of Cainan, the [son] of Enos, the [son] of Seth, the [son] of Adam, the [son] of God.
And Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, turned back from the Jordan, and was brought in the Spirit to the wilderness,
forty days being tempted by the Devil, and he did not eat anything in those days, and they having been ended, he afterward hungered,
and the Devil said to him, 'If Son thou art of God, speak to this stone that it may become bread.'
And Jesus answered him, saying, 'It hath been written, that, not on bread only shall man live, but on every saying of God.'
And the Devil having brought him up to an high mountain, shewed to him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time,
and the Devil said to him, 'To thee I will give all this authority, and their glory, because to me it hath been delivered, and to whomsoever I will, I do give it;
thou, then, if thou mayest bow before me — all shall be thine.'
And Jesus answering him said, 'Get thee behind me, Adversary, for it hath been written, Thou shalt bow before the Lord thy God, and Him only thou shalt serve.'
And he brought him to Jerusalem, and set him on the pinnacle of the temple, and said to him, 'If the Son thou art of God, cast thyself down hence,
for it hath been written — To His messengers He will give charge concerning thee, to guard over thee,
and — On hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou mayest dash against a stone thy foot.'
And Jesus answering said to him — 'It hath been said, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.'
And having ended all temptation, the Devil departed from him till a convenient season.
And Jesus turned back in the power of the Spirit to Galilee, and a fame went forth through all the region round about concerning him,
and he was teaching in their synagogues, being glorified by all.
And he came to Nazareth, where he hath been brought up, and he went in, according to his custom, on the sabbath-day, to the synagogue, and stood up to read;
and there was given over to him a roll of Isaiah the prophet, and having unfolded the roll, he found the place where it hath been written:
'The Spirit of the Lord [is] upon me, Because He did anoint me; To proclaim good news to the poor, Sent me to heal the broken of heart, To proclaim to captives deliverance, And to blind receiving of sight, To send away the bruised with deliverance,
To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord.'
And having folded the roll, having given [it] back to the officer, he sat down, and the eyes of all in the synagogue were gazing on him.
And he began to say unto them — 'To-day hath this writing been fulfilled in your ears;'
and all were bearing testimony to him, and were wondering at the gracious words that are coming forth out of his mouth, and they said, 'Is not this the son of Joseph?'
And he said unto them, 'Certainly ye will say to me this simile, Physician, heal thyself; as great things as we heard done in Capernaum, do also here in thy country;'
and he said, 'Verily I say to you — No prophet is accepted in his own country;
and of a truth I say to you, Many widows were in the days of Elijah, in Israel, when the heaven was shut for three years and six months, when great famine came on all the land,
and unto none of them was Elijah sent, but — to Sarepta of Sidon, unto a woman, a widow;
and many lepers were in the time of Elisha the prophet, in Israel, and none of them was cleansed, but — Naaman the Syrian.'
And all in the synagogue were filled with wrath, hearing these things,
and having risen, they put him forth without the city, and brought him unto the brow of the hill on which their city had been built — to cast him down headlong,
and he, having gone through the midst of them, went away.
And he came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and was teaching them on the sabbaths,
and they were astonished at his teaching, because his word was with authority.
And in the synagogue was a man, having a spirit of an unclean demon, and he cried out with a great voice,
saying, 'Away, what — to us and to thee, Jesus, O Nazarene? thou didst come to destroy us; I have known thee who thou art — the Holy One of God.'
And Jesus did rebuke him, saying, 'Be silenced, and come forth out of him;' and the demon having cast him into the midst, came forth from him, having hurt him nought;
and amazement came upon all, and they were speaking together, with one another, saying, 'What [is] this word, that with authority and power he doth command the unclean spirits, and they come forth?'
and there was going forth a fame concerning him to every place of the region round about.
And having risen out of the synagogue, he entered into the house of Simon, and the mother-in-law of Simon was pressed with a great fever, and they did ask him about her,
and having stood over her, he rebuked the fever, and it left her, and presently, having risen, she was ministering to them.
And at the setting of the sun, all, as many as had any ailing with manifold sicknesses, brought them unto him, and he on each one of them [his] hands having put, did heal them.
And demons also were coming forth from many, crying out and saying — 'Thou art the Christ, the Son of God;' and rebuking, he did not suffer them to speak, because they knew him to be the Christ.
And day having come, having gone forth, he went on to a desert place, and the multitudes were seeking him, and they came unto him, and were staying him — not to go on from them,
and he said unto them — 'Also to the other cities it behoveth me to proclaim good news of the reign of God, because for this I have been sent;'
and he was preaching in the synagogues of Galilee.
And it came to pass, in the multitude pressing on him to hear the word of God, that he was standing beside the lake of Gennesaret,
and he saw two boats standing beside the lake, and the fishers, having gone away from them, were washing the nets,
and having entered into one of the boats, that was Simon's, he asked him to put back a little from the land, and having sat down, was teaching the multitudes out of the boat.
And when he left off speaking, he said unto Simon, 'Put back to the deep, and let down your nets for a draught;'
and Simon answering said to him, 'Master, through the whole night, having laboured, we have taken nothing, but at thy saying I will let down the net.'
And having done this, they enclosed a great multitude of fishes, and their net was breaking,
and they beckoned to the partners, who [are] in the other boat, having come, to help them; and they came, and filled both the boats, so that they were sinking.
And Simon Peter having seen, fell down at the knees of Jesus, saying, 'Depart from me, because I am a sinful man, O lord;'
for astonishment seized him, and all those with him, at the draught of the fishes that they took,
and in like manner also James and John, sons of Zebedee, who were partners with Simon; and Jesus said unto Simon, 'Fear not, henceforth thou shalt be catching men;'
and they, having brought the boats upon the land, having left all, did follow him.
And it came to pass, in his being in one of the cities, that lo, a man full of leprosy, and having seen Jesus, having fallen on [his] face, he besought him, saying, 'Sir, if thou mayest will, thou art able to cleanse me;'
and having stretched forth [his] hand, he touched him, having said, 'I will; be thou cleansed;' and immediately the leprosy went away from him.
And he charged him to tell no one, 'But, having gone away, shew thyself to the priest, and bring near for thy cleansing according as Moses directed, for a testimony to them;'
but the more was the report going abroad concerning him, and great multitudes were coming together to hear, and to be healed by him of their infirmities,
and he was withdrawing himself in the desert places and was praying.
And it came to pass, on one of the days, that he was teaching, and there were sitting by Pharisees and teachers of the Law, who were come out of every village of Galilee, and Judea, and Jerusalem, and the power of the Lord was — to heal them.
And lo, men bearing upon a couch a man, who hath been struck with palsy, and they were seeking to bring him in, and to place before him,
and not having found by what way they may bring him in because of the multitude, having gone up on the house-top, through the tiles they let him down, with the little couch, into the midst before Jesus,
and he having seen their faith, said to him, 'Man, thy sins have been forgiven thee.'
And the scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, 'Who is this that doth speak evil words? who is able to forgive sins, except God only?'
And Jesus having known their reasonings, answering, said unto them, 'What reason ye in your hearts?
which is easier — to say, Thy sins have been forgiven thee? or to say, Arise, and walk?
'And that ye may know that the Son of Man hath authority upon the earth to forgive sins — (he said to the one struck with palsy) — I say to thee, Arise, and having taken up thy little couch, be going on to thy house.'
And presently having risen before them, having taken up [that] on which he was lying, he went away to his house, glorifying God,
and astonishment took all, and they were glorifying God, and were filled with fear, saying — 'We saw strange things to-day.'
And after these things he went forth, and beheld a tax-gatherer, by name Levi, sitting at the tax-office, and said to him, 'Be following me;'
and he, having left all, having arisen, did follow him.
And Levi made a great entertainment to him in his house, and there was a great multitude of tax-gatherers and others who were with them reclining (at meat),
and the scribes and the Pharisees among them were murmuring at his disciples, saying, 'Wherefore with tax-gatherers and sinners do ye eat and drink?'
And Jesus answering said unto them, 'They who are well have no need of a physician, but they that are ill:
I came not to call righteous men, but sinners, to reformation.'
And they said unto him, 'Wherefore do the disciples of John fast often, and make supplications — in like manner also those of the Pharisees — but thine do eat and drink?'
And he said unto them, 'Are ye able to make the sons of the bride-chamber — in the bridegroom being with them — to fast?
but days will come, and, when the bridegroom may be taken away from them, then they shall fast in those days.'
And he spake also a simile unto them — 'No one a patch of new clothing doth put on old clothing, and if otherwise, the new also doth make a rent, and with the old the patch doth not agree, that [is] from the new.
'And no one doth put new wine into old skins, and if otherwise, the new wine will burst the skins, and itself will be poured out, and the skins will be destroyed;
but new wine into new skins is to be put, and both are preserved together;
and no one having drunk old [wine], doth immediately wish new, for he saith, The old is better.'
And it came to pass, on the second-first sabbath, as he is going through the corn fields, that his disciples were plucking the ears, and were eating, rubbing with the hands,
and certain of the Pharisees said to them, 'Why do ye that which is not lawful to do on the sabbaths?'
And Jesus answering said unto them, 'Did ye not read even this that David did, when he hungered, himself and those who are with him,
how he went into the house of God, and the loaves of the presentation did take, and did eat, and gave also to those with him, which it is not lawful to eat, except only to the priests?'
and he said to them, — 'The Son of Man is lord also of the sabbath.'
And it came to pass also, on another sabbath, that he goeth into the synagogue, and teacheth, and there was there a man, and his right hand was withered,
and the scribes and the Pharisees were watching him, if on the sabbath he will heal, that they might find an accusation against him.
And he himself had known their reasonings, and said to the man having the withered hand, 'Rise, and stand in the midst;' and he having risen, stood.
Then said Jesus unto them, 'I will question you something: Is it lawful on the sabbaths to do good, or to do evil? life to save or to kill?'
And having looked round on them all, he said to the man, 'Stretch forth thy hand;' and he did so, and his hand was restored whole as the other;
and they were filled with madness, and were speaking with one another what they might do to Jesus.
And it came to pass in those days, he went forth to the mountain to pray, and was passing the night in the prayer of God,
and when it became day, he called near his disciples, and having chosen from them twelve, whom also he named apostles,
(Simon, whom also he named Peter, and Andrew his brother, James and John, Philip and Bartholomew,
Matthew and Thomas, James of Alphaeus, and Simon called Zelotes,
Judas of James, and Judas Iscariot, who also became betrayer;)
and having come down with them, he stood upon a level spot, and a crowd of his disciples, and a great multitude of the people from all Judea, and Jerusalem, and the maritime Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear him, and to be healed of their sicknesses,
and those harassed by unclean spirits, and they were healed,
and all the multitude were seeking to touch him, because power from him was going forth, and he was healing all.
And he, having lifted up his eyes to his disciples, said: 'Happy the poor — because yours is the reign of God.
'Happy those hungering now — because ye shall be filled. 'Happy those weeping now — because ye shall laugh.
'Happy are ye when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you, and shall reproach, and shall cast forth your name as evil, for the Son of Man's sake —
rejoice in that day, and leap, for lo, your reward [is] great in the heaven, for according to these things were their fathers doing to the prophets.
'But woe to you — the rich, because ye have got your comfort.
'Woe to you who have been filled — because ye shall hunger. 'Woe to you who are laughing now — because ye shall mourn and weep.
'Woe to you when all men shall speak well of you — for according to these things were their fathers doing to false prophets.
'But I say to you who are hearing, Love your enemies, do good to those hating you,
bless those cursing you, and pray for those accusing you falsely;
and to him smiting thee upon the cheek, give also the other, and from him taking away from thee the mantle, also the coat thou mayest not keep back.
'And to every one who is asking of thee, be giving; and from him who is taking away thy goods, be not asking again;
and as ye wish that men may do to you, do ye also to them in like manner;
and — if ye love those loving you, what grace have ye? for also the sinful love those loving them;
and if ye do good to those doing good to you, what grace have ye? for also the sinful do the same;
and if ye lend [to those] of whom ye hope to receive back, what grace have ye? for also the sinful lend to sinners — that they may receive again as much.
'But love your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again, and your reward will be great, and ye shall be sons of the Highest, because He is kind unto the ungracious and evil;
be ye therefore merciful, as also your Father is merciful.
'And judge not, and ye may not be judged; condemn not, and ye may not be condemned; release, and ye shall be released.
'Give, and it shall be given to you; good measure, pressed, and shaken, and running over, they shall give into your bosom; for with that measure with which ye measure, it shall be measured to you again.'
And he spake a simile to them, 'Is blind able to lead blind? shall they not both fall into a pit?
A disciple is not above his teacher, but every one perfected shall be as his teacher.
'And why dost thou behold the mote that is in thy brother's eye, and the beam that [is] in thine own eye dost not consider?
or how art thou able to say to thy brother, Brother, suffer, I may take out the mote that [is] in thine eye — thyself the beam in thine own eye not beholding? Hypocrite, take first the beam out of thine own eye, and then thou shalt see clearly to take out the mote that [is] in thy brother's eye.
'For there is not a good tree making bad fruit, nor a bad tree making good fruit;
for each tree from its own fruit is known, for not from thorns do they gather figs, nor from a bramble do they crop a grape.
'The good man out of the good treasure of his heart doth bring forth that which [is] good; and the evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart doth bring forth that which [is] evil; for out of the abounding of the heart doth his mouth speak.
'And why do ye call me, Lord, Lord, and do not what I say?
Every one who is coming unto me, and is hearing my words, and is doing them, I will shew you to whom he is like;
he is like to a man building a house, who did dig, and deepen, and laid a foundation upon the rock, and a flood having come, the stream broke forth on that house, and was not able to shake it, for it had been founded upon the rock.
'And he who heard and did not, is like to a man having builded a house upon the earth, without a foundation, against which the stream brake forth, and immediately it fell, and the ruin of that house became great.'
And when he completed all his sayings in the ears of the people, he went into Capernaum;
and a certain centurion's servant being ill, was about to die, who was much valued by him,
and having heard about Jesus, he sent unto him elders of the Jews, beseeching him, that having come he might thoroughly save his servant.
And they, having come near unto Jesus, were calling upon him earnestly, saying — 'He is worthy to whom thou shalt do this,
for he doth love our nation, and the synagogue he did build to us.'
And Jesus was going on with them, and now when he is not far distant from the house the centurion sent unto him friends, saying to him, 'Sir, be not troubled, for I am not worthy that under my roof thou mayest enter;
wherefore not even myself thought I worthy to come unto thee, but say in a word, and my lad shall be healed;
for I also am a man placed under authority, having under myself soldiers, and I say to this [one], Go, and he goeth; and to another, Be coming, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doth [it].'
And having heard these things Jesus wondered at him, and having turned to the multitude following him, he said, 'I say to you, not even in Israel so much faith did I find;'
and those sent, having turned back to the house, found the ailing servant in health.
And it came to pass, on the morrow, he was going on to a city called Nain, and there were going with him many of his disciples, and a great multitude,
and as he came nigh to the gate of the city, then, lo, one dead was being carried forth, an only son of his mother, and she a widow, and a great multitude of the city was with her.
And the Lord having seen her, was moved with compassion towards her, and said to her, 'Be not weeping;'
and having come near, he touched the bier, and those bearing [it] stood still, and he said, 'Young man, to thee I say, Arise;'
and the dead sat up, and began to speak, and he gave him to his mother;
and fear took hold of all, and they were glorifying God, saying — 'A great prophet hath risen among us,' and — 'God did look upon His people.'
And the account of this went forth in all Judea about him, and in all the region around.
And the disciples of John told him about all these things,
and John having called near a certain two of his disciples, sent unto Jesus, saying, 'Art thou he who is coming, or for another do we look?'
And having come near to him, the men said, 'John the Baptist sent us unto thee, saying, Art thou he who is coming, or for another do we look?'
And in that hour he cured many from sicknesses, and plagues, and evil spirits, and to many blind he granted sight.
And Jesus answering said to them, 'Having gone on, report to John what ye saw and heard, that blind men do see again, lame do walk, lepers are cleansed, deaf do hear, dead are raised, poor have good news proclaimed;
and happy is he whoever may not be stumbled in me.'
And the messengers of John having gone away, he began to say unto the multitudes concerning John: 'What have ye gone forth to the wilderness to look on? a reed by the wind shaken?
but what have ye gone forth to see? a man in soft garments clothed? lo, they in splendid apparellings, and living in luxury, are in the houses of kings!
'But what have ye gone forth to see? a prophet? Yes, I say to you, and much more than a prophet:
this is he concerning whom it hath been written, Lo, I send my messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee;
for I say to you, a greater prophet, among those born of women, than John the Baptist there is not; but the least in the reign of God is greater than he.'
And all the people having heard, and the tax-gatherers, declared God righteous, having been baptized with the baptism of John,
but the Pharisees, and the lawyers, the counsel of God did put away for themselves, not having been baptized by him.
And the Lord said, 'To what, then, shall I liken the men of this generation? and to what are they like?
they are like to children, to those sitting in a market-place, and calling one to another, and saying, We piped to you, and ye did not dance, we mourned to you, and ye did not weep!
'For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and ye say, He hath a demon;
the Son of Man came eating and drinking, and ye say, Lo, a man, a glutton, and a wine drinker, a friend of tax-gatherers and sinners;
and the wisdom was justified from all her children.'
And a certain one of the Pharisees was asking him that he might eat with him, and having gone into the house of the Pharisee he reclined (at meat),
and lo, a woman in the city, who was a sinner, having known that he reclineth (at meat) in the house of the Pharisee, having provided an alabaster box of ointment,
and having stood behind, beside his feet, weeping, she began to wet his feet with the tears, and with the hairs of her head she was wiping, and was kissing his feet, and was anointing with the ointment.
And the Pharisee who did call him, having seen, spake within himself, saying, 'This one, if he were a prophet, would have known who and of what kind [is] the woman who doth touch him, that she is a sinner.'
And Jesus answering said unto him, 'Simon, I have something to say to thee;' and he saith, 'Teacher, say on.'
'Two debtors were to a certain creditor; the one was owing five hundred denaries, and the other fifty;
and they not having [wherewith] to give back, he forgave both; which then of them, say thou, will love him more?'
And Simon answering said, 'I suppose that to whom he forgave the more;' and he said to him, 'Rightly thou didst judge.'
And having turned unto the woman, he said to Simon, 'Seest thou this woman? I entered into thy house; water for my feet thou didst not give, but this woman with tears did wet my feet, and with the hairs of her head did wipe;
a kiss to me thou didst not give, but this woman, from what [time] I came in, did not cease kissing my feet;
with oil my head thou didst not anoint, but this woman with ointment did anoint my feet;
therefore I say to thee, her many sins have been forgiven, because she did love much; but to whom little is forgiven, little he doth love.'
And he said to her, 'Thy sins have been forgiven;'
and those reclining with him (at meat) began to say within themselves, 'Who is this, who also doth forgive sins?'
and he said unto the woman, 'Thy faith have saved thee, be going on to peace.'
And it came to pass thereafter, that he was going through every city and village, preaching and proclaiming good news of the reign of God, and the twelve [are] with him,
and certain women, who were healed of evil spirits and infirmities, Mary who is called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone forth,
and Joanna wife of Chuza, steward of Herod, and Susanna, and many others, who were ministering to him from their substance.
And a great multitude having gathered, and those who from city and city were coming unto him, he spake by a simile:
'The sower went forth to sow his seed, and in his sowing some indeed fell beside the way, and it was trodden down, and the fowls of the heaven did devour it.
'And other fell upon the rock, and having sprung up, it did wither, through not having moisture.
'And other fell amidst the thorns, and the thorns having sprung up with it, did choke it.
'And other fell upon the good ground, and having sprung up, it made fruit an hundred fold.' These things saying, he was calling, 'He having ears to hear — let him hear.'
And his disciples were questioning him, saying, 'What may this simile be?'
And he said, 'To you it hath been given to know the secrets of the reign of God, and to the rest in similes; that seeing they may not see, and hearing they may not understand.
'And this is the simile: The seed is the word of God,
and those beside the way are those hearing, then cometh the Devil, and taketh up the word from their heart, lest having believed, they may be saved.
'And those upon the rock: They who, when they may hear, with joy do receive the word, and these have no root, who for a time believe, and in time of temptation fall away.
'And that which fell to the thorns: These are they who have heard, and going forth, through anxieties, and riches, and pleasures of life, are choked, and bear not to completion.
'And that in the good ground: These are they, who in an upright and good heart, having heard the word, do retain [it], and bear fruit in continuance.
'And no one having lighted a lamp doth cover it with a vessel, or under a couch doth put [it]; but upon a lamp-stand he doth put [it], that those coming in may see the light,
for nothing is secret, that shall not become manifest, nor hid, that shall not be known, and become manifest.
'See, therefore, how ye hear, for whoever may have, there shall be given to him, and whoever may not have, also what he seemeth to have, shall be taken from him.'
And there came unto him his mother and brethren, and they were not able to get to him because of the multitude,
and it was told him, saying, 'Thy mother and thy brethren do stand without, wishing to see thee;'
and he answering said unto them, 'My mother and my brethren! they are those who the word of God are hearing, and doing.'
And it came to pass, on one of the days, that he himself went into a boat with his disciples, and he said unto them, 'We may go over to the other side of the lake;' and they set forth,
and as they are sailing he fell deeply asleep, and there came down a storm of wind to the lake, and they were filling, and were in peril.
And having come near, they awoke him, saying, 'Master, master, we perish;' and he, having arisen, rebuked the wind and the raging of the water, and they ceased, and there came a calm,
and he said to them, 'Where is your faith?' and they being afraid did wonder, saying unto one another, 'Who, then, is this, that even the winds he doth command, and the water, and they obey him?'
And they sailed down to the region of the Gadarenes, that is over-against Galilee,
and he having gone forth upon the land, there met him a certain man, out of the city, who had demons for a long time, and with a garment was not clothed, and in a house was not abiding, but in the tombs,
and having seen Jesus, and having cried out, he fell before him, and with a loud voice, said, 'What — to me and to thee, Jesus, Son of God Most High? I beseech thee, mayest thou not afflict me!'
For he commanded the unclean spirit to come forth from the man, for many times it had caught him, and he was being bound with chains and fetters — guarded, and breaking asunder the bonds he was driven by the demons to the deserts.
And Jesus questioned him, saying, 'What is thy name?' and he said, 'Legion,' (because many demons were entered into him,)
and he was calling on him, that he may not command them to go away to the abyss,
and there was there a herd of many swine feeding in the mountain, and they were calling on him, that he might suffer them to enter into these, and he suffered them,
and the demons having gone forth from the man, did enter into the swine, and the herd rushed down the steep to the lake, and were choked.
And those feeding [them], having seen what was come to pass, fled, and having gone, told [it] to the city, and to the fields;
and they came forth to see what was come to pass, and they came unto Jesus, and found the man sitting, out of whom the demons had gone forth, clothed, and right-minded, at the feet of Jesus, and they were afraid;
and those also having seen [it], told them how the demoniac was saved.
And the whole multitude of the region of the Gadarenes round about asked him to go away from them, because with great fear they were pressed, and he having entered into the boat, did turn back.
And the man from whom the demons had gone forth was beseeching of him to be with him, and Jesus sent him away, saying,
'Turn back to thy house, and tell how great things God did to thee;' and he went away through all the city proclaiming how great things Jesus did to him.
And it came to pass, in the turning back of Jesus, the multitude received him, for they were all looking for him,
and lo, there came a man, whose name [is] Jairus, and he was a chief of the synagogue, and having fallen at the feet of Jesus, was calling on him to come to his house;
because he had an only daughter about twelve years [old], and she was dying. And in his going away, the multitudes were thronging him,
and a woman, having an issue of blood for twelve years, who, having spent on physicians all her living, was not able to be healed by any,
having come near behind, touched the fringe of his garment, and presently the issue of her blood stood.
And Jesus said, 'Who [is] it that touched me?' and all denying, Peter and those with him said, 'Master, the multitudes press thee, and throng [thee], and thou dost say, Who [is] it that touched me!'
And Jesus said, 'Some one did touch me, for I knew power having gone forth from me.'
And the woman, having seen that she was not hid, trembling, came, and having fallen before him, for what cause she touched him declared to him before all the people, and how she was healed presently;
and he said to her, 'Take courage, daughter, thy faith hath saved thee, be going on to peace.'
While he is yet speaking, there doth come a certain one from the chief of the synagogue's [house], saying to him — 'Thy daughter hath died, harass not the Teacher;'
and Jesus having heard, answered him, saying, 'Be not afraid, only believe, and she shall be saved.'
And having come to the house, he suffered no one to go in, except Peter, and James, and John, and the father of the child, and the mother;
and they were all weeping, and beating themselves for her, and he said, 'Weep not, she did not die, but doth sleep;
and they were deriding him, knowing that she did die;
and he having put all forth without, and having taken hold of her hand, called, saying, 'Child, arise;'
and her spirit came back, and she arose presently, and he directed that there be given to her to eat;
and her parents were amazed, but he charged them to say to no one what was come to pass.
And having called together his twelve disciples, he gave them power and authority over all the demons, and to cure sicknesses,
and he sent them to proclaim the reign of God, and to heal the ailing.
And he said unto them, 'Take nothing for the way, neither staff, nor scrip, nor bread, nor money; neither have two coats each;
and into whatever house ye may enter, there remain, and thence depart;
and as many as may not receive you, going forth from that city, even the dust from your feet shake off, for a testimony against them.'
And going forth they were going through the several villages, proclaiming good news, and healing everywhere.
And Herod the tetrarch heard of all the things being done by him, and was perplexed, because it was said by certain, that John hath been raised out of the dead;
and by certain, that Elijah did appear, and by others, that a prophet, one of the ancients, was risen;
and Herod said, 'John I did behead, but who is this concerning whom I hear such things?' and he was seeking to see him.
And the apostles having turned back, declared to him how great things they did, and having taken them, he withdrew by himself to a desert place of a city called Bethsaida,
and the multitudes having known did follow him, and having received them, he was speaking to them concerning the reign of God, and those having need of service he cured.
And the day began to decline, and the twelve having come near, said to him, 'Let away the multitude, that having gone to the villages and the fields round about, they may lodge and may find provision, because here we are in a desert place.'
And he said unto them, 'Give ye them to eat;' and they said, 'We have no more than five loaves, and two fishes: except, having gone, we may buy for all this people victuals;'
for they were about five thousand men. And he said unto his disciples, 'Cause them to recline in companies, in each fifty;'
and they did so, and made all to recline;
and having taken the five loaves, and the two fishes, having looked up to the heaven, he blessed them, and brake, and was giving to the disciples to set before the multitude;
and they did eat, and were all filled, and there was taken up what was over to them of broken pieces, twelve baskets.
And it came to pass, as he is praying alone, the disciples were with him, and he questioned them, saying, 'Who do the multitudes say me to be?'
And they answering said, 'John the Baptist; and others, Elijah; and others, that a prophet, one of the ancients, was risen;'
and he said to them, 'And ye — who do ye say me to be?' and Peter answering said, 'The Christ of God.'
And having charged them, he commanded [them] to say this to no one,
saying — 'It behoveth the Son of Man to suffer many things, and to be rejected by the elders, and chief priests, and scribes, and to be killed, and the third day to be raised.'
And he said unto all, 'If any one doth will to come after me, let him disown himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me;
for whoever may will to save his life, shall lose it, and whoever may lose his life for my sake, he shall save it;
for what is a man profited, having gained the whole world, and having lost or having forfeited himself?
'For whoever may be ashamed of me, and of my words, of this one shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he may come in his glory, and the Father's, and the holy messengers';
and I say to you, truly, there are certain of those here standing, who shall not taste of death till they may see the reign of God.'
And it came to pass, after these words, as it were eight days, that having taken Peter, and John, and James, he went up to the mountain to pray,
and it came to pass, in his praying, the appearance of his face became altered, and his garment white — sparkling.
And lo, two men were speaking together with him, who were Moses and Elijah,
who having appeared in glory, spake of his outgoing that he was about to fulfil in Jerusalem,
but Peter and those with him were heavy with sleep, and having waked, they saw his glory, and the two men standing with him.
And it came to pass, in their parting from him, Peter said unto Jesus, 'Master, it is good to us to be here; and we may make three booths, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah,' not knowing what he saith:
and as he was speaking these things, there came a cloud, and overshadowed them, and they feared in their entering into the cloud,
and a voice came out of the cloud saying, 'This is My Son — the Beloved; hear ye him;'
and when the voice was past, Jesus was found alone; and they were silent, and declared to no one in those days anything of what they have seen.
And it came to pass on the next day, they having come down from the mount, there met him a great multitude,
and lo, a man from the multitude cried out, saying, 'Teacher, I beseech thee, look upon my son, because he is my only begotten;
and lo, a spirit doth take him, and suddenly he doth cry out, and it teareth him, with foaming, and it hardly departeth from him, bruising him,
and I besought thy disciples that they might cast it out, and they were not able.'
And Jesus answering said, 'O generation, unstedfast and perverse, till when shall I be with you, and suffer you? bring near hither thy son;'
and as he is yet coming near, the demon rent him, and tore [him] sore, and Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the youth, and gave him back to his father.
And they were all amazed at the greatness of God, and while all are wondering at all things that Jesus did, he said unto his disciples,
'Lay ye to your ears these words, for the Son of Man is about to be delivered up to the hands of men.'
And they were not knowing this saying, and it was veiled from them, that they might not perceive it, and they were afraid to ask him about this saying.
And there entered a reasoning among them, this, Who may be greater of them?
and Jesus having seen the reasoning of their heart, having taken hold of a child, set him beside himself,
and said to them, 'Whoever may receive this child in my name, doth receive me, and whoever may receive me, doth receive Him who sent me, for he who is least among you all — he shall be great.'
And John answering said, 'Master, we saw a certain one in thy name casting forth the demons, and we forbade him, because he doth not follow with us;'
and Jesus said unto him, 'Forbid not, for he who is not against us, is for us.'
And it came to pass, in the completing of the days of his being taken up, that he fixed his face to go on to Jerusalem,
and he sent messengers before his face, and having gone on, they went into a village of Samaritans, to make ready for him,
and they did not receive him, because his face was going on to Jerusalem.
And his disciples James and John having seen, said, 'Sir, wilt thou [that] we may command fire to come down from the heaven, and to consume them, as also Elijah did?'
and having turned, he rebuked them, and said, 'Ye have not known of what spirit ye are;
for the Son of Man did not come to destroy men's lives, but to save;' and they went on to another village.
And it came to pass, as they are going on in the way, a certain one said unto him, 'I will follow thee wherever thou mayest go, sir;'
and Jesus said to him, 'The foxes have holes, and the fowls of the heaven places of rest, but the Son of Man hath not where he may recline the head.'
And he said unto another, 'Be following me;' and he said, 'Sir, permit me, having gone away, first to bury my father;'
and Jesus said to him, 'Suffer the dead to bury their own dead, and thou, having gone away, publish the reign of God.'
And another also said, 'I will follow thee, sir, but first permit me to take leave of those in my house;'
and Jesus said unto him, 'No one having put his hand on a plough, and looking back, is fit for the reign of God.'
And after these things, the Lord did appoint also other seventy, and sent them by twos before his face, to every city and place whither he himself was about to come,
then said he unto them, 'The harvest indeed [is] abundant, but the workmen few; beseech ye then the Lord of the harvest, that He may put forth workmen to His harvest.
'Go away; lo, I send you forth as lambs in the midst of wolves;
carry no bag, no scrip, nor sandals; and salute no one on the way;
and into whatever house ye do enter, first say, Peace to this house;
and if indeed there may be there the son of peace, rest on it shall your peace; and if not so, upon you it shall turn back.
'And in that house remain, eating and drinking the things they have, for worthy [is] the workman of his hire; go not from house to house,
and into whatever city ye enter, and they may receive you, eat the things set before you,
and heal the ailing in it, and say to them, The reign of God hath come nigh to you.
'And into whatever city ye do enter, and they may not receive you, having gone forth to its broad places, say,
And the dust that hath cleaved to us, from your city, we do wipe off against you, but this know ye, that the reign of God hath come nigh to you;
and I say to you, that for Sodom in that day it shall be more tolerable than for that city.
'Woe to thee, Chorazin; woe to thee, Bethsaida; for if in Tyre and Sidon had been done the mighty works that were done in you, long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes, they had reformed;
but for Tyre and Sidon it shall be more tolerable in the judgment than for you.
'And thou, Capernaum, which unto the heaven wast exalted, unto hades thou shalt be brought down.
'He who is hearing you, doth hear me; and he who is putting you away, doth put me away; and he who is putting me away, doth put away Him who sent me.'
And the seventy turned back with joy, saying, 'Sir, and the demons are being subjected to us in thy name;'
and he said to them, 'I was beholding the Adversary, as lightning from the heaven having fallen;
lo, I give to you the authority to tread upon serpents and scorpions, and on all the power of the enemy, and nothing by any means shall hurt you;
but, in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subjected to you, but rejoice rather that your names were written in the heavens.'
In that hour was Jesus glad in the Spirit, and said, 'I do confess to thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that Thou didst hide these things from wise men and understanding, and didst reveal them to babes; yes, Father, because so it became good pleasure before Thee.
'All things were delivered up to me by my Father, and no one doth know who the Son is, except the Father, and who the Father is, except the Son, and he to whom the Son may wish to reveal [Him].'
And having turned unto the disciples, he said, by themselves, 'Happy the eyes that are perceiving what ye perceive;
for I say to you, that many prophets and kings did wish to see what ye perceive, and did not see, and to hear what ye hear, and did not hear.'
And lo, a certain lawyer stood up, trying him, and saying, 'Teacher, what having done, life age-during shall I inherit?'
And he said unto him, 'In the law what hath been written? how dost thou read?'
And he answering said, 'Thou shalt love the Lord thy God out of all thy heart, and out of all thy soul, and out of all thy strength, and out of all thy understanding, and thy neighbour as thyself.'
And he said to him, 'Rightly thou didst answer; this do, and thou shalt live.'
And he, willing to declare himself righteous, said unto Jesus, 'And who is my neighbour?'
and Jesus having taken up [the word], said, 'A certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among robbers, and having stripped him and inflicted blows, they went away, leaving [him] half dead.
'And by a coincidence a certain priest was going down in that way, and having seen him, he passed over on the opposite side;
and in like manner also, a Levite, having been about the place, having come and seen, passed over on the opposite side.
'But a certain Samaritan, journeying, came along him, and having seen him, he was moved with compassion,
and having come near, he bound up his wounds, pouring on oil and wine, and having lifted him up on his own beast, he brought him to an inn, and was careful of him;
and on the morrow, going forth, taking out two denaries, he gave to the innkeeper, and said to him, Be careful of him, and whatever thou mayest spend more, I, in my coming again, will give back to thee.
'Who, then, of these three, seemeth to thee to have become neighbour of him who fell among the robbers?'
and he said, 'He who did the kindness with him,' then Jesus said to him, 'Be going on, and thou be doing in like manner.'
And it came to pass, in their going on, that he entered into a certain village, and a certain woman, by name Martha, did receive him into her house,
and she had also a sister, called Mary, who also, having seated herself beside the feet of Jesus, was hearing the word,
and Martha was distracted about much serving, and having stood by him, she said, 'Sir, dost thou not care that my sister left me alone to serve? say then to her, that she may partake along with me.'
And Jesus answering said to her, 'Martha, Martha, thou art anxious and disquieted about many things,
but of one thing there is need, and Mary the good part did choose, that shall not be taken away from her.'
And it came to pass, in his being in a certain place praying, as he ceased, a certain one of his disciples said unto him, 'Sir, teach us to pray, as also John taught his disciples.'
And he said to them, 'When ye may pray, say ye: Our Father who art in the heavens; hallowed be Thy name: Thy reign come; Thy will come to pass, as in heaven also on earth;
our appointed bread be giving us daily;
and forgive us our sins, for also we ourselves forgive every one indebted to us; and mayest Thou not bring us into temptation; but do Thou deliver us from the evil.'
And he said unto them, 'Who of you shall have a friend, and shall go on unto him at midnight, and may say to him, Friend, lend me three loaves,
seeing a friend of mine came out of the way unto me, and I have not what I shall set before him,
and he from within answering may say, Do not give me trouble, already the door hath been shut, and my children with me are in the bed, I am not able, having risen, to give to thee.
'I say to you, even if he will not give to him, having risen, because of his being his friend, yet because of his importunity, having risen, he will give him as many as he doth need;
and I say to you, Ask, and it shall be given to you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened to you;
for every one who is asking doth receive; and he who is seeking doth find; and to him who is knocking it shall be opened.
'And of which of you — the father — if the son shall ask a loaf, a stone will he present to him? and if a fish, will he instead of a fish, a serpent present to him?
and if he may ask an egg, will he present to him a scorpion?
If, then, ye, being evil, have known good gifts to be giving to your children, how much more shall the Father who is from heaven give the Holy Spirit to those asking Him!'
And he was casting forth a demon, and it was dumb, and it came to pass, the demon having gone forth, the dumb man spake, and the multitudes wondered,
and certain of them said, 'By Beelzeboul, ruler of the demons, he doth cast forth the demons;'
and others, tempting, a sign out of heaven from him were asking.
And he, knowing their thoughts, said to them, 'Every kingdom having been divided against itself is desolated; and house against house doth fall;
and if also the Adversary against himself was divided, how shall his kingdom be made to stand? for ye say, by Beelzeboul is my casting forth the demons.
'But if I by Beelzeboul cast forth the demons — your sons, by whom do they cast forth? because of this your judges they shall be;
but if by the finger of God I cast forth the demons, then come unawares upon you did the reign of God.
'When the strong man armed may keep his hall, in peace are his goods;
but when the stronger than he, having come upon [him], may overcome him, his whole-armour he doth take away in which he had trusted, and his spoils he distributeth;
he who is not with me is against me, and he who is not gathering with me doth scatter.
'When the unclean spirit may go forth from the man it walketh through waterless places seeking rest, and not finding, it saith, I will turn back to my house whence I came forth;
and having come, it findeth [it] swept and adorned;
then doth it go, and take to it seven other spirits more evil than itself, and having entered, they dwell there, and the last of that man becometh worst than the first.'
And it came to pass, in his saying these things, a certain woman having lifted up the voice out of the multitude, said to him, 'Happy the womb that carried thee, and the paps that thou didst suck!'
And he said, 'Yea, rather, happy those hearing the word of God, and keeping [it]!'
And the multitudes crowding together upon him, he began to say, 'This generation is evil, a sign it doth seek after, and a sign shall not be given to it, except the sign of Jonah the prophet,
for as Jonah became a sign to the Ninevites, so also shall the Son of Man be to this generation.
'A queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with the men of this generation, and shall condemn them, because she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and lo, greater than Solomon here!
'Men of Nineveh shall stand up in the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it, because they reformed at the proclamation of Jonah; and lo, greater than Jonah here!
'And no one having lighted a lamp, doth put [it] in a secret place, nor under the measure, but on the lamp-stand, that those coming in may behold the light.
'The lamp of the body is the eye, when then thine eye may be simple, thy whole body also is lightened; and when it may be evil, thy body also is darkened;
take heed, then, lest the light that [is] in thee be darkness;
if then thy whole body is lightened, not having any part darkened, the whole shall be lightened, as when the lamp by the brightness may give thee light.'
And in [his] speaking, a certain Pharisee was asking him that he might dine with him, and having gone in, he reclined (at meat),
and the Pharisee having seen, did wonder that he did not first baptize himself before the dinner.
And the Lord said unto him, 'Now do ye, the Pharisees, the outside of the cup and of the plate make clean, but your inward part is full of rapine and wickedness;
unthinking! did not He who made the outside also the inside make?
But what ye have give ye [as] alms, and, lo, all things are clean to you.
'But woe to you, the Pharisees, because ye tithe the mint, and the rue, and every herb, and ye pass by the judgment, and the love of God; these things it behoveth to do, and those not to be neglecting.
'Woe to you, the Pharisees, because ye love the first seats in the synagogues, and the salutations in the market-places.
'Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, because ye are as the unseen tombs, and the men walking above have not known.'
And one of the lawyers answering, saith to him, 'Teacher, these things saying, us also thou dost insult;'
and he said, 'And to you, the lawyers, woe! because ye burden men with burdens grievous to be borne, and ye yourselves with one of your fingers do not touch the burdens.
'Woe to you, because ye build the tombs of the prophets, and your fathers killed them.
Then do ye testify, and are well pleased with the works of your fathers, because they indeed killed them, and ye do build their tombs;
because of this also the wisdom of God said: I will send to them prophets, and apostles, and some of them they shall kill and persecute,
that the blood of all the prophets, that is being poured forth from the foundation of the world, may be required from this generation;
from the blood of Abel unto the blood of Zacharias, who perished between the altar and the house; yes, I say to you, It shall be required from this generation.
'Woe to you, the lawyers, because ye took away the key of the knowledge; yourselves ye did not enter; and those coming in, ye did hinder.'
And in his speaking these things unto them, the scribes and the Pharisees began fearfully to urge and to press him to speak about many things,
laying wait for him, and seeking to catch something out of his mouth, that they might accuse him.
At which time the myriads of the multitude having been gathered together, so as to tread upon one another, he began to say unto his disciples, first, 'Take heed to yourselves of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy;
and there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall not be known;
because whatever in the darkness ye said, in the light shall be heard: and what to the ear ye spake in the inner-chambers, shall be proclaimed upon the house-tops.
'And I say to you, my friends, be not afraid of those killing the body, and after these things are not having anything over to do;
but I will show to you, whom ye may fear; Fear him who, after the killing, is having authority to cast to the gehenna; yes, I say to you, Fear ye Him.
'Are not five sparrows sold for two assars? and one of them is not forgotten before God,
but even the hairs of your head have been all numbered; therefore fear ye not, than many sparrows ye are of more value.
'And I say to you, Every one — whoever may confess with me before men, the Son of Man also shall confess with him before the messengers of God,
and he who hath denied me before men, shall be denied before the messengers of God,
and every one whoever shall say a word to the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven to him, but to him who to the Holy Spirit did speak evil, it shall not be forgiven.
'And when they bring you before the synagogues, and the rulers, and the authorities, be not anxious how or what ye may reply, or what ye may say,
for the Holy Spirit shall teach you in that hour what it behoveth [you] to say.'
And a certain one said to him, out of the multitude, 'Teacher, say to my brother to divide with me the inheritance.'
And he said to him, 'Man, who set me a judge or a divider over you?'
And he said unto them, 'Observe, and beware of the covetousness, because not in the abundance of one's goods is his life.'
And he spake a simile unto them, saying, 'Of a certain rich man the field brought forth well;
and he was reasoning within himself, saying, What shall I do, because I have not where I shall gather together my fruits?
and he said, This I will do, I will take down my storehouses, and greater ones I will build, and I will gather together there all my products and my good things,
and I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast many good things laid up for many years, be resting, eat, drink, be merry.
'And God said to him, Unthinking one! this night thy soul they shall require from thee, and what things thou didst prepare — to whom shall they be?
so [is] he who is treasuring up to himself, and is not rich toward God.'
And he said unto his disciples, 'Because of this, to you I say, Be not anxious for your life, what ye may eat; nor for the body, what ye may put on;
the life is more than the nourishment, and the body than the clothing.
'Consider the ravens, that they sow not, nor reap, to which there is no barn nor storehouse, and God doth nourish them; how much better are ye than the fowls?
and who of you, being anxious, is able to add to his age one cubit?
If, then, ye are not able for the least — why for the rest are ye anxious?
'Consider the lilies, how do they grow? they labour not, nor do they spin, and I say to you, not even Solomon in all his glory was arrayed as one of these;
and if the herbage in the field, that to-day is, and to-morrow into an oven is cast, God doth so clothe, how much more you — ye of little faith?
'And ye — seek not what ye may eat, or what ye may drink, and be not in suspense,
for all these things do the nations of the world seek after, and your Father hath known that ye have need of these things;
but, seek ye the reign of God, and all these things shall be added to you.
'Fear not, little flock, because your Father did delight to give you the reign;
sell your goods, and give alms, make to yourselves bags that become not old, a treasure unfailing in the heavens, where thief doth not come near, nor moth destroy;
for where your treasure is, there also your heart will be.
'Let your loins be girded, and the lamps burning,
and ye like to men waiting for their lord, when he shall return out of the wedding feasts, that he having come and knocked, immediately they may open to him.
'Happy those servants, whom the lord, having come, shall find watching; verily I say to you, that he will gird himself, and will cause them to recline (at meat), and having come near, will minister to them;
and if he may come in the second watch, and in the third watch he may come, and may find [it] so, happy are those servants.
'And this know, that if the master of the house had known what hour the thief doth come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house to be broken through;
and ye, then, become ye ready, because at the hour ye think not, the Son of Man doth come.'
And Peter said to him, 'Sir, unto us this simile dost thou speak, or also unto all?'
And the Lord said, 'Who, then, is the faithful and prudent steward whom the lord shall set over his household, to give in season the wheat measure?
Happy that servant, whom his lord, having come, shall find doing so;
truly I say to you, that over all his goods he will set him.
'And if that servant may say in his heart, My lord doth delay to come, and may begin to beat the men-servants and the maid-servants, to eat also, and to drink, and to be drunken;
the lord of that servant will come in a day in which he doth not look for [him], and in an hour that he doth not know, and will cut him off, and his portion with the unfaithful he will appoint.
'And that servant, who having known his lord's will, and not having prepared, nor having gone according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes,
and he who, not having known, and having done things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few; and to every one to whom much was given, much shall be required from him; and to whom they did commit much, more abundantly they will ask of him.
'Fire I came to cast to the earth, and what will I if already it was kindled?
but I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I pressed till it may be completed!
'Think ye that peace I came to give in the earth? no, I say to you, but rather division;
for there shall be henceforth five in one house divided — three against two, and two against three;
a father shall be divided against a son, and a son against a father, a mother against a daughter, and a daughter against a mother, a mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.'
And he said also to the multitudes, 'When ye may see the cloud rising from the west, immediately ye say, A shower doth come, and it is so;
and when — a south wind blowing, ye say, that there will be heat, and it is;
hypocrites! the face of the earth and of the heaven ye have known to make proof of, but this time — how do ye not make proof of [it]?
'And why, also, of yourselves, judge ye not what is righteous?
for, as thou art going away with thy opponent to the ruler, in the way give diligence to be released from him, lest he may drag thee unto the judge, and the judge may deliver thee to the officer, and the officer may cast thee into prison;
I say to thee, thou mayest not come forth thence till even the last mite thou mayest give back.'
And there were present certain at that time, telling him about the Galileans, whose blood Pilate did mingle with their sacrifices;
and Jesus answering said to them, 'Think ye that these Galileans became sinners beyond all the Galileans, because they have suffered such things?
No — I say to you, but, if ye may not reform, all ye even so shall perish.
'Or those eighteen, on whom the tower in Siloam fell, and killed them; think ye that these became debtors beyond all men who are dwelling in Jerusalem?
No — I say to you, but, if ye may not reform, all ye in like manner shall perish.'
And he spake this simile: 'A certain one had a fig-tree planted in his vineyard, and he came seeking fruit in it, and he did not find;
and he said unto the vine-dresser, Lo, three years I come seeking fruit in this fig-tree, and do not find, cut it off, why also the ground doth it render useless?
'And he answering saith to him, Sir, suffer it also this year, till that I may dig about it, and cast in dung;
and if indeed it may bear fruit — ;and if not so, thereafter thou shalt cut it off.'
And he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath,
and lo, there was a woman having a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and she was bowed together, and not able to bend back at all,
and Jesus having seen her, did call [her] near, and said to her, 'Woman, thou hast been loosed from thy infirmity;'
and he laid on her [his] hands, and presently she was set upright, and was glorifying God.
And the chief of the synagogue answering — much displeased that on the sabbath Jesus healed — said to the multitude, 'Six days there are in which it behoveth [us] to be working; in these, then, coming, be healed, and not on the sabbath-day.'
Then the Lord answered him and said, 'Hypocrite, doth not each of you on the sabbath loose his ox or ass from the stall, and having led away, doth water [it]?
and this one, being a daughter of Abraham, whom the Adversary bound, lo, eighteen years, did it not behove to be loosed from this bond on the sabbath-day?'
And he saying these things, all who were opposed to him were being ashamed, and all the multitude were rejoicing over all the glorious things that are being done by him.
And he said, 'To what is the reign of God like? and to what shall I liken it?
It is like to a grain of mustard, which a man having taken, did cast into his garden, and it increased, and came to a great tree, and the fowls of the heavens did rest in its branches.'
And again he said, 'To what shall I liken the reign of God?
It is like leaven, which a woman, having taken, did hide in three measures of meal, till that all was leavened.'
And he was going through cities and villages, teaching, and making progress toward Jerusalem;
and a certain one said to him, 'Sir, are those saved few?' and he said unto them,
'Be striving to go in through the straight gate, because many, I say to you, will seek to go in, and shall not be able;
from the time the master of the house may have risen up, and may have shut the door, and ye may begin without to stand, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, lord, open to us, and he answering shall say to you, I have not known you whence ye are,
then ye may begin to say, We did eat before thee, and did drink, and in our broad places thou didst teach;
and he shall say, I say to you, I have not known you whence ye are; depart from me, all ye workers of the unrighteousness.
'There shall be there the weeping and the gnashing of the teeth, when ye may see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the reign of God, and yourselves being cast out without;
and they shall come from east and west, and from north and south, and shall recline in the reign of God,
and lo, there are last who shall be first, and there are first who shall be last.'
On that day there came near certain Pharisees, saying to him, 'Go forth, and be going on hence, for Herod doth wish to kill thee;'
and he said to them, 'Having gone, say to this fox, Lo, I cast forth demons, and perfect cures to-day and to-morrow, and the third [day] I am being perfected;
but it behoveth me to-day, and to-morrow, and the [day] following, to go on, because it is not possible for a prophet to perish out of Jerusalem.
'Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that is killing the prophets, and stoning those sent unto her, how often did I will to gather together thy children, as a hen her brood under the wings, and ye did not will.
'Lo, your house is being left to you desolate, and verily I say to you — ye may not see me, till it may come, when ye may say, Blessed [is] he who is coming in the name of the Lord.'
And it came to pass, on his going into the house of a certain one of the chiefs of the Pharisees, on a sabbath, to eat bread, that they were watching him,
and lo, there was a certain dropsical man before him;
and Jesus answering spake to the lawyers and Pharisees, saying, 'Is it lawful on the sabbath-day to heal?'
and they were silent, and having taken hold of [him], he healed him, and let [him] go;
and answering them he said, 'Of which of you shall an ass or ox fall into a pit, and he will not immediately draw it up on the sabbath-day?'
and they were not able to answer him again unto these things.
And he spake a simile unto those called, marking how they were choosing out the first couches, saying unto them,
'When thou mayest be called by any one to marriage-feasts, thou mayest not recline on the first couch, lest a more honourable than thou may have been called by him,
and he who did call thee and him having come shall say to thee, Give to this one place, and then thou mayest begin with shame to occupy the last place.
'But, when thou mayest be called, having gone on, recline in the last place, that when he who called thee may come, he may say to thee, Friend, come up higher; then thou shalt have glory before those reclining with thee;
because every one who is exalting himself shall be humbled, and he who is humbling himself shall be exalted.'
And he said also to him who did call him, 'When thou mayest make a dinner or a supper, be not calling thy friends, nor thy brethren, nor thy kindred, nor rich neighbours, lest they may also call thee again, and a recompense may come to thee;
but when thou mayest make a feast, be calling poor, maimed, lame, blind,
and happy thou shalt be, because they have not to recompense thee, for it shall be recompensed to thee in the rising again of the righteous.'
And one of those reclining with him, having heard these things, said to him, 'Happy [is] he who shall eat bread in the reign of God;'
and he said to him, 'A certain man made a great supper, and called many,
and he sent his servant at the hour of the supper to say to those having been called, Be coming, because now are all things ready.
'And they began with one consent all to excuse themselves: The first said to him, A field I bought, and I have need to go forth and see it; I beg of thee, have me excused.
'And another said, Five yoke of oxen I bought, and I go on to prove them; I beg of thee, have me excused:
and another said, A wife I married, and because of this I am not able to come.
'And that servant having come, told to his lord these things, then the master of the house, having been angry, said to his servant, Go forth quickly to the broad places and lanes of the city, and the poor, and maimed, and lame, and blind, bring in hither.
'And the servant said, Sir, it hath been done as thou didst command, and still there is room.
'And the lord said unto the servant, Go forth to the ways and hedges, and constrain to come in, that my house may be filled;
for I say to you, that none of those men who have been called shall taste of my supper.'
And there were going on with him great multitudes, and having turned, he said unto them,
'If any one doth come unto me, and doth not hate his own father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brothers, and sisters, and yet even his own life, he is not able to be my disciple;
and whoever doth not bear his cross, and come after me, is not able to be my disciple.
'For who of you, willing to build a tower, doth not first, having sat down, count the expence, whether he have the things for completing?
lest that he having laid a foundation, and not being able to finish, all who are beholding may begin to mock him,
saying — This man began to build, and was not able to finish.
'Or what king going on to engage with another king in war, doth not, having sat down, first consult if he be able with ten thousand to meet him who with twenty thousand is coming against him?
and if not so — he being yet a long way off — having sent an embassy, he doth ask the things for peace.
'So, then, every one of you who doth not take leave of all that he himself hath, is not able to be my disciple.
'The salt [is] good, but if the salt doth become tasteless, with what shall it be seasoned?
neither for land nor for manure is it fit — they cast it without. He who is having ears to hear — let him hear.'
And all the tax-gatherers and the sinners were coming nigh to him, to hear him,
and the Pharisees and the scribes were murmuring, saying — This one doth receive sinners, and doth eat with them.'
And he spake unto them this simile, saying,
'What man of you having a hundred sheep, and having lost one out of them, doth not leave behind the ninety-nine in the wilderness, and go on after the lost one, till he may find it?
and having found, he doth lay [it] on his shoulders rejoicing,
and having come to the house, he doth call together the friends and the neighbours, saying to them, Rejoice with me, because I found my sheep — the lost one.
'I say to you, that so joy shall be in the heaven over one sinner reforming, rather than over ninety-nine righteous men, who have no need of reformation.
'Or what woman having ten drachms, if she may lose one drachm, doth not light a lamp, and sweep the house, and seek carefully till that she may find?
and having found, she doth call together the female friends and the neighbours, saying, Rejoice with me, for I found the drachm that I lost.
'So I say to you, joy doth come before the messengers of God over one sinner reforming.'
And he said, 'A certain man had two sons,
and the younger of them said to the father, Father, give me the portion of the substance falling to [me], and he divided to them the living.
'And not many days after, having gathered all together, the younger son went abroad to a far country, and there he scattered his substance, living riotously;
and he having spent all, there came a mighty famine on that country, and himself began to be in want;
and having gone on, he joined himself to one of the citizens of that country, and he sent him to the fields to feed swine,
and he was desirous to fill his belly from the husks that the swine were eating, and no one was giving to him.
'And having come to himself, he said, How many hirelings of my father have a superabundance of bread, and I here with hunger am perishing!
having risen, I will go on unto my father, and will say to him, Father, I did sin — to the heaven, and before thee,
and no more am I worthy to be called thy son; make me as one of thy hirelings.
'And having risen, he went unto his own father, and he being yet far distant, his father saw him, and was moved with compassion, and having ran he fell upon his neck and kissed him;
and the son said to him, Father, I did sin — to the heaven, and before thee, and no more am I worthy to be called thy son.
'And the father said unto his servants, Bring forth the first robe, and clothe him, and give a ring for his hand, and sandals for the feet;
and having brought the fatted calf, kill [it], and having eaten, we may be merry,
because this my son was dead, and did live again, and he was lost, and was found; and they began to be merry.
'And his elder son was in a field, and as, coming, he drew nigh to the house, he heard music and dancing,
and having called near one of the young men, he was inquiring what these things might be,
and he said to him — Thy brother is arrived, and thy father did kill the fatted calf, because in health he did receive him back.
'And he was angry, and would not go in, therefore his father, having come forth, was entreating him;
and he answering said to the father, Lo, so many years I do serve thee, and never thy command did I transgress, and to me thou didst never give a kid, that with my friends I might make merry;
but when thy son — this one who did devour thy living with harlots — came, thou didst kill to him the fatted calf.
'And he said to him, Child, thou art always with me, and all my things are thine;
but to be merry, and to be glad, it was needful, because this thy brother was dead, and did live again, he was lost, and was found.'
And he said also unto his disciples, 'A certain man was rich, who had a steward, and he was accused to him as scattering his goods;
and having called him, he said to him, What [is] this I hear about thee? render the account of thy stewardship, for thou mayest not any longer be steward.
'And the steward said in himself, What shall I do, because my lord doth take away the stewardship from me? to dig I am not able, to beg I am ashamed: —
I have known what I shall do, that, when I may be removed from the stewardship, they may receive me to their houses.
'And having called near each one of his lord's debtors, he said to the first, How much dost thou owe to my lord?
and he said, A hundred baths of oil; and he said to him, Take thy bill, and having sat down write fifty.
'Afterward to another he said, And thou, how much dost thou owe? and he said, A hundred cors of wheat; and he saith to him, Take thy bill, and write eighty.
'And the lord commended the unrighteous steward that he did prudently, because the sons of this age are more prudent than the sons of the light, in respect to their generation.
and I say to you, Make to yourselves friends out of the mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye may fail, they may receive you to the age-during tabernacles.
'He who is faithful in the least, [is] also faithful in much; and he who in the least [is] unrighteous, is also unrighteous in much;
if, then, in the unrighteous mammon ye became not faithful — the true who will entrust to you?
and if in the other's ye became not faithful — your own, who shall give to you?
'No domestic is able to serve two lords, for either the one he will hate, and the other he will love; or one he will hold to, and of the other he will be heedless; ye are not able to serve God and mammon.'
And also the Pharisees, being lovers of money, were hearing all these things, and were deriding him,
and he said to them, 'Ye are those declaring yourselves righteous before men, but God doth know your hearts; because that which among men is high, [is] abomination before God;
the law and the prophets [are] till John; since then the reign of God is proclaimed good news, and every one doth press into it;
and it is easier to the heaven and the earth to pass away, than of the law one tittle to fall.
'Every one who is sending away his wife, and marrying another, doth commit adultery; and every one who is marrying her sent away from a husband doth commit adultery.
'And — a certain man was rich, and was clothed in purple and fine linen, making merry sumptuously every day,
and there was a certain poor man, by name Lazarus, who was laid at his porch, full of sores,
and desiring to be filled from the crumbs that are falling from the table of the rich man; yea, also the dogs, coming, were licking his sores.
'And it came to pass, that the poor man died, and that he was carried away by the messengers to the bosom of Abraham — and the rich man also died, and was buried;
and in the hades having lifted up his eyes, being in torments, he doth see Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom,
and having cried, he said, Father Abraham, deal kindly with me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and may cool my tongue, because I am distressed in this flame.
'And Abraham said, Child, remember that thou did receive — thou — thy good things in thy life, and Lazarus in like manner the evil things, and now he is comforted, and thou art distressed;
and besides all these things, between us and you a great chasm is fixed, so that they who are willing to go over from hence unto you are not able, nor do they from thence to us pass through.
'And he said, I pray thee, then, father, that thou mayest send him to the house of my father,
for I have five brothers, so that he may thoroughly testify to them, that they also may not come to this place of torment.
'Abraham saith to him, They have Moses and the prophets, let them hear them;
and he said, No, father Abraham, but if any one from the dead may go unto them, they will reform.
And he said to him, If Moses and the prophets they do not hear, neither if one may rise out of the dead will they be persuaded.'
And he said unto the disciples, 'It is impossible for the stumbling blocks not to come, but woe [to him] through whom they come;
it is more profitable to him if a weighty millstone is put round about his neck, and he hath been cast into the sea, than that he may cause one of these little ones to stumble.
'Take heed to yourselves, and, if thy brother may sin in regard to thee, rebuke him, and if he may reform, forgive him,
and if seven times in the day he may sin against thee, and seven times in the day may turn back to thee, saying, I reform; thou shalt forgive him.'
And the apostles said to the Lord, 'Add to us faith;'
and the Lord said, 'If ye had faith as a grain of mustard, ye would have said to this sycamine, Be uprooted, and be planted in the sea, and it would have obeyed you.
'But, who is he of you — having a servant ploughing or feeding — who, to him having come in out of the field, will say, Having come near, recline at meat?
but will not [rather] say to him, Prepare what I may sup, and having girded thyself about, minister to me, till I eat and drink, and after these things thou shalt eat and drink?
Hath he favour to that servant because he did the things directed? I think not.
'So also ye, when ye may have done all the things directed you, say — We are unprofitable servants, because that which we owed to do — we have done.'
And it came to pass, in his going on to Jerusalem, that he passed through the midst of Samaria and Galilee,
and he entering into a certain village, there met him ten leprous men, who stood afar off,
and they lifted up the voice, saying, 'Jesus, master, deal kindly with us;'
and having seen [them], he said to them, 'Having gone on, shew yourselves to the priests;' and it came to pass, in their going, they were cleansed,
and one of them having seen that he was healed did turn back, with a loud voice glorifying God,
and he fell upon [his] face at his feet, giving thanks to him, and he was a Samaritan.
And Jesus answering said, 'Were not the ten cleansed, and the nine — where?
There were not found who did turn back to give glory to God, except this alien;'
and he said to him, 'Having risen, be going on, thy faith hath saved thee.'
And having been questioned by the Pharisees, when the reign of God doth come, he answered them, and said, 'The reign of God doth not come with observation;
nor shall they say, Lo, here; or lo, there; for lo, the reign of God is within you.'
And he said unto his disciples, 'Days will come, when ye shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of Man, and ye shall not behold [it];
and they shall say to you, Lo, here; or lo, there; ye may not go away, nor follow;
for as the lightning that is lightening out of the one [part] under heaven, to the other part under heaven doth shine, so shall be also the Son of Man in his day;
and first it behoveth him to suffer many things, and to be rejected by this generation.
'And, as it came to pass in the days of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of Man;
they were eating, they were drinking, they were marrying, they were given in marriage, till the day that Noah entered into the ark, and the deluge came, and destroyed all;
in like manner also, as it came to pass in the days of Lot; they were eating, they were drinking, they were buying, they were selling, they were planting, they were building;
and on the day Lot went forth from Sodom, He rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed all.
'According to these things it shall be, in the day the Son of Man is revealed;
in that day, he who shall be on the house top, and his vessels in the house, let him not come down to take them away; and he in the field, in like manner, let him not turn backward;
remember the wife of Lot.
Whoever may seek to save his life, shall lose it; and whoever may lose it, shall preserve it.
'I say to you, In that night, there shall be two men on one couch, the one shall be taken, and the other shall be left;
two women shall be grinding at the same place together, the one shall be taken, and the other shall be left;
two men shall be in the field, the one shall be taken, and the other left.'
And they answering say to him, 'Where, sir?' and he said to them, 'Where the body [is], there will the eagles be gathered together.'
And he spake also a simile to them, that it behoveth [us] always to pray, and not to faint,
saying, 'A certain judge was in a certain city — God he is not fearing, and man he is not regarding —
and a widow was in that city, and she was coming unto him, saying, Do me justice on my opponent,
and he would not for a time, but after these things he said in himself, Even if God I do not fear, and man do not regard,
yet because this widow doth give me trouble, I will do her justice, lest, perpetually coming, she may plague me.'
And the Lord said, 'Hear ye what the unrighteous judge saith:
and shall not God execute the justice to His choice ones, who are crying unto Him day and night — bearing long in regard to them?
I say to you, that He will execute the justice to them quickly; but the Son of Man having come, shall he find the faith upon the earth?'
And he spake also unto certain who have been trusting in themselves that they were righteous, and have been despising the rest, this simile:
'Two men went up to the temple to pray, the one a Pharisee, and the other a tax-gatherer;
the Pharisee having stood by himself, thus prayed: God, I thank Thee that I am not as the rest of men, rapacious, unrighteous, adulterers, or even as this tax-gatherer;
I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all things — as many as I possess.
'And the tax-gatherer, having stood afar off, would not even the eyes lift up to the heaven, but was smiting on his breast, saying, God be propitious to me — the sinner!
I say to you, this one went down declared righteous, to his house, rather than that one: for every one who is exalting himself shall be humbled, and he who is humbling himself shall be exalted.'
And they were bringing near also the babes, that he may touch them, and the disciples having seen did rebuke them,
and Jesus having called them near, said, 'Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the reign of God;
verily I say to you, Whoever may not receive the reign of God as a little child, may not enter into it.'
And a certain ruler questioned him, saying, 'Good teacher, what having done — shall I inherit life age-during?'
And Jesus said to him, 'Why me dost thou call good? no one [is] good, except One — God;
the commands thou hast known: Thou mayest not commit adultery, Thou mayest do no murder, Thou mayest not steal, Thou mayest not bear false witness, Honour thy father and thy mother.'
And he said, 'All these I did keep from my youth;'
and having heard these things, Jesus said to him, 'Yet one thing to thee is lacking; all things — as many as thou hast — sell, and distribute to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven, and come, be following me;'
and he, having heard these things, became very sorrowful, for he was exceeding rich.
And Jesus having seen him become very sorrowful, said, 'How hardly shall those having riches enter into the reign of God!
for it is easier for a camel through the eye of a needle to enter, than for a rich man into the reign of God to enter.'
And those who heard, said, 'And who is able to be saved?'
and he said, 'The things impossible with men are possible with God.'
And Peter said, 'Lo, we left all, and did follow thee;'
and he said to them, 'Verily I say to you, that there is not one who left house, or parents, or brothers, or wife, or children, for the sake of the reign of God,
who may not receive back manifold more in this time, and in the coming age, life age-during.'
And having taken the twelve aside, he said unto them, 'Lo, we go up to Jerusalem, and all things shall be completed — that have been written through the prophets — to the Son of Man,
for he shall be delivered up to the nations, and shall be mocked, and insulted, and spit upon,
and having scourged they shall put him to death, and on the third day he shall rise again.'
And they none of these things understood, and this saying was hid from them, and they were not knowing the things said.
And it came to pass, in his coming nigh to Jericho, a certain blind man was sitting beside the way begging,
and having heard a multitude going by, he was inquiring what this may be,
and they brought him word that Jesus the Nazarene doth pass by,
and he cried out, saying, 'Jesus, Son of David, deal kindly with me;'
and those going before were rebuking him, that he might be silent, but he was much more crying out, 'Son of David, deal kindly with me.'
And Jesus having stood, commanded him to be brought unto him, and he having come nigh, he questioned him,
saying, 'What wilt thou I shall do to thee?' and he said, 'Sir, that I may receive sight.'
And Jesus said to him, 'Receive thy sight; thy faith hath saved thee;'
and presently he did receive sight, and was following him, glorifying God; and all the people, having seen, did give praise to God.
And having entered, he was passing through Jericho,
and lo, a man, by name called Zaccheus, and he was a chief tax-gatherer, and he was rich,
and he was seeking to see Jesus, who he is, and was not able for the multitude, because in stature he was small,
and having run forward before, he went up on a sycamore, that he may see him, because through that [way] he was about to pass by.
And as Jesus came up to the place, having looked up, he saw him, and said unto him, 'Zaccheus, having hastened, come down, for to-day in thy house it behoveth me to remain;'
and he having hastened did come down, and did receive him rejoicing;
and having seen [it], they were all murmuring, saying — 'With a sinful man he went in to lodge!'
And Zaccheus having stood, said unto the Lord, 'Lo, the half of my goods, sir, I give to the poor, and if of any one anything I did take by false accusation, I give back fourfold.'
And Jesus said unto him — 'To-day salvation did come to this house, inasmuch as he also is a son of Abraham;
for the Son of Man came to seek and to save the lost.'
And while they are hearing these things, having added he spake a simile, because of his being nigh to Jerusalem, and of their thinking that the reign of God is about presently to be made manifest.
He said therefore, 'A certain man of birth went on to a far country, to take to himself a kingdom, and to return,
and having called ten servants of his own, he gave to them ten pounds, and said unto them, Do business — till I come;
and his citizens were hating him, and did send an embassy after him, saying, We do not wish this one to reign over us.
'And it came to pass, on his coming back, having taken the kingdom, that he commanded these servants to be called to him, to whom he gave the money, that he might know what any one had done in business.
'And the first came near, saying, Sir, thy pound did gain ten pounds;
and he said to him, Well done, good servant, because in a very little thou didst become faithful, be having authority over ten cities.
'And the second came, saying, Sir, thy pound made five pounds;
and he said also to this one, And thou, become thou over five cities.
'And another came, saying, Sir, lo, thy pound, that I had lying away in a napkin;
for I was afraid of thee, because thou art an austere man; thou takest up what thou didst not lay down, and reapest what thou didst not sow.
'And he saith to him, Out of thy mouth I will judge thee, evil servant: thou knewest that I am an austere man, taking up what I did not lay down, and reaping what I did not sow!
and wherefore didst thou not give my money to the bank, and I, having come, with interest might have received it?
'And to those standing by he said, Take from him the pound, and give to him having the ten pounds —
(and they said to him, Sir, he hath ten pounds) —
for I say to you, that to every one having shall be given, and from him not having, also what he hath shall be taken from him,
but those my enemies, who did not wish me to reign over them, bring hither and slay before me.'
And having said these things, he went on before, going up to Jerusalem.
And it came to pass, as he came nigh to Bethphage and Bethany, unto the mount called of the Olives, he sent two of his disciples,
having said, Go away to the village over-against, in which, entering into, ye shall find a colt bound, on which no one of men did ever sit, having loosed it, bring [it];
and if any one doth question you, Wherefore do ye loose [it]? thus ye shall say to him — The Lord hath need of it.'
And those sent, having gone away, found according as he said to them,
and while they are loosing the colt, its owners said unto them, 'Why loose ye the colt?'
and they said, 'The Lord hath need of it;'
and they brought it unto Jesus, and having cast their garments upon the colt, they did set Jesus upon it.
And as he is going, they were spreading their garments in the way,
and as he is coming nigh now, at the descent of the mount of the Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began rejoicing to praise God with a great voice for all the mighty works they had seen,
saying, 'blessed [is] he who is coming, a king in the name of the Lord; peace in heaven, and glory in the highest.'
And certain of the Pharisees from the multitude said unto him, 'Teacher, rebuke thy disciples;'
and he answering said to them, 'I say to you, that, if these shall be silent, the stones will cry out!'
And when he came nigh, having seen the city, he wept over it,
saying — 'If thou didst know, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things for thy peace; but now they were hid from thine eyes.
'Because days shall come upon thee, and thine enemies shall cast around thee a rampart, and compass thee round, and press thee on every side,
and lay thee low, and thy children within thee, and they shall not leave in thee a stone upon a stone, because thou didst not know the time of thy inspection.'
And having entered into the temple, he began to cast forth those selling in it, and those buying,
saying to them, 'It hath been written, My house is a house of prayer — but ye made it a den of robbers.'
And he was teaching daily in the temple, but the chief priests and the scribes were seeking to destroy him — also the chiefs of the people —
and they were not finding what they shall do, for all the people were hanging on him, hearing him.
And it came to pass, on one of those days, as he is teaching the people in the temple, and proclaiming good news, the chief priests and the scribes, with the elders, came upon [him],
and spake unto him, saying, 'Tell us by what authority thou dost these things? or who is he that gave to thee this authority?'
And he answering said unto them, 'I will question you — I also — one thing, and tell me:
the baptism of John, from heaven was it, or from men?'
And they reasoned with themselves, saying — 'If we may say, From heaven, he will say, Wherefore, then, did ye not believe him?
and if we may say, From men, all the people will stone us, for they are having been persuaded John to be a prophet.'
And they answered, that they knew not whence [it was],
and Jesus said to them, 'Neither do I say to you by what authority I do these things.'
And he began to speak unto the people this simile: 'A certain man planted a vineyard, and gave it out to husbandmen, and went abroad for a long time,
and at the season he sent unto the husbandmen a servant, that from the fruit of the vineyard they may give to him, but the husbandmen having beat him, did send [him] away empty.
'And he added to send another servant, and they that one also having beaten and dishonoured, did send away empty;
and he added to send a third, and this one also, having wounded, they did cast out.
'And the owner of the vineyard said, What shall I do? I will send my son — the beloved, perhaps having seen this one, they will do reverence;
and having seen him, the husbandmen reasoned among themselves, saying, This is the heir; come, we may kill him, that the inheritance may become ours;
and having cast him outside of the vineyard, they killed [him]; what, then, shall the owner of the vineyard do to them?
He will come, and destroy these husbandmen, and will give the vineyard to others.' And having heard, they said, 'Let it not be!'
and he, having looked upon them, said, 'What, then, is this that hath been written: A stone that the builders rejected — this became head of a corner?
every one who hath fallen on that stone shall be broken, and on whom it may fall, it will crush him to pieces.'
And the chief priests and the scribes sought to lay hands on him in that hour, and they feared the people, for they knew that against them he spake this simile.
And, having watched [him], they sent forth liers in wait, feigning themselves to be righteous, that they might take hold of his word, to deliver him up to the rule and to the authority of the governor,
and they questioned him, saying, 'Teacher, we have known that thou dost say and teach rightly, and dost not accept a person, but in truth the way of God dost teach;
Is it lawful to us to give tribute to Caesar or not?'
And he, having perceived their craftiness, said unto them, 'Why me do ye tempt?
shew me a denary; of whom hath it an image and superscription?' and they answering said, 'Of Caesar:'
and he said to them, 'Give back, therefore, the things of Caesar to Caesar, and the things of God to God;'
and they were not able to take hold on his saying before the people, and having wondered at his answer, they were silent.
And certain of the Sadducees, who are denying that there is a rising again, having come near, questioned him,
saying, 'Teacher, Moses wrote to us, If any one's brother may die, having a wife, and he may die childless — that his brother may take the wife, and may raise up seed to his brother.
'There were, then, seven brothers, and the first having taken a wife, died childless,
and the second took the wife, and he died childless,
and the third took her, and in like manner also the seven — they left not children, and they died;
and last of all died also the woman:
in the rising again, then, of which of them doth she become wife? — for the seven had her as wife.'
And Jesus answering said to them, 'The sons of this age do marry and are given in marriage,
but those accounted worthy to obtain that age, and the rising again that is out of the dead, neither marry, nor are they given in marriage;
for neither are they able to die any more — for they are like messengers — and they are sons of God, being sons of the rising again.
'And that the dead are raised, even Moses shewed at the Bush, since he doth call the Lord, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob;
and He is not a God of dead men, but of living, for all live to Him.'
And certain of the scribes answering said, 'Teacher, thou didst say well;'
and no more durst they question him anything.
And he said unto them, 'How do they say the Christ to be son of David,
and David himself saith in the Book of Psalms, The Lord said to my lord, Sit thou on my right hand,
till I shall make thine enemies thy footstool;
David, then, doth call him lord, and how is he his son?'
And, all the people hearing, he said to his disciples,
'Take heed of the scribes, who are wishing to walk in long robes, and are loving salutations in the markets, and first seats in the synagogues, and first couches in the suppers,
who devour the houses of the widows, and for a pretence make long prayers, these shall receive more abundant judgment.'
And having looked up, he saw those who did cast their gifts to the treasury — rich men,
and he saw also a certain poor widow casting there two mites,
and he said, 'Truly I say to you, that this poor widow did cast in more than all;
for all these out of their superabundance did cast into the gifts to God, but this one out of her want, all the living that she had, did cast in.'
And certain saying about the temple, that with goodly stones and devoted things it hath been adorned, he said,
'These things that ye behold — days will come, in which there shall not be left a stone upon a stone, that shall not be thrown down.'
And they questioned him, saying, 'Teacher, when, then, shall these things be? and what [is] the sign when these things may be about to happen?'
And he said, 'See — ye may not be led astray, for many shall come in my name, saying — I am [he], and the time hath come nigh; go not on then after them;
and when ye may hear of wars and uprisings, be not terrified, for it behoveth these things to happen first, but the end [is] not immediately.'
Then said he to them, 'Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom,
great shakings also in every place, and famines, and pestilences, there shall be; fearful things also, and great signs from heaven there shall be;
and before all these, they shall lay on you their hands, and persecute, delivering up to synagogues and prisons, being brought before kings and governors for my name's sake;
and it shall become to you for a testimony.
'Settle, then, to your hearts, not to meditate beforehand to reply,
for I will give to you a mouth and wisdom that all your opposers shall not be able to refute or resist.
'And ye shall be delivered up also by parents, and brothers, and kindred, and friends, and they shall put of you to death;
and ye shall be hated by all because of my name —
and a hair out of your head shall not perish;
in your patience possess ye your souls.
'And when ye may see Jerusalem surrounded by encampments, then know that come nigh did her desolation;
then those in Judea, let them flee to the mountains; and those in her midst, let them depart out; and those in the countries, let them not come in to her;
because these are days of vengeance, to fulfil all things that have been written.
'And woe to those with child, and to those giving suck, in those days; for there shall be great distress on the land, and wrath on this people;
and they shall fall by the mouth of the sword, and shall be led captive to all the nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden down by nations, till the times of nations be fulfilled.
'And there shall be signs in sun, and moon, and stars, and on the land [is] distress of nations with perplexity, sea and billow roaring;
men fainting at heart from fear, and expectation of the things coming on the world, for the powers of the heavens shall be shaken.
'And then they shall see the Son of Man, coming in a cloud, with power and much glory;
and these things beginning to happen bend yourselves back, and lift up your heads, because your redemption doth draw nigh.'
And he spake a simile to them: 'See the fig-tree, and all the trees,
when they may now cast forth, having seen, of yourselves ye know that now is the summer nigh;
so also ye, when ye may see these things happening, ye know that near is the reign of God;
verily I say to you — This generation may not pass away till all may have come to pass;
the heaven and the earth shall pass away, but my words may not pass away.
'And take heed to yourselves, lest your hearts may be weighed down with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and anxieties of life, and suddenly that day may come on you,
for as a snare it shall come on all those dwelling on the face of all the land,
watch ye, then, in every season, praying that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that are about to come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man.'
And he was during the days in the temple teaching, and during the nights, going forth, he was lodging at the mount called of Olives;
and all the people were coming early unto him in the temple to hear him.
And the feast of the unleavened food was coming nigh, that is called Passover,
and the chief priests and the scribes were seeking how they may take him up, for they were afraid of the people.
And the Adversary entered into Judas, who is surnamed Iscariot, being of the number of the twelve,
and he, having gone away, spake with the chief priests and the magistrates, how he might deliver him up to them,
and they rejoiced, and covenanted to give him money,
and he agreed, and was seeking a favourable season to deliver him up to them without tumult.
And the day of the unleavened food came, in which it was behoving the passover to be sacrificed,
and he sent Peter and John, saying, 'Having gone on, prepare to us the passover, that we may eat;'
and they said to him, 'Where wilt thou that we might prepare?'
And he said to them, 'Lo, in your entering into the city, there shall meet you a man, bearing a pitcher of water, follow him to the house where he doth go in,
and ye shall say to the master of the house, The Teacher saith to thee, Where is the guest-chamber where the passover with my disciples I may eat?
and he shall show you a large upper room furnished, there make ready;'
and they, having gone away, found as he hath said to them, and they made ready the passover.
And when the hour come, he reclined (at meat), and the twelve apostles with him,
and he said unto them, 'With desire I did desire to eat this passover with you before my suffering,
for I say to you, that no more may I eat of it till it may be fulfilled in the reign of God.'
And having taken a cup, having given thanks, he said, 'Take this and divide to yourselves,
for I say to you that I may not drink of the produce of the vine till the reign of God may come.'
And having taken bread, having given thanks, he brake and gave to them, saying, 'This is my body, that for you is being given, this do ye — to remembrance of me.'
In like manner, also, the cup after the supping, saying, 'This cup [is] the new covenant in my blood, that for you is being poured forth.
'But, lo, the hand of him delivering me up [is] with me on the table,
and indeed the Son of Man doth go according to what hath been determined; but woe to that man through whom he is being delivered up.'
And they began to reason among themselves, who then of them it may be, who is about to do this thing.
And there happened also a strife among them — who of them is accounted to be greater.
And he said to them, 'The kings of the nations do exercise lordship over them, and those exercising authority upon them are called benefactors;
but ye [are] not so, but he who is greater among you — let him be as the younger; and he who is leading, as he who is ministering;
for who is greater? he who is reclining (at meat), or he who is ministering? is it not he who is reclining (at meat)? and I — I am in your midst as he who is ministering.
'And ye — ye are those who have remained with me in my temptations,
and I appoint to you, as my Father did appoint to me, a kingdom,
that ye may eat and may drink at my table, in my kingdom, and may sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.'
And the Lord said, 'Simon, Simon, lo, the Adversary did ask you for himself to sift as the wheat,
and I besought for thee, that thy faith may not fail; and thou, when thou didst turn, strengthen thy brethren.'
And he said to him, 'Sir, with thee I am ready both to prison and to death to go;'
and he said, 'I say to thee, Peter, a cock shall not crow to-day, before thrice thou mayest disown knowing me.'
And he said to them, 'When I sent you without bag, and scrip, and sandals, did ye lack anything?' and they said, 'Nothing.'
Then said he to them, 'But, now, he who is having a bag, let him take [it] up, and in like manner also a scrip; and he who is not having, let him sell his garment, and buy a sword,
for I say to you, that yet this that hath been written it behoveth to be fulfilled in me: And with lawless ones he was reckoned, for also the things concerning me have an end.'
And they said, 'Sir, lo, here [are] two swords;' and he said to them, 'It is sufficient.'
And having gone forth, he went on, according to custom, to the mount of the Olives, and his disciples also followed him,
and having come to the place, he said to them, 'Pray ye not to enter into temptation.'
And he was withdrawn from them, as it were a stone's cast, and having fallen on the knees he was praying,
saying, 'Father, if Thou be counselling to make this cup pass from me — ;but, not my will, but Thine be done.' —
And there appeared to him a messenger from heaven strengthening him;
and having been in agony, he was more earnestly praying, and his sweat became, as it were, great drops of blood falling upon the ground.
And having risen up from the prayer, having come unto the disciples, he found them sleeping from the sorrow,
and he said to them, 'Why do ye sleep? having risen, pray that ye may not enter into temptation.'
And while he is speaking, lo, a multitude, and he who is called Judas, one of the twelve, was coming before them, and he came nigh to Jesus to kiss him,
and Jesus said to him, 'Judas, with a kiss the Son of Man dost thou deliver up?'
And those about him, having seen what was about to be, said to him, 'Sir, shall we smite with a sword?'
And a certain one of them smote the servant of the chief priest, and took off his right ear,
and Jesus answering said, 'Suffer ye thus far,' and having touched his ear, he healed him.
And Jesus said to those having come upon him — chief priests, and magistrates of the temple, and elders — 'As upon a robber have ye come forth, with swords and sticks?
while daily I was with you in the temple, ye did stretch forth no hands against me; but this is your hour and the power of the darkness.'
And having taken him, they led and brought him to the house of the chief priest. And Peter was following afar off,
and they having kindled a fire in the midst of the court, and having sat down together, Peter was sitting in the midst of them,
and a certain maid having seen him sitting at the light, and having earnestly looked at him, she said, 'And this one was with him!'
and he disowned him, saying, 'Woman, I have not known him.'
And after a little, another having seen him, said, 'And thou art of them!' and Peter said, 'Man, I am not.'
And one hour, as it were, having intervened, a certain other was confidently affirming, saying, 'Of a truth this one also was with him, for he is also a Galilean;'
and Peter said, 'Man, I have not known what thou sayest;' and presently, while he is speaking, a cock crew.
And the Lord having turned did look on Peter, and Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how he said to him — 'Before a cock shall crow, thou mayest disown me thrice;'
and Peter having gone without, wept bitterly.
And the men who were holding Jesus were mocking him, beating [him];
and having blindfolded him, they were striking him on the face, and were questioning him, saying, 'Prophesy who he is who smote thee?'
and many other things, speaking evilly, they spake in regard to him.
And when it became day there was gathered together the eldership of the people, chief priests also, and scribes, and they led him up to their own sanhedrim,
saying, 'If thou be the Christ, tell us.' And he said to them, 'If I may tell you, ye will not believe;
and if I also question [you], ye will not answer me or send me away;
henceforth, there shall be the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the power of God.'
And they all said, 'Thou, then, art the Son of God?' and he said unto them, 'Ye say [it], because I am;'
and they said, 'What need yet have we of testimony? for we ourselves did hear [it] from his mouth.'
And having risen, the whole multitude of them did lead him to Pilate,
and began to accuse him, saying, 'This one we found perverting the nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying himself to be Christ a king.'
And Pilate questioned him, saying, 'Thou art the king of the Jews?' and he answering him, said, 'Thou dost say [it].'
And Pilate said unto the chief priests, and the multitude, 'I find no fault in this man;'
and they were the more urgent, saying — 'He doth stir up the people, teaching throughout the whole of Judea — having begun from Galilee — unto this place.'
And Pilate having heard of Galilee, questioned if the man is a Galilean,
and having known that he is from the jurisdiction of Herod, he sent him back unto Herod, he being also in Jerusalem in those days.
And Herod having seen Jesus did rejoice exceedingly, for he was wishing for a long [time] to see him, because of hearing many things about him, and he was hoping some sign to see done by him,
and was questioning him in many words, and he answered him nothing.
And the chief priests and the scribes stood vehemently accusing him,
and Herod with his soldiers having set him at nought, and having mocked, having put around him gorgeous apparel, did send him back to Pilate,
and both Pilate and Herod became friends on that day with one another, for they were before at enmity between themselves.
And Pilate having called together the chief priests, and the rulers, and the people,
said unto them, 'Ye brought to me this man as perverting the people, and lo, I before you having examined, found in this man no fault in those things ye bring forward against him;
no, nor yet Herod, for I sent you back unto him, and lo, nothing worthy of death is having been done by him;
having chastised, therefore, I will release him,'
for it was necessary for him to release to them one at every feast,
and they cried out — the whole multitude — saying, 'Away with this one, and release to us Barabbas,'
who had been, because of a certain sedition made in the city, and murder, cast into prison.
Pilate again then — wishing to release Jesus — called to them,
but they were calling out, saying, 'Crucify, crucify him.'
And he a third time said unto them, 'Why, what evil did he? no cause of death did I find in him; having chastised him, then, I will release [him].'
And they were pressing with loud voices asking him to be crucified, and their voices, and those of the chief priests, were prevailing,
and Pilate gave judgment for their request being done,
and he released him who because of sedition and murder hath been cast into the prison, whom they were asking, and Jesus he gave up to their will.
And as they led him away, having taken hold on Simon, a certain Cyrenian, coming from the field, they put on him the cross, to bear [it] behind Jesus.
And there was following him a great multitude of the people, and of women, who also were beating themselves and lamenting him,
and Jesus having turned unto them, said, 'Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but for yourselves weep ye, and for your children;
for, lo, days do come, in which they shall say, Happy the barren, and wombs that did not bare, and paps that did not give suck;
then they shall begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us, and to the hills, Cover us; —
for, if in the green tree they do these things — in the dry what may happen?'
And there were also others — two evil-doers — with him, to be put to death;
and when they came to the place that is called Skull, there they crucified him and the evil-doers, one on the right hand and one on the left.
And Jesus said, 'Father, forgive them, for they have not known what they do;' and parting his garments they cast a lot.
And the people were standing, looking on, and the rulers also were sneering with them, saying, 'Others he saved, let him save himself, if this be the Christ, the choice one of God.'
And mocking him also were the soldiers, coming near and offering vinegar to him,
and saying, 'If thou be the king of the Jews, save thyself.'
And there was also a superscription written over him, in letters of Greek, and Roman, and Hebrew, 'This is the King of the Jews.'
And one of the evil-doers who were hanged, was speaking evil of him, saying, 'If thou be the Christ, save thyself and us.'
And the other answering, was rebuking him, saying, 'Dost thou not even fear God, that thou art in the same judgment?
and we indeed righteously, for things worthy of what we did we receive back, but this one did nothing out of place;'
and he said to Jesus, 'Remember me, lord, when thou mayest come in thy reign;'
and Jesus said to him, 'Verily I say to thee, To-day with me thou shalt be in the paradise.'
And it was, as it were, the sixth hour, and darkness came over all the land till the ninth hour,
and the sun was darkened, and the vail of the sanctuary was rent in the midst,
and having cried with a loud voice, Jesus said, 'Father, to Thy hands I commit my spirit;' and these things having said, he breathed forth the spirit.
And the centurion having seen what was done, did glorify God, saying, 'Really this man was righteous;'
and all the multitudes who were come together to this sight, beholding the things that came to pass, smiting their breasts did turn back;
and all his acquaintances stood afar off, and women who did follow him from Galilee, beholding these things.
And lo, a man, by name Joseph, being a counsellor, a man good and righteous,
— he was not consenting to their counsel and deed — from Arimathea, a city of the Jews, who also himself was expecting the reign of God,
he, having gone near to Pilate, asked the body of Jesus,
and having taken it down, he wrapped it in fine linen, and placed it in a tomb hewn out, where no one was yet laid.
And the day was a preparation, and sabbath was approaching,
and the women also who have come with him out of Galilee having followed after, beheld the tomb, and how his body was placed,
and having turned back, they made ready spices and ointments, and on the sabbath, indeed, they rested, according to the command.
And on the first of the sabbaths, at early dawn, they came to the tomb, bearing the spices they made ready, and certain [others] with them,
and they found the stone having been rolled away from the tomb,
and having gone in, they found not the body of the Lord Jesus.
And it came to pass, while they are perplexed about this, that lo, two men stood by them in glittering apparel,
and on their having become afraid, and having inclined the face to the earth, they said to them, 'Why do ye seek the living with the dead?
he is not here, but was raised; remember how he spake to you, being yet in Galilee,
saying — It behoveth the Son of Man to be delivered up to the hands of sinful men, and to be crucified, and the third day to rise again.'
And they remembered his sayings,
and having turned back from the tomb told all these things to the eleven, and to all the rest.
And it was the Magdalene Mary, and Joanna, and Mary of James, and the other women with them, who told unto the apostles these things,
and their sayings appeared before them as idle talk, and they were not believing them.
And Peter having risen, did run to the tomb, and having stooped down he seeth the linen clothes lying alone, and he went away to his own home, wondering at that which was come to pass.
And, lo, two of them were going on during that day to a village, distant sixty furlongs from Jerusalem, the name of which [is] Emmaus,
and they were conversing with one another about all these things that have happened.
And it came to pass in their conversing and reasoning together, that Jesus himself, having come nigh, was going on with them,
and their eyes were holden so as not to know him,
and he said unto them, 'What [are] these words that ye exchange with one another, walking, and ye are sad?'
And the one, whose name was Cleopas, answering, said unto him, 'Art thou alone such a stranger in Jerusalem, that thou hast not known the things that came to pass in it in these days?'
And he said to them, 'What things?' And they said to him, 'The things about Jesus of Nazareth, who became a man — a prophet — powerful in deed and word, before God and all the people,
how also the chief priests and our rulers did deliver him up to a judgment of death, and crucified him;
and we were hoping that he it is who is about to redeem Israel, and also with all these things, this third day is passing to-day, since these things happened.
'And certain women of ours also astonished us, coming early to the tomb,
and not having found his body, they came, saying also to have seen an apparition of messengers, who say he is alive,
and certain of those with us went away unto the tomb, and found as even the women said, and him they saw not.'
And he said unto them, 'O inconsiderate and slow in heart, to believe on all that the prophets spake!
Was it not behoving the Christ these things to suffer, and to enter into his glory?'
and having begun from Moses, and from all the prophets, he was expounding to them in all the Writings the things about himself.
And they came nigh to the village whither they were going, and he made an appearance of going on further,
and they constrained him, saying, 'Remain with us, for it is toward evening,' and the day did decline, and he went in to remain with them.
And it came to pass, in his reclining (at meat) with them, having taken the bread, he blessed, and having broken, he was giving to them,
and their eyes were opened, and they recognized him, and he became unseen by them.
And they said one to another, 'Was not our heart burning within us, as he was speaking to us in the way, and as he was opening up to us the Writings?'
And they, having risen up the same hour, turned back to Jerusalem, and found gathered together the eleven, and those with them,
saying — 'The Lord was raised indeed, and was seen by Simon;'
and they were telling the things in the way, and how he was made known to them in the breaking of the bread,
and as they are speaking these things, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and saith to them, 'Peace — to you;'
and being amazed, and becoming affrighted, they were thinking themselves to see a spirit.
And he said to them, 'Why are ye troubled? and wherefore do reasonings come up in your hearts?
see my hands and my feet, that I am he; handle me and see, because a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me having.'
And having said this, he shewed to them the hands and the feet,
and while they are not believing from the joy, and wondering, he said to them, 'Have ye anything here to eat?'
and they gave to him part of a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb,
and having taken, he did eat before them,
and he said to them, 'These [are] the words that I spake unto you, being yet with you, that it behoveth to be fulfilled all the things that are written in the Law of Moses, and the Prophets, and the Psalms, about me.'
Then opened he up their understanding to understand the Writings,
and he said to them — 'Thus it hath been written, and thus it was behoving the Christ to suffer, and to rise out of the dead the third day,
and reformation and remission of sins to be proclaimed in his name to all the nations, beginning from Jerusalem:
and ye — ye are witnesses of these things.
'And, lo, I do send the promise of my Father upon you, but ye — abide ye in the city of Jerusalem till ye be clothed with power from on high.'
And he led them forth without — unto Bethany, and having lifted up his hands he did bless them,
and it came to pass, in his blessing them, he was parted from them, and was borne up to the heaven;
and they, having bowed before him, did turn back to Jerusalem with great joy,
and were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God. Amen.
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God;
this one was in the beginning with God;
all things through him did happen, and without him happened not even one thing that hath happened.
In him was life, and the life was the light of men,
and the light in the darkness did shine, and the darkness did not perceive it.
There came a man — having been sent from God — whose name [is] John,
this one came for testimony, that he might testify about the Light, that all might believe through him;
that one was not the Light, but — that he might testify about the Light.
He was the true Light, which doth enlighten every man, coming to the world;
in the world he was, and the world through him was made, and the world did not know him:
to his own things he came, and his own people did not receive him;
but as many as did receive him to them he gave authority to become sons of God — to those believing in his name,
who — not of blood nor of a will of flesh, nor of a will of man but — of God were begotten.
And the Word became flesh, and did tabernacle among us, and we beheld his glory, glory as of an only begotten of a father, full of grace and truth.
John doth testify concerning him, and hath cried, saying, 'This was he of whom I said, He who after me is coming, hath come before me, for he was before me;'
and out of his fulness did we all receive, and grace over-against grace;
for the law through Moses was given, the grace and the truth through Jesus Christ did come;
God no one hath ever seen; the only begotten Son, who is on the bosom of the Father — he did declare.
And this is the testimony of John, when the Jews sent out of Jerusalem priests and Levites, that they might question him, 'Who art thou?'
and he confessed and did not deny, and confessed — 'I am not the Christ.'
And they questioned him, 'What then? Elijah art thou?' and he saith, 'I am not.' — 'The prophet art thou?' and he answered, 'No.'
They said then to him, 'Who art thou, that we may give an answer to those sending us? what dost thou say concerning thyself?'
He said, 'I [am] a voice of one crying in the wilderness: Make straight the way of the Lord, as said Isaiah the prophet.'
And those sent were of the Pharisees,
and they questioned him and said to him, 'Why, then, dost thou baptize, if thou art not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the prophet?'
John answered them, saying, 'I baptize with water, but in midst of you he hath stood whom ye have not known, this one it is who is coming after me, who hath been before me,
of whom I am not worthy that I may loose the cord of his sandal.'
These things came to pass in Bethabara, beyond the Jordan, where John was baptizing,
on the morrow John seeth Jesus coming unto him, and saith, 'Lo, the Lamb of God, who is taking away the sin of the world;
this is he concerning whom I said, After me doth come a man, who hath come before me, because he was before me:
and I knew him not, but, that he might be manifested to Israel, because of this I came with the water baptizing.
And John testified, saying — 'I have seen the Spirit coming down, as a dove, out of heaven, and it remained on him;
and I did not know him, but he who sent me to baptize with water, He said to me, On whomsoever thou mayest see the Spirit coming down, and remaining on him, this is he who is baptizing with the Holy Spirit;
and I have seen, and have testified, that this is the Son of God.'
On the morrow, again, John was standing, and two of his disciples,
and having looked on Jesus walking, he saith, 'Lo, the Lamb of God;'
and the two disciples heard him speaking, and they followed Jesus.
And Jesus having turned, and having beheld them following, saith to them, 'What seek ye?' and they said to them, 'Rabbi, (which is, being interpreted, Teacher,) where remainest thou?'
He saith to them, 'Come and see;' they came, and saw where he doth remain, and with him they remained that day and the hour was about the tenth.
Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, was one of the two who heard from John, and followed him;
this one doth first find his own brother Simon, and saith to him, 'We have found the Messiah,' (which is, being interpreted, The Anointed,)
and he brought him unto Jesus: and having looked upon him, Jesus saith, 'Thou art Simon, the son of Jonas, thou shalt be called Cephas,' (which is interpreted, A rock.)
On the morrow, he willed to go forth to Galilee, and he findeth Philip, and saith to him, 'Be following me.'
And Philip was from Bethsaida, of the city of Andrew and Peter;
Philip findeth Nathanael, and saith to him, 'Him of whom Moses wrote in the Law, and the prophets, we have found, Jesus the son of Joseph, who [is] from Nazareth;'
and Nathanael said to him, 'Out of Nazareth is any good thing able to be?' Philip said to him, 'Come and see.'
Jesus saw Nathanael coming unto him, and he saith concerning him, 'Lo, truly an Israelite, in whom guile is not;'
Nathanael saith to him, 'Whence me dost thou know?' Jesus answered and said to him, 'Before Philip's calling thee — thou being under the fig-tree — I saw thee.'
Nathanael answered and saith to him, 'Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the king of Israel.'
Jesus answered and said to him, 'Because I said to thee, I saw thee under the fig-tree, thou dost believe; greater things than these thou shalt see;'
and he saith to him, 'Verily, verily, I say to you, henceforth ye shall see the heaven opened, and the messengers of God going up and coming down upon the Son of Man.'
And the third day a marriage happened in Cana of Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there,
and also Jesus was called, and his disciples, to the marriage;
and wine having failed, the mother of Jesus saith unto him, 'Wine they have not;'
Jesus saith to her, 'What — to me and to thee, woman? not yet is mine hour come.'
His mother saith to the ministrants, 'Whatever he may say to you — do.'
And there were there six water-jugs of stone, placed according to the purifying of the Jews, holding each two or three measures.
Jesus saith to them, 'Fill the water-jugs with water;' and they filled them — unto the brim;
and he saith to them, 'Draw out, now, and bear to the director of the apartment;' and they bare.
And as the director of the apartment tasted the water become wine, and knew not whence it is, (but the ministrants knew, who have drawn the water,) the director of the feast doth call the bridegroom,
and saith to him, 'Every man, at first, the good wine doth set forth; and when they may have drunk freely, then the inferior; thou didst keep the good wine till now.'
This beginning of the signs did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested his glory, and his disciples believed in him;
after this he went down to Capernaum, he, and his mother, and his brethren, and his disciples; and there they remained not many days.
And the passover of the Jews was nigh, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem,
and he found in the temple those selling oxen, and sheep, and doves, and the money-changers sitting,
and having made a whip of small cords, he put all forth out of the temple, also the sheep, and the oxen; and of the money-changers he poured out the coins, and the tables he overthrew,
and to those selling the doves he said, 'Take these things hence; make not the house of my Father a house of merchandise.'
And his disciples remembered that it is written, 'The zeal of Thy house did eat me up;'
the Jews then answered and said to him, 'What sign dost thou shew to us — that thou dost these things?'
Jesus answered and said to them, 'Destroy this sanctuary, and in three days I will raise it up.'
The Jews, therefore, said, 'Forty and six years was this sanctuary building, and wilt thou in three days raise it up?'
but he spake concerning the sanctuary of his body;
when, then, he was raised out of the dead, his disciples remembered that he said this to them, and they believed the Writing, and the word that Jesus said.
And as he was in Jerusalem, in the passover, in the feast, many believed in his name, beholding his signs that he was doing;
and Jesus himself was not trusting himself to them, because of his knowing all [men],
and because he had no need that any should testify concerning man, for he himself was knowing what was in man.
And there was a man of the Pharisees, Nicodemus his name, a ruler of the Jews,
this one came unto him by night, and said to him, 'Rabbi, we have known that from God thou hast come — a teacher, for no one these signs is able to do that thou dost, if God may not be with him.'
Jesus answered and said to him, 'Verily, verily, I say to thee, If any one may not be born from above, he is not able to see the reign of God;'
Nicodemus saith unto him, 'How is a man able to be born, being old? is he able into the womb of his mother a second time to enter, and to be born?'
Jesus answered, 'Verily, verily, I say to thee, If any one may not be born of water, and the Spirit, he is not able to enter into the reign of God;
that which hath been born of the flesh is flesh, and that which hath been born of the Spirit is spirit.
'Thou mayest not wonder that I said to thee, It behoveth you to be born from above;
the Spirit where he willeth doth blow, and his voice thou dost hear, but thou hast not known whence he cometh, and whither he goeth; thus is every one who hath been born of the Spirit.'
Nicodemus answered and said to him, 'How are these things able to happen?'
Jesus answered and said to him, 'Thou art the teacher of Israel — and these things thou dost not know!
'Verily, verily, I say to thee — What we have known we speak, and what we have seen we testify, and our testimony ye do not receive;
if the earthly things I said to you, and ye do not believe, how, if I shall say to you the heavenly things, will ye believe?
and no one hath gone up to the heaven, except he who out of the heaven came down — the Son of Man who is in the heaven.
'And as Moses did lift up the serpent in the wilderness, so it behoveth the Son of Man to be lifted up,
that every one who is believing in him may not perish, but may have life age-during,
for God did so love the world, that His Son — the only begotten — He gave, that every one who is believing in him may not perish, but may have life age-during.
For God did not send His Son to the world that he may judge the world, but that the world may be saved through him;
he who is believing in him is not judged, but he who is not believing hath been judged already, because he hath not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God.
'And this is the judgment, that the light hath come to the world, and men did love the darkness rather than the light, for their works were evil;
for every one who is doing wicked things hateth the light, and doth not come unto the light, that his works may not be detected;
but he who is doing the truth doth come to the light, that his works may be manifested, that in God they are having been wrought.'
After these things came Jesus and his disciples to the land of Judea, and there he did tarry with them, and was baptizing;
and John was also baptizing in Aenon, nigh to Salem, because there were many waters there, and they were coming and were being baptized —
for John was not yet cast into the prison —
there arose then a question from the disciples of John with [some] Jews about purifying,
and they came unto John, and said to him, 'Rabbi, he who was with thee beyond the Jordan, to whom thou didst testify, lo, this one is baptizing, and all are coming unto him.'
John answered and said, 'A man is not able to receive anything, if it may not have been given him from the heaven;
ye yourselves do testify to me that I said, I am not the Christ, but, that I am having been sent before him;
he who is having the bride is bridegroom, and the friend of the bridegroom, who is standing and hearing him, with joy doth rejoice because of the voice of the bridegroom; this, then, my joy hath been fulfilled.
'Him it behoveth to increase, and me to become less;
he who from above is coming is above all; he who is from the earth, from the earth he is, and from the earth he speaketh; he who from the heaven is coming is above all.
'And what he hath seen and heard this he doth testify, and his testimony none receiveth;
he who is receiving his testimony did seal that God is true;
for he whom God sent, the sayings of God he speaketh; for not by measure doth God give the Spirit;
the Father doth love the Son, and all things hath given into his hand;
he who is believing in the Son, hath life age-during; and he who is not believing the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God doth remain upon him.'
When therefore the Lord knew that the Pharisees heard that Jesus more disciples doth make and baptize than John,
(though indeed Jesus himself was not baptizing, but his disciples,)
he left Judea and went away again to Galilee,
and it was behoving him to go through Samaria.
He cometh, therefore, to a city of Samaria, called Sychar, near to the place that Jacob gave to Joseph his son;
and there was there a well of Jacob. Jesus therefore having been weary from the journeying, was sitting thus on the well; it was as it were the sixth hour;
there cometh a woman out of Samaria to draw water. Jesus saith to her, 'Give me to drink;'
for his disciples were gone away to the city, that they may buy victuals;
the Samaritan woman therefore saith to him, 'How dost thou, being a Jew, ask drink from me, being a Samaritan woman?' for Jews have no dealing with Samaritans.
Jesus answered and said to her, 'If thou hadst known the gift of God, and who it is who is saying to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked him, and he would have given thee living water.'
The woman saith to him, 'Sir, thou hast not even a vessel to draw with, and the well is deep; whence, then, hast thou the living water?
Art thou greater than our father Jacob, who did give us the well, and himself out of it did drink, and his sons, and his cattle?'
Jesus answered and said to her, 'Every one who is drinking of this water shall thirst again;
but whoever may drink of the water that I will give him, may not thirst — to the age; and the water that I will give him shall become in him a well of water, springing up to life age-during.'
The woman saith unto him, 'Sir, give me this water, that I may not thirst, nor come hither to draw.'
Jesus saith to her, 'Go, call thy husband, and come hither;'
the woman answered and said, 'I have not a husband.' Jesus saith to her, 'Well didst thou say — A husband I have not;
for five husbands thou hast had, and, now, he whom thou hast is not thy husband; this hast thou said truly.'
The woman saith to him, 'Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet;
our fathers in this mountain did worship, and ye — ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where it behoveth to worship.'
Jesus saith to her, 'Woman, believe me, that there doth come an hour, when neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, shall ye worship the Father;
ye worship what ye have not known; we worship what we have known, because the salvation is of the Jews;
but, there cometh an hour, and it now is, when the true worshippers will worship the Father in spirit and truth, for the Father also doth seek such to worship him;
God [is] a Spirit, and those worshipping Him, in spirit and truth it doth behove to worship.'
The woman saith to him, 'I have known that Messiah doth come, who is called Christ, when that one may come, he will tell us all things;'
Jesus saith to her, 'I am [he], who am speaking to thee.'
And upon this came his disciples, and were wondering that with a woman he was speaking, no one, however, said, 'What seekest thou?' or 'Why speakest thou with her?'
The woman then left her water-jug, and went away to the city, and saith to the men,
'Come, see a man, who told me all things — as many as I did; is this the Christ?'
They went forth therefore out of the city, and were coming unto him.
And in the meanwhile his disciples were asking him, saying, 'Rabbi, eat;'
and he said to them, 'I have food to eat that ye have not known.'
The disciples then said one to another, 'Did any one bring him anything to eat?'
Jesus saith to them, 'My food is, that I may do the will of Him who sent me, and may finish His work;
do not say that it is yet four months, and the harvest cometh; lo, I say to you, Lift up your eyes, and see the fields, that they are white unto harvest already.
'And he who is reaping doth receive a reward, and doth gather fruit to life age-during, that both he who is sowing and he who is reaping may rejoice together;
for in this the saying is the true one, that one is the sower and another the reaper.
I sent you to reap that on which ye have not laboured; others laboured, and ye into their labour have entered.
And from that city many believed in him, of the Samaritans, because of the word of the woman testifying, — 'He told me all things — as many as I did.'
When, then, the Samaritans came unto him, they were asking him to remain with them, and he remained there two days;
and many more did believe because of his word,
and said to the woman — 'No more because of thy speaking do we believe; for we ourselves have heard and known that this is truly the Saviour of the world — the Christ.'
And after the two days he went forth thence, and went away to Galilee,
for Jesus himself testified that a prophet in his own country shall not have honour;
when then, he came to Galilee, the Galileans received him, having seen all things that he did in Jerusalem in the feast — for they also went to the feast.
Jesus came, therefore, again to Cana of Galilee, where he made the water wine, and there was a certain courtier, whose son was ailing in Capernaum,
he, having heard that Jesus is come out of Judea to Galilee, went away unto him, and was asking him that he may come down and may heal his son, for he was about to die.
Jesus then said unto him, 'If signs and wonders ye may not see, ye will not believe.'
The courtier saith unto him, 'Sir, come down before my child die;'
Jesus saith to him, 'Be going on; thy son doth live.' And the man believed the word that Jesus said to him, and was going on,
and he now going down, his servants met him, and told, saying — 'Thy child doth live;'
he inquired then of them the hour in which he became better, and they said to him — 'Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him;'
then the father knew that [it was] in that hour in which Jesus said to him — 'Thy son doth live,' and he himself believed, and his whole house;
this again a second sign did Jesus, having come out of Judea to Galilee.
After these things there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem,
and there is in Jerusalem by the sheep -[gate] a pool that is called in Hebrew Bethesda, having five porches,
in these were lying a great multitude of the ailing, blind, lame, withered, waiting for the moving of the water,
for a messenger at a set time was going down in the pool, and was troubling the water, the first then having gone in after the troubling of the water, became whole of whatever sickness he was held.
and there was a certain man there being in ailment thirty and eight years,
him Jesus having seen lying, and having known that he is already a long time, he saith to him, 'Dost thou wish to become whole?'
The ailing man answered him, 'Sir, I have no man, that, when the water may be troubled, he may put me into the pool, and while I am coming, another doth go down before me.'
Jesus saith to him, 'Rise, take up thy couch, and be walking;'
and immediately the man became whole, and he took up his couch, and was walking, and it was a sabbath on that day,
the Jews then said to him that hath been healed, 'It is a sabbath; it is not lawful to thee to take up the couch.'
He answered them, 'He who made me whole — that one said to me, Take up thy couch, and be walking;'
they questioned him, then, 'Who is the man who is saying to thee, Take up thy couch and be walking?'
But he that was healed had not known who he is, for Jesus did move away, a multitude being in the place.
After these things, Jesus findeth him in the temple, and said to him, 'Lo, thou hast become whole; sin no more, lest something worse may happen to thee.'
The man went away, and told the Jews that it is Jesus who made him whole,
and because of this were the Jews persecuting Jesus, and seeking to kill him, because these things he was doing on a sabbath.
And Jesus answered them, 'My Father till now doth work, and I work;'
because of this, then, were the Jews seeking the more to kill him, because not only was he breaking the sabbath, but he also called God his own Father, making himself equal to God.
Jesus therefore responded and said to them, 'Verily, verily, I say to you, The Son is not able to do anything of himself, if he may not see the Father doing anything; for whatever things He may do, these also the Son in like manner doth;
for the Father doth love the Son, and doth shew to him all things that He himself doth; and greater works than these He will shew him, that ye may wonder.
'For, as the Father doth raise the dead, and doth make alive, so also the Son doth make alive whom he willeth;
for neither doth the Father judge any one, but all the judgment He hath given to the Son,
that all may honour the Son according as they honour the Father; he who is not honouring the Son, doth not honour the Father who sent him.
'Verily, verily, I say to you — He who is hearing my word, and is believing Him who sent me, hath life age-during, and to judgment he doth not come, but hath passed out of the death to the life.
'Verily, verily, I say to you — There cometh an hour, and it now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and those having heard shall live;
for, as the Father hath life in himself, so He gave also to the Son to have life in himself,
and authority He gave him also to do judgment, because he is Son of Man.
'Wonder not at this, because there doth come an hour in which all those in the tombs shall hear his voice,
and they shall come forth; those who did the good things to a rising again of life, and those who practised the evil things to a rising again of judgment.
'I am not able of myself to do anything; according as I hear I judge, and my judgment is righteous, because I seek not my own will, but the will of the Father who sent me.
'If I testify concerning myself, my testimony is not true;
another there is who is testifying concerning me, and I have known that the testimony that he doth testify concerning me is true;
ye have sent unto John, and he hath testified to the truth.
'But I do not receive testimony from man, but these things I say that ye may be saved;
he was the burning and shining lamp, and ye did will to be glad, for an hour, in his light.
'But I have the testimony greater than John's, for the works that the Father gave me, that I might finish them, the works themselves that I do, they testify concerning me, that the Father hath sent me.
'And the Father who sent me Himself hath testified concerning me; ye have neither heard His voice at any time, nor His appearance have ye seen;
and His word ye have not remaining in you, because whom He sent, him ye do not believe.
'Ye search the Writings, because ye think in them to have life age-during, and these are they that are testifying concerning me;
and ye do not will to come unto me, that ye may have life;
glory from man I do not receive,
but I have known you, that the love of God ye have not in yourselves.
'I have come in the name of my Father, and ye do not receive me; if another may come in his own name, him ye will receive;
how are ye able — ye — to believe, glory from one another receiving, and the glory that [is] from God alone ye seek not?
'Do not think that I will accuse you unto the Father; there is who is accusing you, Moses — in whom ye have hoped;
for if ye were believing Moses, ye would have been believing me, for he wrote concerning me;
but if his writings ye believe not, how shall ye believe my sayings?'
After these things Jesus went away beyond the sea of Galilee (of Tiberias),
and there was following him a great multitude, because they were seeing his signs that he was doing on the ailing;
and Jesus went up to the mount, and he was there sitting with his disciples,
and the passover was nigh, the feast of the Jews.
Jesus then having lifted up [his] eyes and having seen that a great multitude doth come to him, saith unto Philip, 'Whence shall we buy loaves, that these may eat?' —
and this he said, trying him, for he himself had known what he was about to do.
Philip answered him, 'Two hundred denaries' worth of loaves are not sufficient to them, that each of them may receive some little;'
one of his disciples — Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter — saith to him,
'There is one little lad here who hath five barley loaves, and two fishes, but these — what are they to so many?'
And Jesus said, 'Make the men to sit down;' and there was much grass in the place, the men then sat down, in number, as it were, five thousand,
and Jesus took the loaves, and having given thanks he distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to those reclining, in like manner, also of the little fishes as much as they wished.
And when they were filled, he saith to his disciples, 'Gather together the broken pieces that are over, that nothing may be lost;'
they gathered together, therefore, and filled twelve hand-baskets with broken pieces, from the five barley loaves that were over to those having eaten.
The men, then, having seen the sign that Jesus did, said — 'This is truly the Prophet, who is coming to the world;'
Jesus, therefore, having known that they are about to come, and to take him by force that they may make him king, retired again to the mountain himself alone.
And when evening came, his disciples went down to the sea,
and having entered into the boat, they were going over the sea to Capernaum, and darkness had already come, and Jesus had not come unto them,
the sea also — a great wind blowing — was being raised,
having pushed onwards, therefore, about twenty-five or thirty furlongs, they behold Jesus walking on the sea, and coming nigh to the boat, and they were afraid;
and he saith to them, 'I am [he], be not afraid;'
they were willing then to receive him into the boat, and immediately the boat came unto the land to which they were going.
On the morrow, the multitude that was standing on the other side of the sea, having seen that there was no other little boat there except one — that into which his disciples entered — and that Jesus went not in with his disciples into the little boat, but his disciples went away alone,
(and other little boats came from Tiberias, nigh the place where they did eat the bread, the Lord having given thanks),
when therefore the multitude saw that Jesus is not there, nor his disciples, they also themselves did enter into the boats, and came to Capernaum seeking Jesus;
and having found him on the other side of the sea, they said to him, 'Rabbi, when hast thou come hither?'
Jesus answered them and said, 'Verily, verily, I say to you, Ye seek me, not because ye saw signs, but because ye did eat of the loaves, and were satisfied;
work not for the food that is perishing, but for the food that is remaining to life age-during, which the Son of Man will give to you, for him did the Father seal — [even] God.'
They said therefore unto him, 'What may we do that we may work the works of God?'
Jesus answered and said to them, 'This is the work of God, that ye may believe in him whom He did send.'
They said therefore to him, 'What sign, then, dost thou, that we may see and may believe thee? what dost thou work?
our fathers the manna did eat in the wilderness, according as it is having been written, Bread out of the heaven He gave them to eat.'
Jesus, therefore, said to them, 'Verily, verily, I say to you, Moses did not give you the bread out of the heaven; but my Father doth give you the true bread out of the heaven;
for the bread of God is that which is coming down out of the heaven, and giving life to the world.'
They said, therefore, unto him, 'Sir, always give us this bread.'
And Jesus said to them, 'I am the bread of the life; he who is coming unto me may not hunger, and he who is believing in me may not thirst — at any time;
but I said to you, that ye also have seen me, and ye believe not;
all that the Father doth give to me will come unto me; and him who is coming unto me, I may in no wise cast without,
because I have come down out of the heaven, not that I may do my will, but the will of Him who sent me.
'And this is the will of the Father who sent me, that all that He hath given to me I may not lose of it, but may raise it up in the last day;
and this is the will of Him who sent me, that every one who is beholding the Son, and is believing in him, may have life age-during, and I will raise him up in the last day.'
The Jews, therefore, were murmuring at him, because he said, 'I am the bread that came down out of the heaven;'
and they said, 'Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we have known? how then saith this one — Out of the heaven I have come down?'
Jesus answered, therefore, and said to them, 'Murmur not one with another;
no one is able to come unto me, if the Father who sent me may not draw him, and I will raise him up in the last day;
it is having been written in the prophets, And they shall be all taught of God; every one therefore who heard from the Father, and learned, cometh to me;
not that any one hath seen the Father, except he who is from God, he hath seen the Father.
'Verily, verily, I say to you, He who is believing in me, hath life age-during;
I am the bread of the life;
your fathers did eat the manna in the wilderness, and they died;
this is the bread that out of the heaven is coming down, that any one may eat of it, and not die.
'I am the living bread that came down out of the heaven; if any one may eat of this bread he shall live — to the age; and the bread also that I will give is my flesh, that I will give for the life of the world.'
The Jews, therefore, were striving with one another, saying, 'How is this one able to give us [his] flesh to eat?'
Jesus, therefore, said to them, 'Verily, verily, I say to you, If ye may not eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and may not drink his blood, ye have no life in yourselves;
he who is eating my flesh, and is drinking my blood, hath life age-during, and I will raise him up in the last day;
for my flesh truly is food, and my blood truly is drink;
he who is eating my flesh, and is drinking my blood, doth remain in me, and I in him.
'According as the living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father, he also who is eating me, even that one shall live because of me;
this is the bread that came down out of the heaven; not as your fathers did eat the manna, and died; he who is eating this bread shall live — to the age.'
These things he said in a synagogue, teaching in Capernaum;
many, therefore, of his disciples having heard, said, 'This word is hard; who is able to hear it?'
And Jesus having known in himself that his disciples are murmuring about this, said to them, 'Doth this stumble you?
if then ye may behold the Son of Man going up where he was before?
the spirit it is that is giving life; the flesh doth not profit anything; the sayings that I speak to you are spirit, and they are life;
but there are certain of you who do not believe;' for Jesus had known from the beginning who they are who are not believing, and who is he who will deliver him up,
and he said, 'Because of this I have said to you — No one is able to come unto me, if it may not have been given him from my Father.'
From this [time] many of his disciples went away backward, and were no more walking with him,
Jesus, therefore, said to the twelve, 'Do ye also wish to go away?'
Simon Peter, therefore, answered him, 'Sir, unto whom shall we go? thou hast sayings of life age-during;
and we have believed, and we have known, that thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.'
Jesus answered them, 'Did not I choose you — the twelve? and of you — one is a devil.
And he spake of Judas, Simon's [son], Iscariot, for he was about to deliver him up, being one of the twelve.
And Jesus was walking after these things in Galilee, for he did not wish to walk in Judea, because the Jews were seeking to kill him,
and the feast of the Jews was nigh — that of tabernacles —
his brethren, therefore, said unto him, 'Remove hence, and go away to Judea, that thy disciples also may behold thy works that thou dost;
for no one in secret doth anything, and himself seeketh to be in public; if thou dost these things — manifest thyself to the world;'
for not even were his brethren believing in him.
Jesus, therefore, saith to them, 'My time is not yet present, but your time is always ready;
the world is not able to hate you, but me it doth hate, because I testify concerning it that its works are evil.
Ye — go ye up to this feast; I do not yet go up to this feast, because my time hath not yet been fulfilled;'
and saying these things to them, he remained in Galilee.
And when his brethren went up, then also he himself went up to the feast, not manifestly, but as in secret;
the Jews, therefore, were seeking him, in the feast, and said, 'Where is that one?'
and there was much murmuring about him among the multitudes, some indeed said — 'He is good;' and others said, 'No, but he leadeth astray the multitude;'
no one, however, was speaking freely about him, through fear of the Jews.
And it being now the middle of the feast, Jesus went up to the temple, and he was teaching,
and the Jews were wondering, saying, 'How hath this one known letters — not having learned?'
Jesus answered them and said, 'My teaching is not mine, but His who sent me;
if any one may will to do His will, he shall know concerning the teaching, whether it is of God, or — I do speak from myself.
'He who is speaking from himself his own glory doth seek, but he who is seeking the glory of him who sent him, this one is true, and unrighteousness is not in him;
hath not Moses given you the law? and none of you doth the law; why me do ye seek to kill?'
The multitude answered and said, 'Thou hast a demon, who doth seek to kill thee?'
Jesus answered and said to them, 'One work I did, and ye all wonder,
because of this, Moses hath given you the circumcision — not that it is of Moses, but of the fathers — and on a sabbath ye circumcise a man;
if a man doth receive circumcision on a sabbath that the law of Moses may not be broken, are ye wroth with me that I made a man all whole on a sabbath?
judge not according to appearance, but the righteous judgment judge.'
Certain, therefore, of the Jerusalemites said, 'Is not this he whom they are seeking to kill?
and, lo, he doth speak freely, and they say nothing to him; did the rulers at all know truly that this is truly the Christ?
but this one — we have known whence he is; and the Christ, when he doth come, no one doth know whence he is.'
Jesus cried, therefore, in the temple, teaching and saying, 'Ye have both known me, and ye have known whence I am; and I have not come of myself, but He who sent me is true, whom ye have not known;
and I have known Him, because I am from Him, and He did send me.'
They were seeking, therefore, to seize him, and no one laid the hand on him, because his hour had not yet come,
and many out of the multitude did believe in him, and said — 'The Christ — when he may come — will he do more signs than these that this one did?'
The Pharisees heard the multitude murmuring these things concerning him, and the Pharisees and the chief priests sent officers that they may take him;
Jesus, therefore, said to them, 'Yet a little time I am with you, and I go away unto Him who sent me;
ye will seek me, and ye shall not find; and where I am, ye are not able to come.'
The Jews, therefore, said among themselves, 'Whither is this one about to go that we shall not find him? — to the dispersion of the Greeks is he about to go? and to teach the Greeks;
what is this word that he said, Ye will seek me, and ye shall not find? and, Where I am, ye are not able to come?'
And in the last, the great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, 'If any one doth thirst, let him come unto me and drink;
he who is believing in me, according as the Writing said, Rivers out of his belly shall flow of living water;'
and this he said of the Spirit, which those believing in him were about to receive; for not yet was the Holy Spirit, because Jesus was not yet glorified.
Many, therefore out of the multitude, having heard the word, said, 'This is truly the Prophet;'
others said, 'This is the Christ;' and others said, 'Why, out of Galilee doth the Christ come?
Did not the Writing say, that out of the seed of David, and from Bethlehem — the village where David was — the Christ doth come?'
A division, therefore, arose among the multitude because of him.
And certain of them were willing to seize him, but no one laid hands on him;
the officers came, therefore, unto the chief priests and Pharisees, and they said to them, 'Wherefore did ye not bring him?'
The officers answered, 'Never so spake man — as this man.'
The Pharisees, therefore, answered them, 'Have ye also been led astray?
did any one out of the rulers believe in him? or out of the Pharisees?
but this multitude, that is not knowing the law, is accursed.'
Nicodemus saith unto them — he who came by night unto him — being one of them,
'Doth our law judge the man, if it may not hear from him first, and know what he doth?'
They answered and said to him, 'Art thou also out of Galilee? search and see, that a prophet out of Galilee hath not risen;'
and each one went on to his house, but Jesus went on to the mount of the Olives.
And at dawn he came again to the temple,
and all the people were coming unto him, and having sat down, he was teaching them;
and the scribes and the Pharisees bring unto him a woman having been taken in adultery, and having set her in the midst,
they say to him, 'Teacher, this woman was taken in the very crime — committing adultery,
and in the law, Moses did command us that such be stoned; thou, therefore, what dost thou say?'
and this they said, trying him, that they might have to accuse him. And Jesus, having stooped down, with the finger he was writing on the ground,
and when they continued asking him, having bent himself back, he said unto them, 'The sinless of you — let him first cast the stone at her;'
and again having stooped down, he was writing on the ground,
and they having heard, and by the conscience being convicted, were going forth one by one, having begun from the elders — unto the last; and Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst.
And Jesus having bent himself back, and having seen no one but the woman, said to her, 'Woman, where are those — thine accusers? did no one pass sentence upon thee?'
and she said, 'No one, Sir;' and Jesus said to her, 'Neither do I pass sentence on thee; be going on, and no more sin.'
Again, therefore, Jesus spake to them, saying, 'I am the light of the world; he who is following me shall not walk in the darkness, but he shall have the light of the life.'
The Pharisees, therefore, said to him, 'Thou of thyself dost testify, thy testimony is not true;'
Jesus answered and said to them, 'And if I testify of myself — my testimony is true, because I have known whence I came, and whither I go, and ye — ye have not known whence I come, or whither I go.
'Ye according to the flesh do judge; I do not judge any one,
and even if I do judge my judgment is true, because I am not alone, but I and the Father who sent me;
and also in your law it hath been written, that the testimony of two men are true;
I am [one] who is testifying of myself, and the Father who sent me doth testify of me.'
They said, therefore, to him, 'Where is thy father?' Jesus answered, 'Ye have neither known me nor my Father: if me ye had known, my Father also ye had known.'
These sayings spake Jesus in the treasury, teaching in the temple, and no one seized him, because his hour had not yet come;
therefore said Jesus again to them, 'I go away, and ye will seek me, and in your sin ye shall die; whither I go away, ye are not able to come.'
The Jews, therefore, said, 'Will he kill himself, because he saith, Whither I go away, ye are not able to come?'
and he said to them, 'Ye are from beneath, I am from above; ye are of this world, I am not of this world;
I said, therefore, to you, that ye shall die in your sins, for if ye may not believe that I am [he], ye shall die in your sins.'
They said, therefore, to him, 'Thou — who art thou?' and Jesus said to them, 'Even what I did speak of to you at the beginning;
many things I have to speak concerning you and to judge, but He who sent me is true, and I — what things I heard from Him — these I say to the world.'
They knew not that of the Father he spake to them;
Jesus, therefore, said to them, 'When ye may lift up the Son of Man then ye will know that I am [he]; and of myself I do nothing, but according as my Father did teach me, these things I speak;
and He who sent me is with me; the Father did not leave me alone, because I, the things pleasing to Him, do always.'
As he is speaking these things, many believed in him;
Jesus, therefore, said unto the Jews who believed in him, 'If ye may remain in my word, truly my disciples ye are, and ye shall know the truth,
and the truth shall make you free.'
They answered him, 'Seed of Abraham we are; and to no one have we been servants at any time; how dost thou say — Ye shall become free?'
Jesus answered them, 'Verily, verily, I say to you — Every one who is committing sin, is a servant of the sin,
and the servant doth not remain in the house — to the age, the son doth remain — to the age;
if then the son may make you free, in reality ye shall be free.
'I have known that ye are seed of Abraham, but ye seek to kill me, because my word hath no place in you;
I — that which I have seen with my Father do speak, and ye, therefore, that which ye have seen with your father — ye do.'
They answered and said to him, 'Our father is Abraham;' Jesus saith to them, 'If children of Abraham ye were, the works of Abraham ye were doing;
and now, ye seek to kill me — a man who hath spoken to you the truth I heard from God; this Abraham did not;
ye do the works of your father.' They said, therefore, to him, 'We of whoredom have not been born; one Father we have — God;'
Jesus then said to them, 'If God were your father, ye were loving me, for I came forth from God, and am come; for neither have I come of myself, but He sent me;
wherefore do ye not know my speech? because ye are not able to hear my word.
'Ye are of a father — the devil, and the desires of your father ye will to do; he was a man-slayer from the beginning, and in the truth he hath not stood, because there is no truth in him; when one may speak the falsehood, of his own he speaketh, because he is a liar — also his father.
'And because I say the truth, ye do not believe me.
Who of you doth convict me of sin? and if I speak truth, wherefore do ye not believe me?
he who is of God, the sayings of God he doth hear; because of this ye do not hear, because of God ye are not.'
The Jews, therefore, answered and said to him, 'Do we not say well, that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a demon?'
Jesus answered, 'I have not a demon, but I honour my Father, and ye dishonour me;
and I do not seek my own glory; there is who is seeking and is judging;
verily, verily, I say to you, If any one may keep my word, death he may not see — to the age.'
The Jews, therefore, said to him, 'Now we have known that thou hast a demon; Abraham did die, and the prophets, and thou dost say, If any one may keep my word, he shall not taste of death — to the age!
Art thou greater than our father Abraham, who died? and the prophets died; whom dost thou make thyself?'
Jesus answered, 'If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing; it is my Father who is glorifying me, of whom ye say that He is your God;
and ye have not known Him, and I have known Him, and if I say that I have not known Him, I shall be like you — speaking falsely; but I have known Him, and His word I keep;
Abraham, your father, was glad that he might see my day; and he saw, and did rejoice.'
The Jews, therefore, said unto him, 'Thou art not yet fifty years old, and Abraham hast thou seen?'
Jesus said to them, 'Verily, verily, I say to you, Before Abraham's coming — I am;'
they took up, therefore, stones that they may cast at him, but Jesus hid himself, and went forth out of the temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed by.
And passing by, he saw a man blind from birth,
and his disciples asked him, saying, 'Rabbi, who did sin, this one or his parents, that he should be born blind?'
Jesus answered, 'Neither did this one sin nor his parents, but that the works of God may be manifested in him;
it behoveth me to be working the works of Him who sent me while it is day; night doth come, when no one is able to work: —
when I am in the world, I am a light of the world.'
These things saying, he spat on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and rubbed the clay on the eyes of the blind man, and said to him,
'Go away, wash at the pool of Siloam,' which is, interpreted, Sent. He went away, therefore, and did wash, and came seeing;
the neighbours, therefore, and those seeing him before, that he was blind, said, 'Is not this he who is sitting and begging?'
others said — 'This is he;' and others — 'He is like to him;' he himself said, — 'I am [he].'
They said, therefore, to him, 'How were thine eyes opened?'
he answered and said, 'A man called Jesus made clay, and rubbed my eyes, and said to me, Go away to the pool of Siloam, and wash; and having gone away and having washed, I received sight;'
they said, therefore, to him, 'Where is that one?' he saith, 'I have not known.'
They bring him to the Pharisees who once [was] blind,
and it was a sabbath when Jesus made the clay, and opened his eyes.
Again, therefore, the Pharisees also were asking him how he received sight, and he said to them, 'Clay he did put upon my eyes, and I did wash — and I see.'
Of the Pharisees, therefore, certain said, 'This man is not from God, because the sabbath he doth not keep;' others said, 'How is a man — a sinful one — able to do such signs?' and there was a division among them.
They said to the blind man again, 'Thou — what dost thou say of him — that he opened thine eyes?'
and he said — 'He is a prophet.' The Jews, therefore, did not believe concerning him that he was blind and did receive sight, till that they called the parents of him who received sight,
and they asked them, saying, 'Is your son, of whom ye say that he was born blind? how then now doth he see?'
His parents answered them and said, 'We have known that this is our son, and that he was born blind;
and how he now seeth, we have not known; or who opened his eyes, we have not known; himself is of age, ask him; he himself shall speak concerning himself.'
These things said his parents, because they were afraid of the Jews, for already had the Jews agreed together, that if any one may confess him — Christ, he may be put out of the synagogue;
because of this his parents said — 'He is of age, ask him.'
They called, therefore, a second time the man who was blind, and they said to him, 'Give glory to God, we have known that this man is a sinner;'
he answered, therefore, and said, 'If he be a sinner — I have not known, one thing I have known, that, being blind, now I see.'
And they said to him again, 'What did he to thee? how did he open thine eyes?'
He answered them, 'I told you already, and ye did not hear; why again do ye wish to hear? do ye also wish to become his disciples?'
They reviled him, therefore, and said, 'Thou art his disciple, and we are Moses' disciples;
we have known that God hath spoken to Moses, but this one — we have not known whence he is.'
The man answered and said to them, 'Why, in this is a wonderful thing, that ye have not known whence he is, and he opened my eyes!
and we have known that God doth not hear sinners, but, if any one may be a worshipper of God, and may do His will, him He doth hear;
from the age it was not heard, that any one did open eyes of one who hath been born blind;
if this one were not from God, he were not able to do anything.'
They answered and said to him, 'In sins thou wast born altogether, and thou dost teach us!' and they cast him forth without.
Jesus heard that they cast him forth without, and having found him, he said to him, 'Dost thou believe in the Son of God?'
he answered and said, 'Who is he, sir, that I may believe in him?'
And Jesus said to him, 'Thou hast both seen him, and he who is speaking with thee is he;'
and he said, 'I believe, sir,' and bowed before him.
And Jesus said, 'For judgment I to this world did come, that those not seeing may see, and those seeing may become blind.'
And those of the Pharisees who were with him heard these things, and they said to him, 'Are we also blind?'
Jesus said to them, 'If ye were blind, ye were not having had sin, but now ye say — We see, therefore doth your sin remain.
'Verily, verily, I say to you, He who is not entering through the door to the fold of the sheep, but is going up from another side, that one is a thief and a robber;
and he who is entering through the door is shepherd of the sheep;
to this one the doorkeeper doth open, and the sheep hear his voice, and his own sheep he doth call by name, and doth lead them forth;
and when his own sheep he may put forth, before them he goeth on, and the sheep follow him, because they have known his voice;
and a stranger they will not follow, but will flee from him, because they have not known the voice of strangers.'
This similitude spake Jesus to them, and they knew not what the things were that he was speaking to them;
Jesus said therefore again to them, 'Verily, verily, I say to you — I am the door of the sheep;
all, as many as came before me, are thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not hear them;
I am the door, through me if any one may come in, he shall be saved, and he shall come in, and go out, and find pasture.
'The thief doth not come, except that he may steal, and kill, and destroy; I came that they may have life, and may have [it] abundantly.
'I am the good shepherd; the good shepherd his life layeth down for the sheep;
and the hireling, and not being a shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, doth behold the wolf coming, and doth leave the sheep, and doth flee; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep;
and the hireling doth flee because he is an hireling, and is not caring for the sheep.
'I am the good shepherd, and I know my [sheep], and am known by mine,
according as the Father doth know me, and I know the Father, and my life I lay down for the sheep,
and other sheep I have that are not of this fold, these also it behoveth me to bring, and my voice they will hear, and there shall become one flock — one shepherd.
'Because of this doth the Father love me, because I lay down my life, that again I may take it;
no one doth take it from me, but I lay it down of myself; authority I have to lay it down, and authority I have again to take it; this command I received from my Father.'
Therefore, again, there came a division among the Jews, because of these words,
and many of them said, 'He hath a demon, and is mad, why do ye hear him?'
others said, 'These sayings are not those of a demoniac; is a demon able blind men's eyes to open?'
And the dedication in Jerusalem came, and it was winter,
and Jesus was walking in the temple, in the porch of Solomon,
the Jews, therefore, came round about him, and said to him, 'Till when our soul dost thou hold in suspense? if thou art the Christ, tell us freely.'
Jesus answered them, 'I told you, and ye do not believe; the works that I do in the name of my Father, these testify concerning me;
but ye do not believe, for ye are not of my sheep,
according as I said to you: My sheep my voice do hear, and I know them, and they follow me,
and life age-during I give to them, and they shall not perish — to the age, and no one shall pluck them out of my hand;
my Father, who hath given to me, is greater than all, and no one is able to pluck out of the hand of my Father;
I and the Father are one.'
Therefore, again, did the Jews take up stones that they may stone him;
Jesus answered them, 'Many good works did I shew you from my Father; because of which work of them do ye stone me?'
The Jews answered him, saying, 'For a good work we do not stone thee, but for evil speaking, and because thou, being a man, dost make thyself God.'
Jesus answered them, 'Is it not having been written in your law: I said, ye are gods?
if them he did call gods unto whom the word of God came, (and the Writing is not able to be broken,)
of him whom the Father did sanctify, and send to the world, do ye say — Thou speakest evil, because I said, Son of God I am?
if I do not the works of my Father, do not believe me;
and if I do, even if me ye may not believe, the works believe, that ye may know and may believe that in me [is] the Father, and I in Him.'
Therefore were they seeking again to seize him, and he went forth out of their hand,
and went away again to the other side of the Jordan, to the place where John was at first baptizing, and remained there,
and many came unto him, and said — 'John, indeed, did no sign, and all things, as many as John said about this one were true;'
and many did believe in him there.
And there was a certain one ailing, Lazarus, from Bethany, of the village of Mary and Martha her sister —
and it was Mary who did anoint the Lord with ointment, and did wipe his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was ailing —
therefore sent the sisters unto him, saying, 'Sir, lo, he whom thou dost love is ailing;'
and Jesus having heard, said, 'This ailment is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God may be glorified through it.'
And Jesus was loving Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus,
when, therefore, he heard that he is ailing, then indeed he remained in the place in which he was two days,
then after this, he saith to the disciples, 'We may go to Judea again;'
the disciples say to him, 'Rabbi, now were the Jews seeking to stone thee, and again thou dost go thither!'
Jesus answered, 'Are there not twelve hours in the day? if any one may walk in the day, he doth not stumble, because the light of this world he doth see;
and if any one may walk in the night, he stumbleth, because the light is not in him.'
These things he said, and after this he saith to them, 'Lazarus our friend hath fallen asleep, but I go on that I may awake him;'
therefore said his disciples, 'Sir, if he hath fallen asleep, he will be saved;'
but Jesus had spoken about his death, but they thought that about the repose of sleep he speaketh.
Then, therefore, Jesus said to them freely, 'Lazarus hath died;
and I rejoice, for your sake, (that ye may believe,) that I was not there; but we may go to him;'
therefore said Thomas, who is called Didymus, to the fellow-disciples, 'We may go — we also, that we may die with him,'
Jesus, therefore, having come, found him having been four days already in the tomb.
And Bethany was nigh to Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off,
and many of the Jews had come unto Martha and Mary, that they might comfort them concerning their brother;
Martha, therefore, when she heard that Jesus doth come, met him, and Mary kept sitting in the house.
Martha, therefore, said unto Jesus, 'Sir, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died;
but even now, I have known that whatever thou mayest ask of God, God will give to thee;'
Jesus saith to her, 'Thy brother shall rise again.'
Martha saith to him, 'I have known that he will rise again, in the rising again in the last day;'
Jesus said to her, 'I am the rising again, and the life; he who is believing in me, even if he may die, shall live;
and every one who is living and believing in me shall not die — to the age;
believest thou this?' she saith to him, 'Yes, sir, I have believed that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, who is coming to the world.'
And these things having said, she went away, and called Mary her sister privately, saying, 'The Teacher is present, and doth call thee;'
she, when she heard, riseth up quickly, and doth come to him;
and Jesus had not yet come to the village, but was in the place where Martha met him;
the Jews, therefore, who were with her in the house, and were comforting her, having seen Mary that she rose up quickly and went forth, followed her, saying — 'She doth go away to the tomb, that she may weep there.'
Mary, therefore, when she came where Jesus was, having seen him, fell at his feet, saying to him, 'Sir, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died;'
Jesus, therefore, when he saw her weeping, and the Jews who came with her weeping, did groan in the spirit, and troubled himself, and he said,
'Where have ye laid him?' they say to him, 'Sir, come and see;'
Jesus wept.
The Jews, therefore, said, 'Lo, how he was loving him!'
and certain of them said, 'Was not this one, who did open the eyes of the blind man, able to cause that also this one might not have died?'
Jesus, therefore, again groaning in himself, cometh to the tomb, and it was a cave, and a stone was lying upon it,
Jesus saith, 'Take ye away the stone;' the sister of him who hath died — Martha — saith to him, 'Sir, already he stinketh, for he is four days dead;'
Jesus saith to her, 'Said I not to thee, that if thou mayest believe, thou shalt see the glory of God?'
They took away, therefore, the stone where the dead was laid, and Jesus lifted his eyes upwards, and said, 'Father, I thank Thee, that Thou didst hear me;
and I knew that Thou always dost hear me, but, because of the multitude that is standing by, I said [it], that they may believe that Thou didst send me.'
And these things saying, with a loud voice he cried out, 'Lazarus, come forth;'
and he who died came forth, being bound feet and hands with grave-clothes, and his visage with a napkin was bound about; Jesus saith to them, 'Loose him, and suffer to go.'
Many, therefore, of the Jews who came unto Mary, and beheld what Jesus did, believed in him;
but certain of them went away unto the Pharisees, and told them what Jesus did;
the chief priests, therefore, and the Pharisees, gathered together a sanhedrim, and said, 'What may we do? because this man doth many signs?
if we may let him alone thus, all will believe in him; and the Romans will come, and will take away both our place and nation.'
and a certain one of them, Caiaphas, being chief priest of that year, said to them, 'Ye have not known anything,
nor reason that it is good for us that one man may die for the people, and not the whole nation perish.'
And this he said not of himself, but being chief priest of that year, he did prophesy that Jesus was about to die for the nation,
and not for the nation only, but that also the children of God, who have been scattered abroad, he may gather together into one.
From that day, therefore, they took counsel together that they may kill him;
Jesus, therefore, was no more freely walking among the Jews, but went away thence to the region nigh the wilderness, to a city called Ephraim, and there he tarried with his disciples.
And the passover of the Jews was nigh, and many went up to Jerusalem out of the country before the passover, that they might purify themselves;
they were seeking, therefore, Jesus, and said one with another, standing in the temple, 'What doth appear to you — that he may not come to the feast?'
and both the chief priests and the Pharisees had given a command, that if any one may know where he is, he may shew [it], so that they may seize him.
Jesus, therefore, six days before the passover, came to Bethany, where was Lazarus, who had died, whom he raised out of the dead;
they made, therefore, to him a supper there, and Martha was ministering, and Lazarus was one of those reclining together (at meat) with him;
Mary, therefore, having taken a pound of ointment of spikenard, of great price, anointed the feet of Jesus and did wipe with her hair his feet, and the house was filled from the fragrance of the ointment.
Therefore saith one of his disciples — Judas Iscariot, of Simon, who is about to deliver him up —
'Wherefore was not this ointment sold for three hundred denaries, and given to the poor?'
and he said this, not because he was caring for the poor, but because he was a thief, and had the bag, and what things were put in he was carrying.
Jesus, therefore, said, 'Suffer her; for the day of my embalming she hath kept it,
for the poor ye have always with yourselves, and me ye have not always.'
A great multitude, therefore, of the Jews knew that he is there, and they came, not because of Jesus only, but that Lazarus also they may see, whom he raised out of the dead;
and the chief priests took counsel, that also Lazarus they may kill,
because on account of him many of the Jews were going away, and were believing in Jesus.
On the morrow, a great multitude that came to the feast, having heard that Jesus doth come to Jerusalem,
took the branches of the palms, and went forth to meet him, and were crying, 'Hosanna, blessed [is] he who is coming in the name of the Lord — the king of Israel;'
and Jesus having found a young ass did sit upon it, according as it is written,
'Fear not, daughter of Sion, lo, thy king doth come, sitting on an ass' colt.'
And these things his disciples did not know at the first, but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things were having been written about him, and these things they did to him.
The multitude, therefore, who are with him, were testifying that he called Lazarus out of the tomb, and did raise him out of the dead;
because of this also did the multitude meet him, because they heard of his having done this sign,
the Pharisees, therefore, said among themselves, 'Ye see that ye do not gain anything, lo, the world did go after him.'
And there were certain Greeks out of those coming up that they may worship in the feast,
these then came near to Philip, who [is] from Bethsaida of Galilee, and were asking him, saying, 'Sir, we wish to see Jesus;'
Philip cometh and telleth Andrew, and again Andrew and Philip tell Jesus.
And Jesus responded to them, saying, 'The hour hath come that the Son of Man may be glorified;
verily, verily, I say to you, if the grain of the wheat, having fallen to the earth, may not die, itself remaineth alone; and if it may die, it doth bear much fruit;
he who is loving his life shall lose it, and he who is hating his life in this world — to life age-during shall keep it;
if any one may minister to me, let him follow me, and where I am, there also my ministrant shall be; and if any one may minister to me — honour him will the Father.
'Now hath my soul been troubled, and what? shall I say — Father, save me from this hour? — but because of this I came to this hour;
Father, glorify Thy name.' There came, therefore, a voice out of the heaven, 'I both glorified, and again I will glorify [it];'
the multitude, therefore, having stood and heard, were saying that there hath been thunder; others said, 'A messenger hath spoken to him.'
Jesus answered and said, 'Not because of me hath this voice come, but because of you;
now is a judgment of this world, now shall the ruler of this world be cast forth;
and I, if I may be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto myself.'
And this he said signifying by what death he was about to die;
the multitude answered him, 'We heard out of the law that the Christ doth remain — to the age; and how dost thou say, That it behoveth the Son of Man to be lifted up? who is this — the Son of Man?'
Jesus, therefore, said to them, 'Yet a little time is the light with you; walk while ye have the light, that darkness may not overtake you; and he who is walking in the darkness hath not known where he goeth;
while ye have the light, believe in the light, that sons of light ye may become.' These things spake Jesus, and having gone away, he was hid from them,
yet he having done so many signs before them, they were not believing in him,
that the word of Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, which he said, 'Lord, who gave credence to our report? and the arm of the Lord — to whom was it revealed?'
Because of this they were not able to believe, that again Isaiah said,
'He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, that they might not see with the eyes, and understand with the heart, and turn back, and I might heal them;'
these things said Isaiah, when he saw his glory, and spake of him.
Still, however, also out of the rulers did many believe in him, but because of the Pharisees they were not confessing, that they might not be put out of the synagogue,
for they loved the glory of men more than the glory of God.
And Jesus cried and said, 'He who is believing in me, doth not believe in me, but in Him who sent me;
and he who is beholding me, doth behold Him who sent me;
I a light to the world have come, that every one who is believing in me — in the darkness may not remain;
and if any one may hear my sayings, and not believe, I — I do not judge him, for I came not that I might judge the world, but that I might save the world.
'He who is rejecting me, and not receiving my sayings, hath one who is judging him, the word that I spake, that will judge him in the last day,
because I spake not from myself, but the Father who sent me, He did give me a command, what I may say, and what I may speak,
and I have known that His command is life age-during; what, therefore, I speak, according as the Father hath said to me, so I speak.'
And before the feast of the passover, Jesus knowing that his hour hath come, that he may remove out of this world unto the Father, having loved his own who [are] in the world — to the end he loved them.
And supper being come, the devil already having put [it] into the heart of Judas of Simon, Iscariot, that he may deliver him up,
Jesus knowing that all things the Father hath given to him — into [his] hands, and that from God he came forth, and unto God he goeth,
doth rise from the supper, and doth lay down his garments, and having taken a towel, he girded himself;
afterward he putteth water into the basin, and began to wash the feet of his disciples, and to wipe with the towel with which he was being girded.
He cometh, therefore, unto Simon Peter, and that one saith to him, 'Sir, thou — dost thou wash my feet?'
Jesus answered and said to him, 'That which I do thou hast not known now, but thou shalt know after these things;'
Peter saith to him, 'Thou mayest not wash my feet — to the age.' Jesus answered him, 'If I may not wash thee, thou hast no part with me;'
Simon Peter saith to him, 'Sir, not my feet only, but also the hands and the head.'
Jesus saith to him, 'He who hath been bathed hath no need save to wash his feet, but he is clean altogether; and ye are clean, but not all;'
for he knew him who is delivering him up; because of this he said, 'Ye are not all clean.'
When, therefore, he washed their feet, and took his garments, having reclined (at meat) again, he said to them, 'Do ye know what I have done to you?
ye call me, The Teacher and The Lord, and ye say well, for I am;
if then I did wash your feet — the Lord and the Teacher — ye also ought to wash one another's feet.
'For an example I gave to you, that, according as I did to you, ye also may do;
verily, verily, I say to you, a servant is not greater than his lord, nor an apostle greater than he who sent him;
if these things ye have known, happy are ye, if ye may do them;
not concerning you all do I speak; I have known whom I chose for myself; but that the Writing may be fulfilled: He who is eating the bread with me, did lift up against me his heel.
'From this time I tell you, before its coming to pass, that, when it may come to pass, ye may believe that I am [he];
verily, verily, I say to you, he who is receiving whomsoever I may send, doth receive me; and he who is receiving me, doth receive Him who sent me.'
These things having said, Jesus was troubled in the spirit, and did testify, and said, 'Verily, verily, I say to you, that one of you will deliver me up;'
the disciples were looking, therefore, one at another, doubting concerning whom he speaketh.
And there was one of his disciples reclining (at meat) in the bosom of Jesus, whom Jesus was loving;
Simon Peter, then, doth beckon to this one, to inquire who he may be concerning whom he speaketh,
and that one having leant back on the breast of Jesus, respondeth to him, 'Sir, who is it?'
Jesus answereth, 'That one it is to whom I, having dipped the morsel, shall give it;' and having dipped the morsel, he giveth [it] to Judas of Simon, Iscariot.
And after the morsel, then the Adversary entered into that one, Jesus, therefore, saith to him, 'What thou dost — do quickly;'
and none of those reclining at meat knew for what intent he said this to him,
for certain were thinking, since Judas had the bag, that Jesus saith to him, 'Buy what we have need of for the feast;' or that he may give something to the poor;
having received, therefore, the morsel, that one immediately went forth, and it was night.
When, therefore, he went forth, Jesus saith, 'Now was the Son of Man glorified, and God was glorified in him;
if God was glorified in him, God also will glorify him in Himself; yea, immediately He will glorify him.
'Little children, yet a little am I with you; ye will seek me, and, according as I said to the Jews — Whither I go away, ye are not able to come, to you also I do say [it] now.
'A new commandment I give to you, that ye love one another; according as I did love you, that ye also love one another;
in this shall all know that ye are my disciples, if ye may have love one to another.'
Simon Peter saith to him, 'Sir, whither dost thou go away?' Jesus answered him, 'Whither I go away, thou art not able now to follow me, but afterward thou shalt follow me.'
Peter saith to him, 'Sir, wherefore am I not able to follow thee now? my life for thee I will lay down;'
Jesus answered him, 'Thy life for me thou wilt lay down! verily, verily, I say to thee, a cock will not crow till thou mayest deny me thrice.'
'Let not your heart be troubled, believe in God, also in me believe;
in the house of my Father are many mansions; and if not, I would have told you; I go on to prepare a place for you;
and if I go on and prepare for you a place, again do I come, and will receive you unto myself, that where I am ye also may be;
and whither I go away ye have known, and the way ye have known.'
Thomas saith to him, 'Sir, we have not known whither thou goest away, and how are we able to know the way?'
Jesus saith to him, 'I am the way, and the truth, and the life, no one doth come unto the Father, if not through me;
if ye had known me, my Father also ye would have known, and from this time ye have known Him, and have seen Him.'
Philip saith to him, 'Sir, shew to us the Father, and it is enough for us;'
Jesus saith to him, 'So long time am I with you, and thou hast not known me, Philip? he who hath seen me hath seen the Father; and how dost thou say, Shew to us the Father?
Believest thou not that I [am] in the Father, and the Father is in me? the sayings that I speak to you, from myself I speak not, and the Father who is abiding in me, Himself doth the works;
believe me, that I [am] in the Father, and the Father in me; and if not, because of the works themselves, believe me.
'Verily, verily, I say to you, he who is believing in me, the works that I do — that one also shall do, and greater than these he shall do, because I go on to my Father;
and whatever ye may ask in my name, I will do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son;
if ye ask anything in my name I will do [it].
'If ye love me, my commands keep,
and I will ask the Father, and another Comforter He will give to you, that he may remain with you — to the age;
the Spirit of truth, whom the world is not able to receive, because it doth not behold him, nor know him, and ye know him, because he doth remain with you, and shall be in you.
'I will not leave you bereaved, I come unto you;
yet a little, and the world doth no more behold me, and ye behold me, because I live, and ye shall live;
in that day ye shall know that I [am] in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you;
he who is having my commands, and is keeping them, that one it is who is loving me, and he who is loving me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him.'
Judas saith to him, (not the Iscariot), 'Sir, what hath come to pass, that to us thou are about to manifest thyself, and not to the world?'
Jesus answered and said to him, 'If any one may love me, my word he will keep, and my Father will love him, and unto him we will come, and abode with him we will make;
he who is not loving me, my words doth not keep; and the word that ye hear is not mine, but the Father's who sent me.
'These things I have spoken to you, remaining with you,
and the Comforter, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things, and remind you of all things that I said to you.
'Peace I leave to you; my peace I give to you, not according as the world doth give do I give to you; let not your heart be troubled, nor let it be afraid;
ye heard that I said to you — I go away, and I come unto you; if ye did love me, ye would have rejoiced that I said — I go on to the Father, because my Father is greater than I.
'And now I have said [it] to you before it come to pass, that when it may come to pass, ye may believe;
I will no more talk much with you, for the ruler of this world doth come, and in me he hath nothing;
but that the world may know that I love the Father, and according as the Father gave me command so I do; arise, we may go hence.
'I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman;
every branch in me not bearing fruit, He doth take it away, and every one bearing fruit, He doth cleanse by pruning it, that it may bear more fruit;
already ye are clean, because of the word that I have spoken to you;
remain in me, and I in you, as the branch is not able to bear fruit of itself, if it may not remain in the vine, so neither ye, if ye may not remain in me.
'I am the vine, ye the branches; he who is remaining in me, and I in him, this one doth bear much fruit, because apart from me ye are not able to do anything;
if any one may not remain in me, he was cast forth without as the branch, and was withered, and they gather them, and cast to fire, and they are burned;
if ye may remain in me, and my sayings in you may remain, whatever ye may wish ye shall ask, and it shall be done to you.
'In this was my Father glorified, that ye may bear much fruit, and ye shall become my disciples.
According as the Father did love me, I also loved you, remain in my love;
if my commandments ye may keep, ye shall remain in my love, according as I the commands of my Father have kept, and do remain in His love;
these things I have spoken to you, that my joy in you may remain, and your joy may be full.
'This is my command, that ye love one another, according as I did love you;
greater love than this hath no one, that any one his life may lay down for his friends;
ye are my friends, if ye may do whatever I command you;
no more do I call you servants, because the servant hath not known what his lord doth, and you I have called friends, because all things that I heard from my Father, I did make known to you.
'Ye did not choose out me, but I chose out you, and did appoint you, that ye might go away, and might bear fruit, and your fruit might remain, that whatever ye may ask of the Father in my name, He may give you.
'These things I command you, that ye love one another;
if the world doth hate you, ye know that it hath hated me before you;
if of the world ye were, the world its own would have been loving, and because of the world ye are not — but I chose out of the world — because of this the world hateth you.
'Remember the word that I said to you, A servant is not greater than his lord; if me they did persecute, you also they will persecute; if my word they did keep, yours also they will keep;
but all these things will they do to you, because of my name, because they have not known Him who sent me;
if I had not come and spoken to them, they were not having sin; but now pretext they have not for their sin.
'He who is hating me, doth hate also my Father;
if I did not do among them the works that no other hath done, they were not having sin, and now they have both seen and hated both me and my Father;
but — that the word may be fulfilled that was written in their law — They hated me without a cause.
'And when the Comforter may come, whom I will send to you from the Father — the Spirit of truth, who from the Father doth come forth, he will testify of me;
and ye also do testify, because from the beginning ye are with me.
'These things I have spoken to you, that ye may not be stumbled,
out of the synagogues they will put you; but an hour doth come, that every one who hath killed you, may think to offer service unto God;
and these things they will do to you, because they did not know the Father, nor me.
'But these things I have spoken to you, that when the hour may come, ye may remember them, that I said [them] to you, and these things to you from the beginning I did not say, because I was with you;
and now I go away to Him who sent me, and none of you doth ask me, Whither dost thou go?
but because these things I have said to you, the sorrow hath filled your heart.
'But I tell you the truth; it is better for you that I go away, for if I may not go away, the Comforter will not come unto you, and if I go on, I will send Him unto you;
and having come, He will convict the world concerning sin, and concerning righteousness, and concerning judgment;
concerning sin indeed, because they do not believe in me;
and concerning righteousness, because unto my Father I go away, and no more do ye behold me;
and concerning judgment, because the ruler of this world hath been judged.
'I have yet many things to say to you, but ye are not able to bear [them] now;
and when He may come — the Spirit of truth — He will guide you to all the truth, for He will not speak from Himself, but as many things as He will hear He will speak, and the coming things He will tell you;
He will glorify me, because of mine He will take, and will tell to you.
'All things, as many as the Father hath, are mine; because of this I said, That of mine He will take, and will tell to you;
a little while, and ye do not behold me, and again a little while, and ye shall see me, because I go away unto the Father.'
Therefore said [some] of his disciples one to another, 'What is this that he saith to us, A little while, and ye do not behold me, and again a little while, and ye shall see me, and, Because I go away unto the Father?'
they said then, 'What is this he saith — the little while? we have not known what he saith.'
Jesus, therefore, knew that they were wishing to ask him, and he said to them, 'Concerning this do ye seek one with another, because I said, A little while, and you do not behold me, and again a little while, and ye shall see me?
verily, verily, I say to you, that ye shall weep and lament, and the world will rejoice; and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow joy will become.
'The woman, when she may bear, hath sorrow, because her hour did come, and when she may bear the child, no more doth she remember the anguish, because of the joy that a man was born to the world.
'And ye, therefore, now, indeed, have sorrow; and again I will see you, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no one doth take from you,
and in that day ye will question me nothing; verily, verily, I say to you, as many things as ye may ask of the Father in my name, He will give you;
till now ye did ask nothing in my name; ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.
'These things in similitudes I have spoken to you, but there cometh an hour when no more in similitudes will I speak to you, but freely of the Father, will tell you.
'In that day, in my name ye will make request, and I do not say to you that I will ask the Father for you,
for the Father himself doth love you, because me ye have loved, and ye have believed that I from God came forth;
I came forth from the Father, and have come to the world; again I leave the world, and go on unto the Father.'
His disciples say to him, 'Lo, now freely thou dost speak, and no similitude speakest thou;
now we have known that thou hast known all things, and hast no need that any one do question thee; in this we believe that from God thou didst come forth.'
Jesus answered them, 'Now do ye believe? lo, there doth come an hour,
and now it hath come, that ye may be scattered, each to his own things, and me ye may leave alone, and I am not alone, because the Father is with me;
these things I have spoken to you, that in me ye may have peace, in the world ye shall have tribulation, but take courage — I have overcome the world.'
These things spake Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to the heaven, and said — 'Father, the hour hath come, glorify Thy Son, that Thy Son also may glorify Thee,
according as Thou didst give to him authority over all flesh, that — all that Thou hast given to him — he may give to them life age-during;
and this is the life age-during, that they may know Thee, the only true God, and him whom Thou didst send — Jesus Christ;
I did glorify Thee on the earth, the work I did finish that Thou hast given me, that I may do [it].
'And now, glorify me, Thou Father, with Thyself, with the glory that I had before the world was, with Thee;
I did manifest Thy name to the men whom Thou hast given to me out of the world; Thine they were, and to me Thou hast given them, and Thy word they have kept;
now they have known that all things, as many as Thou hast given to me, are from Thee,
because the sayings that Thou hast given to me, I have given to them, and they themselves received, and have known truly, that from Thee I came forth, and they did believe that Thou didst send me.
'I ask in regard to them; not in regard to the world do I ask, but in regard to those whom Thou hast given to me, because Thine they are,
and all mine are Thine, and Thine [are] mine, and I have been glorified in them;
and no more am I in the world, and these are in the world, and I come unto Thee. Holy Father, keep them in Thy name, whom Thou hast given to me, that they may be one as we;
when I was with them in the world, I was keeping them in Thy name; those whom Thou hast given to me I did guard, and none of them was destroyed, except the son of the destruction, that the Writing may be fulfilled.
'And now unto Thee I come, and these things I speak in the world, that they may have my joy fulfilled in themselves;
I have given to them Thy word, and the world did hate them, because they are not of the world, as I am not of the world;
I do not ask that Thou mayest take them out of the world, but that Thou mayest keep them out of the evil.
'Of the world they are not, as I of the world am not;
sanctify them in Thy truth, Thy word is truth;
as Thou didst send me to the world, I also did send them to the world;
and for them do I sanctify myself, that they also themselves may be sanctified in truth.
'And not in regard to these alone do I ask, but also in regard to those who shall be believing, through their word, in me;
that they all may be one, as Thou Father [art] in me, and I in Thee; that they also in us may be one, that the world may believe that Thou didst send me.
'And I, the glory that thou hast given to me, have given to them, that they may be one as we are one;
I in them, and Thou in me, that they may be perfected into one, and that the world may know that Thou didst send me, and didst love them as Thou didst love me.
'Father, those whom Thou hast given to me, I will that where I am they also may be with me, that they may behold my glory that Thou didst give to me, because Thou didst love me before the foundation of the world.
'Righteous Father, also the world did not know Thee, and I knew Thee, and these have known that Thou didst send me,
and I made known to them Thy name, and will make known, that the love with which Thou lovedst me in them may be, and I in them.'
These things having said, Jesus went forth with his disciples beyond the brook of Kedron, where was a garden, into which he entered, himself and his disciples,
and Judas also, who delivered him up, had known the place, because many times did Jesus assemble there with his disciples.
Judas, therefore, having taken the band and officers out of the chief priests and Pharisees, doth come thither with torches and lamps, and weapons;
Jesus, therefore, knowing all things that are coming upon him, having gone forth, said to them, 'Whom do ye seek?'
they answered him, 'Jesus the Nazarene;' Jesus saith to them, 'I am [he];' — and Judas who delivered him up was standing with them; —
when, therefore, he said to them — 'I am [he],' they went away backward, and fell to the ground.
Again, therefore, he questioned them, 'Whom do ye seek?' and they said, 'Jesus the Nazarene;'
Jesus answered, 'I said to you that I am [he]; if, then, me ye seek, suffer these to go away;'
that the word might be fulfilled that he said — 'Those whom Thou hast given to me, I did not lose of them even one.'
Simon Peter, therefore, having a sword, drew it, and struck the chief priest's servant, and cut off his right ear — and the name of the servant was Malchus —
Jesus, therefore, said to Peter, 'Put the sword into the sheath; the cup that the Father hath given to me, may I not drink it?'
The band, therefore, and the captain, and the officers of the Jews, took hold on Jesus, and bound him,
and they led him away to Annas first, for he was father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was chief priest of that year,
and Caiaphas was he who gave counsel to the Jews, that it is good for one man to perish for the people.
And following Jesus was Simon Peter, and the other disciple, and that disciple was known to the chief priest, and he entered with Jesus to the hall of the chief priest,
and Peter was standing at the door without, therefore went forth the other disciple who was known to the chief priest, and he spake to the female keeping the door, and he brought in Peter.
Then said the maid keeping the door to Peter, 'Art thou also of the disciples of this man?' he saith, 'I am not;'
and the servants and the officers were standing, having made a fire of coals, because it was cold, and they were warming themselves, and Peter was standing with them, and warming himself.
The chief priests, therefore, questioned Jesus concerning his disciples, and concerning his teaching;
Jesus answered him, 'I spake freely to the world, I did always teach in a synagogue, and in the temple, where the Jews do always come together; and in secret I spake nothing;
why me dost thou question? question those having heard what I spake to them; lo, these have known what I said.'
And he having said these things, one of the officers standing by did give Jesus a slap, saying, 'Thus dost thou answer the chief priest?'
Jesus answered him, 'If I spake ill, testify concerning the ill; and if well, why me dost thou smite?'
Annas then sent him bound to Caiaphas the chief priest.
And Simon Peter was standing and warming himself, they said then to him, 'Art thou also of his disciples?' he denied, and said, 'I am not.'
One of the servants of the chief priest, being kinsman of him whose ear Peter cut off, saith, 'Did not I see thee in the garden with him?'
again, therefore, Peter denied, and immediately a cock crew.
They led, therefore, Jesus from Caiaphas to the praetorium, and it was early, and they themselves did not enter into the praetorium, that they might not be defiled, but that they might eat the passover;
Pilate, therefore, went forth unto them, and said, 'What accusation do ye bring against this man?'
they answered and said to him, 'If he were not an evil doer, we had not delivered him to thee.'
Pilate, therefore, said to them, 'Take ye him — ye — and according to your law judge him;' the Jews, therefore, said to him, 'It is not lawful to us to put any one to death;'
that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled which he said, signifying by what death he was about to die.
Pilate, therefore, entered into the praetorium again, and called Jesus, and said to him, 'Thou art the King of the Jews?'
Jesus answered him, 'From thyself dost thou say this? or did others say it to thee about me?'
Pilate answered, 'Am I a Jew? thy nation, and the chief priests did deliver thee up to me; what didst thou?'
Jesus answered, 'My kingdom is not of this world; if my kingdom were of this world, my officers had struggled that I might not be delivered up to Jews; but now my kingdom is not from hence.'
Pilate, therefore, said to him, 'Art thou then a king?' Jesus answered, 'Thou dost say [it]; because a king I am, I for this have been born, and for this I have come to the world, that I may testify to the truth; every one who is of the truth, doth hear my voice.'
Pilate saith to him, 'What is truth?' and this having said, again he went forth unto the Jews, and saith to them, 'I do find no fault in him;
and ye have a custom that I shall release to you one in the passover; will ye, therefore, [that] I shall release to you the king of the Jews?'
therefore they all cried out again, saying, 'Not this one — but Barabbas;' and Barabbas was a robber.
Then, therefore, did Pilate take Jesus and scourge [him],
and the soldiers having plaited a crown of thorns, did place [it] on his head, and a purple garment they put around him,
and said, 'Hail! the king of the Jews;' and they were giving him slaps.
Pilate, therefore, again went forth without, and saith to them, 'Lo, I do bring him to you without, that ye may know that in him I find no fault;'
Jesus, therefore, came forth without, bearing the thorny crown and the purple garment; and he saith to them, 'Lo, the man!'
When, therefore, the chief priests and the officers did see him, they cried out, saying, 'Crucify, crucify;' Pilate saith to them, 'Take ye him — ye, and crucify; for I find no fault in him;'
the Jews answered him, 'We have a law, and according to our law he ought to die, for he made himself Son of God.'
When, therefore, Pilate heard this word, he was the more afraid,
and entered again to the praetorium, and saith to Jesus, 'Whence art thou?' and Jesus gave him no answer.
Pilate, therefore, saith to him, 'To me dost thou not speak? hast thou not known that I have authority to crucify thee, and I have authority to release thee?'
Jesus answered, 'Thou wouldest have no authority against me, if it were not having been given thee from above; because of this, he who is delivering me up to thee hath greater sin.'
From this [time] was Pilate seeking to release him, and the Jews were crying out, saying, 'If this one thou mayest release, thou art not a friend of Caesar; every one making himself a king, doth speak against Caesar.'
Pilate, therefore, having heard this word, brought Jesus without — and he sat down upon the tribunal — to a place called, 'Pavement,' and in Hebrew, Gabbatha;
and it was the preparation of the passover, and as it were the sixth hour, and he saith to the Jews, 'Lo, your king!'
and they cried out, 'Take away, take away, crucify him;' Pilate saith to them, 'Your king shall I crucify?' the chief priests answered, 'We have no king except Caesar.'
Then, therefore, he delivered him up to them, that he may be crucified, and they took Jesus and led [him] away,
and bearing his cross, he went forth to the place called [Place] of a Skull, which is called in Hebrew Golgotha;
where they crucified him, and with him two others, on this side, and on that side, and Jesus in the midst.
And Pilate also wrote a title, and put [it] on the cross, and it was written, 'Jesus the Nazarene, the king of the Jews;'
this title, therefore, read many of the Jews, because the place was nigh to the city where Jesus was crucified, and it was having been written in Hebrew, in Greek, in Roman.
The chief priests of the Jews said, therefore, to Pilate, 'Write not — The king of the Jews, but that one said, I am king of the Jews;'
Pilate answered, 'What I have written, I have written.'
The soldiers, therefore, when they did crucify Jesus, took his garments, and made four parts, to each soldier a part, also the coat, and the coat was seamless, from the top woven throughout,
they said, therefore, to one another, 'We may not rend it, but cast a lot for it, whose it shall be;' that the Writing might be fulfilled, that is saying, 'They divided my garments to themselves, and upon my raiment they did cast a lot;' the soldiers, therefore, indeed, did these things.
And there stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his mother's sister, Mary of Cleopas, and Mary the Magdalene;
Jesus, therefore, having seen [his] mother, and the disciple standing by, whom he was loving, he saith to his mother, 'Woman, lo, thy son;'
afterward he saith to the disciple, 'Lo, thy mother;' and from that hour the disciple took her to his own [home].
After this, Jesus knowing that all things now have been finished, that the Writing may be fulfilled, saith, 'I thirst;'
a vessel, therefore, was placed full of vinegar, and they having filled a sponge with vinegar, and having put [it] around a hyssop stalk, did put [it] to his mouth;
when, therefore, Jesus received the vinegar, he said, 'It hath been finished;' and having bowed the head, gave up the spirit.
The Jews, therefore, that the bodies might not remain on the cross on the sabbath, since it was the preparation, (for that sabbath day was a great one,) asked of Pilate that their legs may be broken, and they taken away.
The soldiers, therefore, came, and of the first indeed they did break the legs, and of the other who was crucified with him,
and having come to Jesus, when they saw him already having been dead, they did not break his legs;
but one of the soldiers with a spear did pierce his side, and immediately there came forth blood and water;
and he who hath seen hath testified, and his testimony is true, and that one hath known that true things he speaketh, that ye also may believe.
For these things came to pass, that the Writing may be fulfilled, 'A bone of him shall not be broken;'
and again another Writing saith, 'They shall look to him whom they did pierce.'
And after these things did Joseph of Arimathea — being a disciple of Jesus, but concealed, through the fear of the Jews — ask of Pilate, that he may take away the body of Jesus, and Pilate gave leave; he came, therefore, and took away the body of Jesus,
and Nicodemus also came — who came unto Jesus by night at the first — bearing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, as it were, a hundred pounds.
They took, therefore, the body of Jesus, and bound it with linen clothes with the spices, according as it was the custom of the Jews to prepare for burial;
and there was in the place where he was crucified a garden, and in the garden a new tomb, in which no one was yet laid;
there, therefore, because of the preparation of the Jews, because the tomb was nigh, they laid Jesus.
And on the first of the sabbaths, Mary the Magdalene doth come early (there being yet darkness) to the tomb, and she seeth the stone having been taken away out of the tomb,
she runneth, therefore, and cometh unto Simon Peter, and unto the other disciple whom Jesus was loving, and saith to them, 'They took away the Lord out of the tomb, and we have not known where they laid him.'
Peter, therefore, went forth, and the other disciple, and they were coming to the tomb,
and the two were running together, and the other disciple did run forward more quickly than Peter, and came first to the tomb,
and having stooped down, seeth the linen clothes lying, yet, indeed, he entered not.
Simon Peter, therefore, cometh, following him, and he entered into the tomb, and beholdeth the linen clothes lying,
and the napkin that was upon his head, not lying with the linen clothes, but apart, having been folded up, in one place;
then, therefore, entered also the other disciple who came first unto the tomb, and he saw, and did believe;
for not yet did they know the Writing, that it behoveth him out of the dead to rise again.
The disciples therefore went away again unto their own friends,
and Mary was standing near the tomb, weeping without; as she was weeping, then, she stooped down to the tomb, and beholdeth two messengers in white, sitting,
one at the head, and one at the feet, where the body of Jesus had been laid.
And they say to her, 'Woman, why dost thou weep?' she saith to them, 'Because they took away my Lord, and I have not known where they laid him;'
and these things having said, she turned backward, and seeth Jesus standing, and she had not known that it is Jesus.
Jesus saith to her, 'Woman, why dost thou weep? whom dost thou seek;' she, supposing that he is the gardener, saith to him, 'Sir, if thou didst carry him away, tell me where thou didst lay him, and I will take him away;'
Jesus saith to her, 'Mary!' having turned, she saith to him, 'Rabbouni;' that is to say, 'Teacher.'
Jesus saith to her, 'Be not touching me, for I have not yet ascended unto my Father; and be going on to my brethren, and say to them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and to your God.'
Mary the Magdalene cometh, telling to the disciples that she hath seen the Lord, and [that] these things he said to her.
It being, therefore, evening, on that day, the first of the sabbaths, and the doors having been shut where the disciples were assembled, through fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst, and saith to them, 'Peace to you;'
and this having said, he shewed them his hands and side; the disciples, therefore, rejoiced, having seen the Lord.
Jesus, therefore, said to them again, 'Peace to you; according as the Father hath sent me, I also send you;'
and this having said, he breathed on [them], and saith to them, 'Receive the Holy Spirit;
if of any ye may loose the sins, they are loosed to them; if of any ye may retain, they have been retained.'
And Thomas, one of the twelve, who is called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came;
the other disciples, therefore, said to him, 'We have seen the Lord;' and he said to them, 'If I may not see in his hands the mark of the nails, and may put my finger to the mark of the nails, and may put my hand to his side, I will not believe.'
And after eight days, again were his disciples within, and Thomas with them; Jesus cometh, the doors having been shut, and he stood in the midst, and said, 'Peace to you!'
then he saith to Thomas, 'Bring thy finger hither, and see my hands, and bring thy hand, and put [it] to my side, and become not unbelieving, but believing.'
And Thomas answered and said to him, 'My Lord and my God;'
Jesus saith to him, 'Because thou hast seen me, Thomas, thou hast believed; happy those not having seen, and having believed.'
Many indeed, therefore, other signs also did Jesus before his disciples, that are not written in this book;
and these have been written that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye may have life in his name.'
After these things did Jesus manifest himself again to the disciples on the sea of Tiberias, and he did manifest himself thus:
There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas who is called Didymus, and Nathanael from Cana of Galilee, and the [sons] of Zebedee, and two others of his disciples.
Simon Peter saith to them, 'I go away to fish;' they say to him, 'We go — we also — with thee;' they went forth and entered into the boat immediately, and on that night they caught nothing.
And morning being now come, Jesus stood at the shore, yet indeed the disciples did not know that it is Jesus;
Jesus, therefore, saith to them, 'Lads, have ye any meat?'
they answered him, 'No;' and he said to them, 'Cast the net at the right side of the boat, and ye shall find;' they cast, therefore, and no longer were they able to draw it, from the multitude of the fishes.
That disciple, therefore, whom Jesus was loving saith to Peter, 'The Lord it is!' Simon Peter, therefore, having heard that it is the Lord, did gird on the outer coat, (for he was naked,) and did cast himself into the sea;
and the other disciples came by the little boat, for they were not far from the land, but as it were about two hundred cubits off, dragging the net of the fishes;
when, therefore, they came to the land, they behold a fire of coals lying, and a fish lying on it, and bread.
Jesus saith to them, 'Bring ye from the fishes that ye caught now;'
Simon Peter went up, and drew the net up on the land, full of great fishes, an hundred fifty and three, and though they were so many, the net was not rent.
Jesus saith to them, 'Come ye, dine;' and none of the disciples was venturing to inquire of him, 'Who art thou?' knowing that it is the Lord;
Jesus, therefore, doth come and take the bread and give to them, and the fish in like manner;
this [is] now a third time Jesus was manifested to his disciples, having been raised from the dead.
When, therefore, they dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter, 'Simon, [son] of Jonas, dost thou love me more than these?' he saith to him, 'Yes, Lord; thou hast known that I dearly love thee;' he saith to him, 'Feed my lambs.'
He saith to him again, a second time, 'Simon, [son] of Jonas, dost thou love me?' he saith to him, 'Yes, Lord; thou hast known that I dearly love thee;' he saith to him, 'Tend my sheep.'
He saith to him the third time, 'Simon, [son] of Jonas, dost thou dearly love me?' Peter was grieved that he said to him the third time, 'Dost thou dearly love me?' and he said to him, 'Lord, thou hast known all things; thou dost know that I dearly love thee.' Jesus saith to him, 'Feed my sheep;
verily, verily, I say to thee, When thou wast younger, thou wast girding thyself and wast walking whither thou didst will, but when thou mayest be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another will gird thee, and shall carry [thee] whither thou dost not will;'
and this he said, signifying by what death he shall glorify God; and having said this, he saith to him, 'Be following me.'
And Peter having turned about doth see the disciple whom Jesus was loving following, (who also reclined in the supper on his breast, and said, 'Sir, who is he who is delivering thee up?')
Peter having seen this one, saith to Jesus, 'Lord, and what of this one?'
Jesus saith to him, 'If him I will to remain till I come, what — to thee? be thou following me.' This word, therefore, went forth to the brethren that that disciple doth not die,
yet Jesus did not say to him, that he doth not die, but, 'If him I will to remain till I come, what — to thee?'
this is the disciple who is testifying concerning these things, and he wrote these things, and we have known that his testimony is true.
And there are also many other things — as many as Jesus did — which, if they may be written one by one, not even the world itself I think to have place for the books written. Amen.
The former account, indeed, I made concerning all things, O Theophilus, that Jesus began both to do and to teach,
till the day in which, having given command, through the Holy Spirit, to the apostles whom he did choose out, he was taken up,
to whom also he did present himself alive after his suffering, in many certain proofs, through forty days being seen by them, and speaking the things concerning the reign of God.
And being assembled together with them, he commanded them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of the Father, which, [saith he,] 'Ye did hear of me;
because John, indeed, baptized with water, and ye shall be baptized with the Holy Spirit — after not many days.'
They, therefore, indeed, having come together, were questioning him, saying, 'Lord, dost thou at this time restore the reign to Israel?'
and he said unto them, 'It is not yours to know times or seasons that the Father did appoint in His own authority;
but ye shall receive power at the coming of the Holy Spirit upon you, and ye shall be witnesses to me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and Samaria, and unto the end of the earth.'
And these things having said — they beholding — he was taken up, and a cloud did receive him up from their sight;
and as they were looking stedfastly to the heaven in his going on, then, lo, two men stood by them in white apparel,
who also said, 'Men, Galileans, why do ye stand gazing into the heaven? this Jesus who was received up from you into the heaven, shall so come in what manner ye saw him going on to the heaven.'
Then did they return to Jerusalem from the mount that is called of Olives, that is near Jerusalem, a sabbath's journey;
and when they came in, they went up to the upper room, where were abiding both Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, Philip, and Thomas, Bartholomew, and Matthew, James, of Alphaeus, and Simon the Zelotes, and Judas, of James;
these all were continuing with one accord in prayer and supplication, with women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren.
And in these days, Peter having risen up in the midst of the disciples, said, (the multitude also of the names at the same place was, as it were, an hundred and twenty,)
'Men, brethren, it behoved this Writing that it be fulfilled that beforehand the Holy Spirit spake through the mouth of David, concerning Judas, who became guide to those who took Jesus,
because he was numbered among us, and did receive the share in this ministration,
this one, indeed, then, purchased a field out of the reward of unrighteousness, and falling headlong, burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed forth,
and it became known to all those dwelling in Jerusalem, insomuch that that place is called, in their proper dialect, Aceldama, that is, field of blood,
for it hath been written in the book of Psalms: Let his lodging-place become desolate, and let no one be dwelling in it, and his oversight let another take.
'It behoveth, therefore, of the men who did go with us during all the time in which the Lord Jesus went in and went out among us,
beginning from the baptism of John, unto the day in which he was received up from us, one of these to become with us a witness of his rising again.'
And they set two, Joseph called Barsabas, who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias,
and having prayed, they said, 'Thou, Lord, who art knowing the heart of all, shew which one thou didst choose of these two
to receive the share of this ministration and apostleship, from which Judas, by transgression, did fall, to go on to his proper place;'
and they gave their lots, and the lot fell upon Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.
And in the day of the Pentecost being fulfilled, they were all with one accord at the same place,
and there came suddenly out of the heaven a sound as of a bearing violent breath, and it filled all the house where they were sitting,
and there appeared to them divided tongues, as it were of fire; it sat also upon each one of them,
and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak with other tongues, according as the Spirit was giving them to declare.
And there were dwelling in Jerusalem Jews, devout men from every nation of those under the heaven,
and the rumour of this having come, the multitude came together, and was confounded, because they were each one hearing them speaking in his proper dialect,
and they were all amazed, and did wonder, saying one unto another, 'Lo, are not all these who are speaking Galileans?
and how do we hear, each in our proper dialect, in which we were born?
Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and those dwelling in Mesopotamia, in Judea also, and Cappadocia, Pontus, and Asia,
Phrygia also, and Pamphylia, Egypt, and the parts of Libya, that [are] along Cyrene, and the strangers of Rome, both Jews and proselytes,
Cretes and Arabians, we did hear them speaking in our tongues the great things of God.'
And they were all amazed, and were in doubt, saying one unto another, 'What would this wish to be?'
and others mocking said, — 'They are full of sweet wine;'
and Peter having stood up with the eleven, lifted up his voice and declared to them, 'Men, Jews! and all those dwelling in Jerusalem, let this be known to you, and harken to my sayings,
for these are not drunken, as ye take it up, for it is the third hour of the day.
'But this is that which hath been spoken through the prophet Joel:
And it shall be in the last days, saith God, I will pour out of My Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams;
and also upon My men-servants, and upon My maid-servants, in those days, I will pour out of My Spirit, and they shall prophesy;
and I will give wonders in the heaven above, and signs upon the earth beneath — blood, and fire, and vapour of smoke,
the sun shall be turned to darkness, and the moon to blood, before the coming of the day of the Lord — the great and illustrious;
and it shall be, every one — whoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, he shall be saved.
'Men, Israelites! hear these words, Jesus the Nazarene, a man approved of God among you by mighty works, and wonders, and signs, that God did through him in the midst of you, according as also ye yourselves have known;
this one, by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, being given out, having taken by lawless hands, having crucified — ye did slay;
whom God did raise up, having loosed the pains of the death, because it was not possible for him to be held by it,
for David saith in regard to him: I foresaw the Lord always before me — because He is on my right hand — that I may not be moved;
because of this was my heart cheered, and my tongue was glad, and yet — my flesh also shall rest on hope,
because Thou wilt not leave my soul to hades, nor wilt Thou give Thy Kind One to see corruption;
Thou didst make known to me ways of life, Thou shalt fill me with joy with Thy countenance.
'Men, brethren! it is permitted to speak with freedom unto you concerning the patriarch David, that he both died and was buried, and his tomb is among us unto this day;
a prophet, therefore, being, and knowing that with an oath God did swear to him, out of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, to raise up the Christ, to sit upon his throne,
having foreseen, he did speak concerning the rising again of the Christ, that his soul was not left to hades, nor did his flesh see corruption.
'This Jesus did God raise up, of which we are all witnesses;
at the right hand then of God having been exalted — also the promise of the Holy Spirit having received from the Father — he was shedding forth this, which now ye see and hear;
for David did not go up to the heavens, and he saith himself: The Lord saith to my lord, Sit thou at my right hand,
till I make thy foes thy footstool;
assuredly, therefore, let all the house of Israel know, that both Lord and Christ did God make him — this Jesus whom ye did crucify.'
And having heard, they were pricked to the heart; they say also to Peter, and to the rest of the apostles, 'What shall we do, men, brethren?'
and Peter said unto them, 'Reform, and be baptized each of you on the name of Jesus Christ, to remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit,
for to you is the promise, and to your children, and to all those afar off, as many as the Lord our God shall call.'
Also with many more other words he was testifying and exhorting, saying, 'Be saved from this perverse generation;'
then those, indeed, who did gladly receive his word were baptized, and there were added on that day, as it were, three thousand souls,
and they were continuing stedfastly in the teaching of the apostles, and the fellowship, and the breaking of the bread, and the prayers.
And fear came on every soul, many wonders also and signs were being done through the apostles,
and all those believing were at the same place, and had all things common,
and the possessions and the goods they were selling, and were parting them to all, according as any one had need.
Daily also continuing with one accord in the temple, breaking also at every house bread, they were partaking of food in gladness and simplicity of heart,
praising God, and having favour with all the people, and the Lord was adding those being saved every day to the assembly.
And Peter and John were going up at the same time to the temple, at the hour of the prayer, the ninth [hour],
and a certain man, being lame from the womb of his mother, was being carried, whom they were laying every day at the gate of the temple, called Beautiful, to ask a kindness from those entering into the temple,
who, having seen Peter and John about to go into the temple, was begging to receive a kindness.
And Peter, having looked stedfastly toward him with John, said, 'Look toward us;'
and he was giving heed to them, looking to receive something from them;
and Peter said, 'Silver and gold I have none, but what I have, that I give to thee; in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and be walking.'
And having seized him by the right hand, he raised [him] up, and presently his feet and ankles were strengthened,
and springing up, he stood, and was walking, and did enter with them into the temple, walking and springing, and praising God;
and all the people saw him walking and praising God,
they were knowing him also that this it was who for a kindness was sitting at the Beautiful gate of the temple, and they were filled with wonder and amazement at what hath happened to him.
And at the lame man who was healed holding Peter and John, all the people ran together unto them in the porch called Solomon's — greatly amazed,
and Peter having seen, answered unto the people, 'Men, Israelites! why wonder ye at this? or on us why look ye so earnestly, as if by our own power or piety we have made him to walk?
'The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our fathers, did glorify His child Jesus, whom ye delivered up, and denied him in the presence of Pilate, he having given judgment to release [him],
and ye the Holy and Righteous One did deny, and desired a man — a murderer — to be granted to you,
and the Prince of the life ye did kill, whom God did raise out of the dead, of which we are witnesses;
and on the faith of his name, this one whom ye see and have known, his name made strong, even the faith that [is] through him did give to him this perfect soundness before you all.
'And now, brethren, I have known that through ignorance ye did [it], as also your rulers;
and God, what things before He had declared through the mouth of all His prophets, that the Christ should suffer, He did thus fulfil;
reform ye, therefore, and turn back, for your sins being blotted out, that times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord,
and He may send Jesus Christ who before hath been preached to you,
whom it behoveth heaven, indeed, to receive till times of a restitution of all things, of which God spake through the mouth of all His holy prophets from the age.
'For Moses, indeed, unto the fathers said — A prophet to you shall the Lord your God raise up out of your brethren, like to me; him shall ye hear in all things, as many as he may speak unto you;
and it shall be, every soul that may not hear that prophet shall be utterly destroyed out of the people;
and also all the prophets from Samuel and those following in order, as many as spake, did also foretell of these days.
'Ye are sons of the prophets, and of the covenant that God made unto our fathers, saying unto Abraham: And in thy seed shall be blessed all the families of the earth;
to you first, God, having raised up His child Jesus, did send him, blessing you, in the turning away of each one from your evil ways.'
And as they are speaking unto the people, there came to them the priests, and the magistrate of the temple, and the Sadducees —
being grieved because of their teaching the people, and preaching in Jesus the rising again out of the dead —
and they laid hands upon them, and did put them in custody unto the morrow, for it was evening already;
and many of those hearing the word did believe, and the number of the men became, as it were, five thousand.
And it came to pass upon the morrow, there were gathered together of them the rulers, and elders, and scribes, to Jerusalem,
and Annas the chief priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and as many as were of the kindred of the chief priest,
and having set them in the midst, they were inquiring, 'In what power, or in what name did ye do this?'
Then Peter, having been filled with the Holy Spirit, said unto them: 'Rulers of the people, and elders of Israel,
if we to-day are examined concerning the good deed to the ailing man, by whom he hath been saved,
be it known to all of you, and to all the people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye did crucify, whom God did raise out of the dead, in him hath this one stood by before you whole.
'This is the stone that was set at nought by you — the builders, that became head of a corner;
and there is not salvation in any other, for there is no other name under the heaven that hath been given among men, in which it behoveth us to be saved.'
And beholding the openness of Peter and John, and having perceived that they are men unlettered and plebeian, they were wondering — they were taking knowledge also of them that with Jesus they had been —
and seeing the man standing with them who hath been healed, they had nothing to say against [it],
and having commanded them to go away out of the sanhedrim, they took counsel with one another,
saying, 'What shall we do to these men? because that, indeed, a notable sign hath been done through them, to all those dwelling in Jerusalem [is] manifest, and we are not able to deny [it];
but that it may spread no further toward the people, let us strictly threaten them no more to speak in this name to any man.'
And having called them, they charged them not to speak at all, nor to teach, in the name of Jesus,
and Peter and John answering unto them said, 'Whether it is righteous before God to hearken to you rather than to God, judge ye;
for we cannot but speak what we did see and hear.'
And they having further threatened [them], let them go, finding nothing how they may punish them, because of the people, because all were glorifying God for that which hath been done,
for above forty years of age was the man upon whom had been done this sign of the healing.
And being let go, they went unto their own friends, and declared whatever the chief priests and the elders said unto them,
and they having heard, with one accord did lift up the voice unto God, and said, 'Lord, thou [art] God, who didst make the heaven, and the earth, and the sea, and all that [are] in them,
who, through the mouth of David thy servant, did say, Why did nations rage, and peoples meditate vain things?
the kings of the earth stood up, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord and against His Christ;
for gathered together of a truth against Thy holy child Jesus, whom Thou didst anoint, were both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with nations and peoples of Israel,
to do whatever Thy hand and Thy counsel did determine before to come to pass.
'And now, Lord, look upon their threatenings, and grant to Thy servants with all freedom to speak Thy word,
in the stretching forth of Thy hand, for healing, and signs, and wonders, to come to pass through the name of Thy holy child Jesus.'
And they having prayed, the place was shaken in which they were gathered together, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and were speaking the word of God with freedom,
and of the multitude of those who did believe the heart and the soul was one, and not one was saying that anything of the things he had was his own, but all things were to them in common.
And with great power were the apostles giving the testimony to the rising again of the Lord Jesus, great grace also was on them all,
for there was not any one among them who did lack, for as many as were possessors of fields, or houses, selling [them], were bringing the prices of the thing sold,
and were laying them at the feet of the apostles, and distribution was being made to each according as any one had need.
And Joses, who was surnamed by the apostles Barnabas — which is, having been interpreted, Son of Comfort — a Levite, of Cyprus by birth,
a field being his, having sold [it], brought the money and laid [it] at the feet of the apostles.
And a certain man, Ananias by name, with Sapphira his wife, sold a possession,
and did keep back of the price — his wife also knowing — and having brought a certain part, at the feet of the apostles he laid [it].
And Peter said, 'Ananias, wherefore did the Adversary fill thy heart, for thee to lie to the Holy Spirit, and to keep back of the price of the place?
while it remained, did it not remain thine? and having been sold, in thy authority was it not? why [is] it that thou didst put in thy heart this thing? thou didst not lie to men, but to God;'
and Ananias hearing these words, having fallen down, did expire, and great fear came upon all who heard these things,
and having risen, the younger men wound him up, and having carried forth, they buried [him].
And it came to pass, about three hours after, that his wife, not knowing what hath happened, came in,
and Peter answered her, 'Tell me if for so much ye sold the place;' and she said, 'Yes, for so much.'
And Peter said unto her, 'How was it agreed by you, to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? lo, the feet of those who did bury thy husband [are] at the door, and they shall carry thee forth;'
and she fell down presently at his feet, and expired, and the young men having come in, found her dead, and having carried forth, they buried [her] by her husband;
and great fear came upon all the assembly, and upon all who heard these things.
And through the hands of the apostles came many signs and wonders among the people, and they were with one accord all in the porch of Solomon;
and of the rest no one was daring to join himself to them, but the people were magnifying them,
(and the more were believers added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women,)
so as into the broad places to bring forth the ailing, and to lay [them] upon couches and mats, that at the coming of Peter, even [his] shadow might overshadow some one of them;
and there were coming together also the people of the cities round about to Jerusalem, bearing ailing persons, and those harassed by unclean spirits — who were all healed.
And having risen, the chief priest, and all those with him — being the sect of the Sadducees — were filled with zeal,
and laid their hands upon the apostles, and did put them in a public prison;
and a messenger of the Lord through the night opened the doors of the prison, having also brought them forth, he said,
'Go on, and standing, speak in the temple to the people all the sayings of this life;'
and having heard, they did enter at the dawn into the temple, and were teaching. And the chief priest having come, and those with him, they called together the sanhedrim and all the senate of the sons of Israel, and they sent to the prison to have them brought,
and the officers having come, did not find them in the prison, and having turned back, they told,
saying — 'The prison indeed we found shut in all safety, and the keepers standing without before the doors, and having opened — within we found no one.'
And as the priest, and the magistrate of the temple, and the chief priests, heard these words, they were doubting concerning them to what this would come;
and coming near, a certain one told them, saying — 'Lo, the men whom ye did put in the prison are in the temple standing and teaching the people;'
then the magistrate having gone away with officers, brought them without violence, for they were fearing the people, lest they should be stoned;
and having brought them, they set [them] in the sanhedrim, and the chief priest questioned them,
saying, 'Did not we strictly command you not to teach in this name? and lo, ye have filled Jerusalem with your teaching, and ye intend to bring upon us the blood of this man.'
And Peter and the apostles answering, said, 'To obey God it behoveth, rather than men;
and the God of our fathers did raise up Jesus, whom ye slew, having hanged upon a tree;
this one God, a Prince and a Saviour, hath exalted with His right hand, to give reformation to Israel, and forgiveness of sins;
and we are His witnesses of these sayings, and the Holy Spirit also, whom God gave to those obeying him.'
And they having heard, were cut [to the heart], and were taking counsel to slay them,
but a certain one, having risen up in the sanhedrim — a Pharisee, by name Gamaliel, a teacher of law honoured by all the people — commanded to put the apostles forth a little,
and said unto them, 'Men, Israelites, take heed to yourselves about these men, what ye are about to do,
for before these days rose up Theudas, saying, that himself was some one, to whom a number of men did join themselves, as it were four hundred, who was slain, and all, as many as were obeying him, were scattered, and came to nought.
'After this one rose up, Judas the Galilean, in the days of the enrolment, and drew away much people after him, and that one perished, and all, as many as were obeying him, were scattered;
and now I say to you, Refrain from these men, and let them alone, because if this counsel or this work may be of men, it will be overthrown,
and if it be of God, ye are not able to overthrow it, lest perhaps also ye be found fighting against God.'
And to him they agreed, and having called near the apostles, having beaten [them], they commanded [them] not to speak in the name of Jesus, and let them go;
they, indeed, then, departed from the presence of the sanhedrim, rejoicing that for his name they were counted worthy to suffer dishonour,
every day also in the temple, and in every house, they were not ceasing teaching and proclaiming good news — Jesus the Christ.
And in these days, the disciples multiplying, there came a murmuring of the Hellenists at the Hebrews, because their widows were being overlooked in the daily ministration,
and the twelve, having called near the multitude of the disciples, said, 'It is not pleasing that we, having left the word of God, do minister at tables;
look out, therefore, brethren, seven men of you who are well testified of, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom, whom we may set over this necessity,
and we to prayer, and to the ministration of the word, will give ourselves continually.'
And the thing was pleasing before all the multitude, and they did choose Stephen, a man full of faith and the Holy Spirit, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolaus, a proselyte of Antioch,
whom they did set before the apostles, and they, having prayed, laid on them [their] hands.
And the word of God did increase, and the number of the disciples did multiply in Jerusalem exceedingly; a great multitude also of the priests were obedient to the faith.
And Stephen, full of faith and power, was doing great wonders and signs among the people,
and there arose certain of those of the synagogue, called of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and of those from Cilicia, and Asia, disputing with Stephen,
and they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit with which he was speaking;
then they suborned men, saying — 'We have heard him speaking evil sayings in regard to Moses and God.'
They did stir up also the people, and the elders, and the scribes, and having come upon [him], they caught him, and brought [him] to the sanhedrim;
they set up also false witnesses, saying, 'This one doth not cease to speak evil sayings against this holy place and the law,
for we have heard him saying, That this Jesus the Nazarean shall overthrow this place, and shall change the customs that Moses delivered to us;'
and gazing at him, all those sitting in the sanhedrim saw his face as it were the face of a messenger.
And the chief priest said, 'Are then these things so?'
and he said, 'Men, brethren, and fathers, hearken: The God of the glory did appear to our father Abraham, being in Mesopotamia, before his dwelling in Haran,
and He said to him, Go forth out of thy land, and out of thy kindred, and come to a land that I shall shew thee.
'Then having come forth out of the land of the Chaldeans, he dwelt in Haran, and from thence, after the death of his father, He did remove him to this land wherein ye now dwell,
and He gave him no inheritance in it, not even a footstep, and did promise to give it to him for a possession, and to his seed after him — he having no child.
'And God spake thus, That his seed shall be sojourning in a strange land, and they shall cause it to serve, and shall do it evil four hundred years,
and the nation whom they shall serve I will judge, said God; and after these things they shall come forth and shall do Me service in this place.
'And He gave to him a covenant of circumcision, and so he begat Isaac, and did circumcise him on the eighth day, and Isaac [begat] Jacob, and Jacob — the twelve patriarchs;
and the patriarchs, having been moved with jealousy, sold Joseph to Egypt, and God was with him,
and did deliver him out of all his tribulations, and gave him favour and wisdom before Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he did set him — governor over Egypt and all his house.
'And there came a dearth upon all the land of Egypt and Canaan, and great tribulation, and our fathers were not finding sustenance,
and Jacob having heard that there was corn in Egypt, sent forth our fathers a first time;
and at the second time was Joseph made known to his brethren, and Joseph's kindred became manifest to Pharaoh,
and Joseph having sent, did call for his father Jacob, and all his kindred — with seventy and five souls —
and Jacob went down to Egypt, and died, himself and our fathers,
and they were carried over into Sychem, and were laid in the tomb that Abraham bought for a price in money from the sons of Emmor, of Sychem.
'And according as the time of the promise was drawing nigh, which God did swear to Abraham, the people increased and multiplied in Egypt,
till another king rose, who had not known Joseph;
this one, having dealt subtilely with our kindred, did evil to our fathers, causing to expose their babes, that they might not live;
in which time Moses was born, and he was fair to God, and he was brought up three months in the house of his father;
and he having been exposed, the daughter of Pharaoh took him up, and did rear him to herself for a son;
and Moses was taught in all wisdom of the Egyptians, and he was powerful in words and in works.
'And when forty years were fulfilled to him, it came upon his heart to look after his brethren, the sons of Israel;
and having seen a certain one suffering injustice, he did defend, and did justice to the oppressed, having smitten the Egyptian;
and he was supposing his brethren to understand that God through his hand doth give salvation; and they did not understand.
'On the succeeding day, also, he shewed himself to them as they are striving, and urged them to peace, saying, Men, brethren are ye, wherefore do ye injustice to one another?
and he who is doing injustice to the neighbour, did thrust him away, saying, Who set thee a ruler and a judge over us?
to kill me dost thou wish, as thou didst kill yesterday the Egyptian?
'And Moses fled at this word, and became a sojourner in the land of Midian, where he begat two sons,
and forty years having been fulfilled, there appeared to him in the wilderness of mount Sinai a messenger of the Lord, in a flame of fire of a bush,
and Moses having seen did wonder at the sight; and he drawing near to behold, there came a voice of the Lord unto him,
I [am] the God of thy fathers; the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. 'And Moses having become terrified, durst not behold,
and the Lord said to him, Loose the sandal of thy feet, for the place in which thou hast stood is holy ground;
seeing I have seen the affliction of My people that [is] in Egypt, and their groaning I did hear, and came down to deliver them; and now come, I will send thee to Egypt.
'This Moses, whom they did refuse, saying, Who did set thee a ruler and a judge? this one God a ruler and a redeemer did send, in the hand of a messenger who appeared to him in the bush;
this one did bring them forth, having done wonders and signs in the land of Egypt, and in the Red Sea, and in the wilderness forty years;
this is the Moses who did say to the sons of Israel: A prophet to you shall the Lord your God raise up out of your brethren, like to me, him shall ye hear.
'This is he who was in the assembly in the wilderness, with the messenger who is speaking to him in the mount Sinai, and with our fathers who did receive the living oracles to give to us;
to whom our fathers did not wish to become obedient, but did thrust away, and turned back in their hearts to Egypt,
saying to Aaron, Make to us gods who shall go on before us, for this Moses, who brought us forth out of the land of Egypt, we have not known what hath happened to him.
'And they made a calf in those days, and brought a sacrifice to the idol, and were rejoicing in the works of their hands,
and God did turn, and did give them up to do service to the host of the heaven, according as it hath been written in the scroll of the prophets: Slain beasts and sacrifices did ye offer to Me forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel?
and ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your god Remphan — the figures that ye made to bow before them, and I will remove your dwelling beyond Babylon.
'The tabernacle of the testimony was among our fathers in the wilderness, according as He did direct, who is speaking to Moses, to make it according to the figure that he had seen;
which also our fathers having in succession received, did bring in with Joshua, into the possession of the nations whom God did drive out from the presence of our fathers, till the days of David,
who found favour before God, and requested to find a tabernacle for the God of Jacob;
and Solomon built Him an house.
'But the Most High in sanctuaries made with hands doth not dwell, according as the prophet saith:
The heaven [is] My throne, and the earth My footstool; what house will ye build to Me? saith the Lord, or what [is] the place of My rest?
hath not My hand made all these things?
'Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and in ears! ye do always the Holy Spirit resist; as your fathers — also ye;
which of the prophets did not your fathers persecute? and they killed those who declared before about the coming of the Righteous One, of whom now ye betrayers and murderers have become,
who received the law by arrangement of messengers, and did not keep [it].'
And hearing these things, they were cut to the hearts, and did gnash the teeth at him;
and being full of the Holy Spirit, having looked stedfastly to the heaven, he saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God,
and he said, 'Lo, I see the heavens having been opened, and the Son of Man standing on the right hand of God.'
And they, having cried out with a loud voice, stopped their ears, and did rush with one accord upon him,
and having cast him forth outside of the city, they were stoning [him] — and the witnesses did put down their garments at the feet of a young man called Saul —
and they were stoning Stephen, calling and saying, 'Lord Jesus, receive my spirit;'
and having bowed the knees, he cried with a loud voice, 'Lord, mayest thou not lay to them this sin;' and this having said, he fell asleep.
And Saul was assenting to his death, and there came in that day a great persecution upon the assembly in Jerusalem, all also were scattered abroad in the regions of Judea and Samaria, except the apostles;
and devout men carried away Stephen, and made great lamentation over him;
and Saul was making havoc of the assembly, into every house entering, and haling men and women, was giving them up to prison;
they then indeed, having been scattered, went abroad proclaiming good news — the word.
And Philip having gone down to a city of Samaria, was preaching to them the Christ,
the multitudes also were giving heed to the things spoken by Philip, with one accord, in their hearing and seeing the signs that he was doing,
for unclean spirits came forth from many who were possessed, crying with a loud voice, and many who have been paralytic and lame were healed,
and there was great joy in that city.
And a certain man, by name Simon, was before in the city using magic, and amazing the nation of Samaria, saying himself to be a certain great one,
to whom they were all giving heed, from small unto great, saying, 'This one is the great power of God;'
and they were giving heed to him, because of his having for a long time amazed them with deeds of magic.
And when they believed Philip, proclaiming good news, the things concerning the reign of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both men and women;
and Simon also himself did believe, and, having been baptized, he was continuing with Philip, beholding also signs and mighty acts being done, he was amazed.
And the apostles in Jerusalem having heard that Samaria hath received the word of God, did send unto them Peter and John,
who having come down did pray concerning them, that they may receive the Holy Spirit, —
for as yet he was fallen upon none of them, and only they have been baptized — to the name of the Lord Jesus;
then were they laying hands on them, and they received the Holy Spirit.
And Simon, having beheld that through the laying on of the hands of the apostles, the Holy Spirit is given, brought before them money,
saying, 'Give also to me this authority, that on whomsoever I may lay the hands, he may receive the Holy Spirit.'
And Peter said unto him, 'Thy silver with thee — may it be to destruction! because the gift of God thou didst think to possess through money;
thou hast neither part nor lot in this thing, for thy heart is not right before God;
reform, therefore, from this thy wickedness, and beseech God, if then the purpose of thy heart may be forgiven thee,
for in the gall of bitterness, and bond of unrighteousness, I perceive thee being.'
And Simon answering, said, 'Beseech ye for me unto the Lord, that nothing may come upon me of the things ye have spoken.'
They indeed, therefore, having testified fully, and spoken the word of the Lord, did turn back to Jerusalem; in many villages also of the Samaritans they did proclaim good news.
And a messenger of the Lord spake unto Philip, saying, 'Arise, and go on toward the south, on the way that is going down from Jerusalem to Gaza,' — this is desert.
And having arisen, he went on, and lo, a man of Ethiopia, a eunuch, a man of rank, of Candace the queen of the Ethiopians, who was over all her treasure, who had come to worship to Jerusalem;
he was also returning, and is sitting on his chariot, and he was reading the prophet Isaiah.
And the Spirit said to Philip, 'Go near, and be joined to this chariot;'
and Philip having run near, heard him reading the prophet Isaiah, and said, 'Dost thou then know what thou dost read?'
and he said, 'Why, how am I able, if some one may not guide me?' he called Philip also, having come up, to sit with him.
And the contents of the Writing that he was reading was this: 'As a sheep unto slaughter he was led, and as a lamb before his shearer dumb, so he doth not open his mouth;
in his humiliation his judgment was taken away, and his generation — who shall declare? because taken from the earth is his life.'
And the eunuch answering Philip said, 'I pray thee, about whom doth the prophet say this? about himself, or about some other one?'
and Philip having opened his mouth, and having begun from this Writing, proclaimed good news to him — Jesus.
And as they were going on the way, they came upon a certain water, and the eunuch said, 'Lo, water; what doth hinder me to be baptized?'
[And Philip said, 'If thou dost believe out of all the heart, it is lawful;' and he answering said, 'I believe Jesus Christ to be the Son of God;']
and he commanded the chariot to stand still, and they both went down to the water, both Philip and the eunuch, and he baptized him;
and when they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, and the eunuch saw him no more, for he was going on his way rejoicing;
and Philip was found at Azotus, and passing through, he was proclaiming good news to all the cities, till his coming to Caesarea.
And Saul, yet breathing of threatening and slaughter to the disciples of the Lord, having gone to the chief priest,
did ask from him letters to Damascus, unto the synagogues, that if he may find any being of the way, both men and women, he may bring them bound to Jerusalem.
And in the going, he came nigh to Damascus, and suddenly there shone round about him a light from the heaven,
and having fallen upon the earth, he heard a voice saying to him, 'Saul, Saul, why me dost thou persecute?'
And he said, 'Who art thou, Lord?' and the Lord said, 'I am Jesus whom thou dost persecute; hard for thee at the pricks to kick;'
trembling also, and astonished, he said, 'Lord, what dost thou wish me to do?' and the Lord [said] unto him, 'Arise, and enter into the city, and it shall be told thee what it behoveth thee to do.'
And the men who are journeying with him stood speechless, hearing indeed the voice but seeing no one,
and Saul arose from the earth, and his eyes having been opened, he beheld no one, and leading him by the hand they brought him to Damascus,
and he was three days without seeing, and he did neither eat nor drink.
And there was a certain disciple in Damascus, by name Ananias, and the Lord said unto him in a vision, 'Ananias;' and he said, 'Behold me, Lord;'
and the Lord [saith] unto him, 'Having risen, go on unto the street that is called Straight, and seek in the house of Judas, [one] by name Saul of Tarsus, for, lo, he doth pray,
and he saw in a vision a man, by name Ananias, coming in, and putting a hand on him, that he may see again.'
And Ananias answered, 'Lord, I have heard from many about this man, how many evils he did to Thy saints in Jerusalem,
and here he hath authority from the chief priests, to bind all those calling on Thy name.'
And the Lord said unto him, 'Be going on, because a choice vessel to Me is this one, to bear My name before nations and kings — the sons also of Israel;
for I will shew him how many things it behoveth him for My name to suffer.'
And Ananias went away, and did enter into the house, and having put upon him [his] hands, said, 'Saul, brother, the Lord hath sent me — Jesus who did appear to thee in the way in which thou wast coming — that thou mayest see again, and mayest be filled with the Holy Spirit.'
And immediately there fell from his eyes as it were scales, he saw again also presently, and having risen, was baptized,
and having received nourishment, was strengthened, and Saul was with the disciples in Damascus certain days,
and immediately in the synagogues he was preaching the Christ, that he is the Son of God.
And all those hearing were amazed, and said, 'Is not this he who laid waist in Jerusalem those calling on this name, and hither to this intent had come, that he might bring them bound to the chief priests?'
And Saul was still more strengthened, and he was confounding the Jews dwelling in Damascus, proving that this is the Christ.
And when many days were fulfilled, the Jews took counsel together to kill him,
and their counsel against [him] was known to Saul; they were also watching the gates both day and night, that they may kill him,
and the disciples having taken him, by night did let him down by the wall, letting down in a basket.
And Saul, having come to Jerusalem, did try to join himself to the disciples, and they were all afraid of him, not believing that he is a disciple,
and Barnabas having taken him, brought [him] unto the apostles, and did declare to them how in the way he saw the Lord, and that he spake to him, and how in Damascus he was speaking boldly in the name of Jesus.
And he was with them, coming in and going out in Jerusalem,
and speaking boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus, he was both speaking and disputing with the Hellenists, and they were taking in hand to kill him,
and the brethren having known, brought him down to Caesarea, and sent him forth to Tarsus.
Then, indeed, the assemblies throughout all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria, had peace, being built up, and, going on in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit, they were multiplied.
And it came to pass that Peter passing throughout all [quarters], came down also unto the saints who were dwelling at Lydda,
and he found there a certain man, Aeneas by name — for eight years laid upon a couch — who was paralytic,
and Peter said to him, 'Aeneas, heal thee doth Jesus the Christ; arise and spread for thyself;' and immediately he rose,
and all those dwelling at Lydda, and Saron saw him, and did turn to the Lord.
And in Joppa there was a certain female disciple, by name Tabitha, (which interpreted, is called Dorcas,) this woman was full of good works and kind acts that she was doing;
and it came to pass in those days she, having ailed, died, and having bathed her, they laid her in an upper chamber,
and Lydda being nigh to Joppa, the disciples having heard that Peter is in that [place], sent two men unto him, calling on him not to delay to come through unto them.
And Peter having risen, went with them, whom having come, they brought into the upper chamber, and all the widows stood by him weeping, and shewing coats and garments, as many as Dorcas was making while she was with them.
And Peter having put them all forth without, having bowed the knees, did pray, and having turned unto the body said, 'Tabitha, arise;' and she opened her eyes, and having seen Peter, she sat up,
and having given her [his] hand, he lifted her up, and having called the saints and the widows, he presented her alive,
and it became known throughout all Joppa, and many believed on the Lord;
and it came to pass, that he remained many days in Joppa, with a certain one, Simon a tanner.
And there was a certain man in Caesarea, by name Cornelius, a centurion from a band called Italian,
pious, and fearing God with all his house, doing also many kind acts to the people, and beseeching God always,
he saw in a vision manifestly, as it were the ninth hour of the day, a messenger of God coming in unto him, and saying to him, 'Cornelius;'
and he having looked earnestly on him, and becoming afraid, said, 'What is it, Lord?' And he said to him, 'Thy prayers and thy kind acts came up for a memorial before God,
and now send men to Joppa, and send for a certain one Simon, who is surnamed Peter,
this one doth lodge with a certain Simon a tanner, whose house is by the sea; this one shall speak to thee what it behoveth thee to do.'
And when the messenger who is speaking to Cornelius went away, having called two of his domestics, and a pious soldier of those waiting on him continually,
and having declared to them all things, he sent them to Joppa.
And on the morrow, as these are proceeding on the way, and are drawing nigh to the city, Peter went up upon the house-top to pray, about the sixth hour,
and he became very hungry, and wished to eat; and they making ready, there fell upon him a trance,
and he doth behold the heaven opened, and descending unto him a certain vessel, as a great sheet, bound at the four corners, and let down upon the earth,
in which were all the four-footed beasts of the earth, and the wild beasts, and the creeping things, and the fowls of the heaven,
and there came a voice unto him: 'Having risen, Peter, slay and eat.'
And Peter said, 'Not so, Lord; because at no time did I eat anything common or unclean;'
and [there is] a voice again a second time unto him: 'What God did cleanse, thou, declare not thou common;'
and this was done thrice, and again was the vessel received up to the heaven.
And as Peter was perplexed in himself what the vision that he saw might be, then, lo, the men who have been sent from Cornelius, having made inquiry for the house of Simon, stood at the gate,
and having called, they were asking if Simon, who is surnamed Peter, doth lodge here?
And Peter thinking about the vision, the Spirit said to him, 'Lo, three men do seek thee;
but having risen, go down and go on with them, nothing doubting, because I have sent them;'
and Peter having come down unto the men who have been sent from Cornelius unto him, said, 'Lo, I am he whom ye seek, what [is] the cause for which ye are present?'
And they said, 'Cornelius, a centurion, a man righteous and fearing God, well testified to, also, by all the nation of the Jews, was divinely warned by a holy messenger to send for thee, to his house, and to hear sayings from thee.'
Having called them in, therefore, he lodged them, and on the morrow Peter went forth with them, and certain of the brethren from Joppa went with him,
and on the morrow they did enter into Caesarea; and Cornelius was waiting for them, having called together his kindred and near friends,
and as it came that Peter entered in, Cornelius having met him, having fallen at [his] feet, did bow before [him];
and Peter raised him, saying, 'Stand up; I also myself am a man;'
and talking with him he went in, and doth find many having come together.
And he said unto them, 'Ye know how it is unlawful for a man, a Jew, to keep company with, or to come unto, one of another race, but to me God did shew to call no man common or unclean;
therefore also without gainsaying I came, having been sent for; I ask, therefore, for what matter ye did send for me?'
And Cornelius said, 'Four days ago till this hour, I was fasting, and [at] the ninth hour praying in my house, and, lo, a man stood before me in bright clothing,
and he said, Cornelius, thy prayer was heard, and thy kind acts were remembered before God;
send, therefore, to Joppa, and call for Simon, who is surnamed Peter; this one doth lodge in the house of Simon a tanner, by the sea, who having come, shall speak to thee;
at once, therefore, I sent to thee; thou also didst do well, having come; now, therefore, are we all before God present to hear all things that have been commanded thee by God.'
And Peter having opened his mouth, said, 'Of a truth, I perceive that God is no respecter of persons,
but in every nation he who is fearing Him, and is working righteousness, is acceptable to Him;
the word that he sent to the sons of Israel, proclaiming good news — peace through Jesus Christ (this one is Lord of all,)
ye — ye have known; — the word that came throughout all Judea, having begun from Galilee, after the baptism that John preached;
Jesus who [is] from Nazareth — how God did anoint him with the Holy Spirit and power; who went through, doing good, and healing all those oppressed by the devil, because God was with him;
and we — we are witnesses of all things that he did, both in the country of the Jews, and in Jerusalem, — whom they did slay, having hanged upon a tree.
'This one God did raise up the third day, and gave him to become manifest,
not to all the people, but to witnesses, to those having been chosen before by God — to us who did eat with [him], and did drink with him, after his rising out of the dead;
and he commanded us to preach to the people, and to testify fully that it is he who hath been ordained by God judge of living and dead —
to this one do all the prophets testify, that through his name every one that is believing in him doth receive remission of sins.'
While Peter is yet speaking these sayings, the Holy spirit fell upon all those hearing the word,
and those of the circumcision believing were astonished — as many as came with Peter — because also upon the nations the gift of the Holy Spirit hath been poured out,
for they were hearing them speaking with tongues and magnifying God.
Then answered Peter, 'The water is any one able to forbid, that these may not be baptized, who the Holy Spirit did receive — even as also we?'
he commanded them also to be baptized in the name of the Lord; then they besought him to remain certain days.
And the apostles and the brethren who are in Judea heard that also the nations did receive the word of God,
and when Peter came up to Jerusalem, those of the circumcision were contending with him,
saying — 'Unto men uncircumcised thou didst go in, and didst eat with them!'
And Peter having begun, did expound to them in order saying,
'I was in the city of Joppa praying, and I saw in a trance a vision, a certain vessel coming down, as a great sheet by four corners being let down out of the heaven, and it came unto me;
at which having looked stedfastly, I was considering, and I saw the four-footed beasts of the earth, and the wild beasts, and the creeping things, and the fowls of heaven;
and I heard a voice saying to me, Having risen, Peter, slay and eat;
and I said, Not so, Lord; because anything common or unclean hath at no time entered into my mouth;
and a voice did answer me a second time out of the heaven, What God did cleanse, thou — declare not thou common.
'And this happened thrice, and again was all drawn up to the heaven,
and, lo, immediately, three men stood at the house in which I was, having been sent from Caesarea unto me,
and the Spirit said to me to go with them, nothing doubting, and these six brethren also went with me, and we did enter into the house of the man,
he declared also to us how he saw the messenger in his house standing, and saying to him, Send men to Joppa, and call for Simon, who is surnamed Peter,
who shall speak sayings by which thou shalt be saved, thou and all thy house.
'And in my beginning to speak, the Holy Spirit did fall upon them, even as also upon us in the beginning,
and I remembered the saying of the Lord, how he said, John indeed did baptize with water, and ye shall be baptized with the Holy Spirit;
if then the equal gift God did give to them as also to us, having believed upon the Lord Jesus Christ, I — how was I able to withstand God?'
And they, having heard these things, were silent, and were glorifying God, saying, 'Then, indeed, also to the nations did God give the reformation to life.'
Those, indeed, therefore, having been scattered abroad, from the tribulation that came after Stephen, went through unto Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch, speaking the word to none except to Jews only;
and there were certain of them men of Cyprus and Cyrene, who having entered into Antioch, were speaking unto the Hellenists, proclaiming good news — the Lord Jesus,
and the hand of the Lord was with them, a great number also, having believed, did turn unto the Lord.
And the account was heard in the ears of the assembly that [is] in Jerusalem concerning them, and they sent forth Barnabas to go through unto Antioch,
who, having come, and having seen the grace of God, was glad, and was exhorting all with purpose of heart to cleave to the Lord,
because he was a good man, and full of the Holy Spirit, and of faith, and a great multitude was added to the Lord.
And Barnabas went forth to Tarsus, to seek for Saul,
and having found him, he brought him to Antioch, and it came to pass that they a whole year did assemble together in the assembly, and taught a great multitude, the disciples also were divinely called first in Antioch Christians.
And in those days there came from Jerusalem prophets to Antioch,
and one of them, by name Agabus, having stood up, did signify through the Spirit a great dearth is about to be throughout all the world — which also came to pass in the time of Claudius Caesar —
and the disciples, according as any one was prospering, determined each of them to send for ministration to the brethren dwelling in Judea,
which also they did, having sent unto the elders by the hand of Barnabas and Saul.
And about that time, Herod the king put forth his hands, to do evil to certain of those of the assembly,
and he killed James, the brother of John, with the sword,
and having seen that it is pleasing to the Jews, he added to lay hold of Peter also — and they were the days of the unleavened food —
whom also having seized, he did put in prison, having delivered [him] to four quaternions of soldiers to guard him, intending after the passover to bring him forth to the people.
Peter, therefore, indeed, was kept in the prison, and fervent prayer was being made by the assembly unto God for him,
and when Herod was about to bring him forth, the same night was Peter sleeping between two soldiers, having been bound with two chains, guards also before the door were keeping the prison,
and lo, a messenger of the Lord stood by, and a light shone in the buildings, and having smitten Peter on the side, he raised him up, saying, 'Rise in haste,' and his chains fell from off [his] hands.
The messenger also said to him, 'Gird thyself, and bind on thy sandals;' and he did so; and he saith to him, 'Put thy garment round and be following me;'
and having gone forth, he was following him, and he knew not that it is true that which is done through the messenger, and was thinking he saw a vision,
and having passed through a first ward, and a second, they came unto the iron gate that is leading to the city, which of its own accord did open to them, and having gone forth, they went on through one street, and immediately the messenger departed from him.
And Peter having come to himself, said, 'Now I have known of a truth that the Lord did sent forth His messenger, and did deliver me out of the hand of Herod, and all the expectation of the people of the Jews;'
also, having considered, he came unto the house of Mary, the mother of John, who is surnamed Mark, where there were many thronged together and praying.
And Peter having knocked at the door of the porch, there came a damsel to hearken, by name Rhoda,
and having known the voice of Peter, from the joy she did not open the porch, but having run in, told of the standing of Peter before the porch,
and they said unto her, 'Thou art mad;' and she was confidently affirming [it] to be so, and they said, 'It is his messenger;'
and Peter was continuing knocking, and having opened, they saw him, and were astonished,
and having beckoned to them with the hand to be silent, he declared to them how the Lord brought him out of the prison, and he said, 'Declare to James and to the brethren these things;' and having gone forth, he went on to another place.
And day having come, there was not a little stir among the soldiers what then was become of Peter,
and Herod having sought for him, and not having found, having examined the guards, did command [them] to be led away to punishment, and having gone down from Judea to Caesarea, he was abiding [there].
And Herod was highly displeased with the Tyrians and Sidonians, and with one accord they came unto him, and having made a friend of Blastus, who [is] over the bed-chambers of the king, they were asking peace, because of their country being nourished from the king's;
and on a set day, Herod having arrayed himself in kingly apparel, and having sat down upon the tribunal, was making an oration unto them,
and the populace were shouting, 'The voice of a god, and not of a man;'
and presently there smote him a messenger of the Lord, because he did not give the glory to God, and having been eaten of worms, he expired.
And the word of God did grow and did multiply,
and Barnabas and Saul did turn back out of Jerusalem, having fulfilled the ministration, having taken also with [them] John, who was surnamed Mark.
And there were certain in Antioch, in the assembly there, prophets and teachers; both Barnabas, and Simeon who is called Niger, and Lucius the Cyrenian, Manaen also — Herod the tetrarch's foster-brother — and Saul;
and in their ministering to the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, 'Separate ye to me both Barnabas and Saul to the work to which I have called them,'
then having fasted, and having prayed, and having laid the hands on them, they sent [them] away.
These, indeed, then, having been sent forth by the Holy Spirit, went down to Seleucia, thence also they sailed to Cyprus,
and having come unto Salamis, they declared the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews, and they had also John [as] a ministrant;
and having gone through the island unto Paphos, they found a certain magian, a false prophet, a Jew, whose name [is] Bar-Jesus;
who was with the proconsul Sergius Paulus, an intelligent man; this one having called for Barnabas and Saul, did desire to hear the word of God,
and there withstood them Elymas the magian — for so is his name interpreted — seeking to pervert the proconsul from the faith.
And Saul — who also [is] Paul — having been filled with the Holy Spirit, and having looked stedfastly on him,
said, 'O full of all guile, and all profligacy, son of a devil, enemy of all righteousness, wilt thou not cease perverting the right ways of the Lord?
and now, lo, a hand of the Lord [is] upon thee, and thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for a season;' and presently there fell upon him a mist and darkness, and he, going about, was seeking some to lead [him] by the hand;
then the proconsul having seen what hath come to pass, did believe, being astonished at the teaching of the Lord.
And those about Paul having set sail from Paphos, came to Perga of Pamphylia, and John having departed from them, did turn back to Jerusalem,
and they having gone through from Perga, came to Antioch of Pisidia, and having gone into the synagogue on the sabbath-day, they sat down,
and after the reading of the law and of the prophets, the chief men of the synagogue sent unto them, saying, 'Men, brethren, if there be a word in you of exhortation unto the people — say on.'
And Paul having risen, and having beckoned with the hand, said, 'Men, Israelites, and those fearing God, hearken:
the God of this people Israel did choose our fathers, and the people He did exalt in their sojourning in the land of Egypt, and with an high arm did He bring them out of it;
and about a period of forty years He did suffer their manners in the wilderness,
and having destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, He did divide by lot to them their land.
'And after these things, about four hundred and fifty years, He gave judges — till Samuel the prophet;
and thereafter they asked for a king, and God did give to them Saul, son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, for forty years;
and having removed him, He did raise up to them David for king, to whom also having testified, he said, I found David, the [son] of Jesse, a man according to My heart, who shall do all My will.
'Of this one's seed God, according to promise, did raise to Israel a Saviour — Jesus,
John having first preached, before his coming, a baptism of reformation to all the people of Israel;
and as John was fulfilling the course, he said, Whom me do ye suppose to be? I am not [he], but, lo, he doth come after me, of whom I am not worthy to loose the sandal of [his] feet.
'Men, brethren, sons of the race of Abraham, and those among you fearing God, to you was the word of this salvation sent,
for those dwelling in Jerusalem, and their chiefs, this one not having known, also the voices of the prophets, which every sabbath are being read — having judged [him] — did fulfil,
and no cause of death having found, they did ask of Pilate that he should be slain,
and when they did complete all the things written about him, having taken [him] down from the tree, they laid him in a tomb;
and God did raise him out of the dead,
and he was seen for many days of those who did come up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are his witnesses unto the people.
'And we to you do proclaim good news — that the promise made unto the fathers,
God hath in full completed this to us their children, having raised up Jesus, as also in the second Psalm it hath been written, My Son thou art — I to-day have begotten thee.
'And that He did raise him up out of the dead, no more to return to corruption, he hath said thus — I will give to you the faithful kindnesses of David;
wherefore also in another [place] he saith, Thou shalt not give Thy kind One to see corruption,
for David, indeed, his own generation having served by the will of God, did fall asleep, and was added unto his fathers, and saw corruption,
but he whom God did raise up, did not see corruption.
'Let it therefore be known to you, men, brethren, that through this one to you is the forgiveness of sins declared,
and from all things from which ye were not able in the law of Moses to be declared righteous, in this one every one who is believing is declared righteous;
see, therefore, it may not come upon you that hath been spoken in the prophets:
See, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish, because a work I — I do work in your days, a work in which ye may not believe, though any one may declare [it] to you.'
And having gone forth out of the synagogue of the Jews, the nations were calling upon [them] that on the next sabbath these sayings may be spoken to them,
and the synagogue having been dismissed, many of the Jews and of the devout proselytes did follow Paul and Barnabas, who, speaking to them, were persuading them to remain in the grace of God.
And on the coming sabbath, almost all the city was gathered together to hear the word of God,
and the Jews having seen the multitudes, were filled with zeal, and did contradict the things spoken by Paul — contradicting and speaking evil.
And speaking boldly, Paul and Barnabas said, 'To you it was necessary that first the word of God be spoken, and seeing ye do thrust it away, and do not judge yourselves worthy of the life age-during, lo, we do turn to the nations;
for so hath the Lord commanded us: I have set thee for a light of nations — for thy being for salvation unto the end of the earth.'
And the nations hearing were glad, and were glorifying the word of the Lord, and did believe — as many as were appointed to life age-during;
and the word of the Lord was spread abroad through all the region.
And the Jews stirred up the devout and honourable women, and the first men of the city, and did raise persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and did put them out from their borders;
and they having shaken off the dust of their feet against them, came to Iconium,
and the disciples were filled with joy and the Holy Spirit.
And it came to pass in Iconium, that they did enter together into the synagogue of the Jews, and spake, so that there believed both of Jews and Greeks a great multitude;
and the unbelieving Jews did stir up and made evil the souls of the nations against the brethren;
long time, indeed, therefore, did they abide speaking boldly in the Lord, who is testifying to the word of His grace, and granting signs and wonders to come to pass through their hands.
And the multitude of the city was divided, and some were with the Jews, and some with the apostles,
and when there was a purpose both of the nations and of the Jews with their rulers to use [them] despitefully, and to stone them,
they having become aware, did flee to the cities of Lycaonia, Lystra, and Derbe, and to the region round about,
and there they were proclaiming good news.
And a certain man in Lystra, impotent in the feet, was sitting, being lame from the womb of his mother — who never had walked,
this one was hearing Paul speaking, who, having stedfastly beheld him, and having seen that he hath faith to be saved,
said with a loud voice, 'Stand up on thy feet upright;' and he was springing and walking,
and the multitudes having seen what Paul did, did lift up their voice, in the speech of Lycaonia, saying, 'The gods, having become like men, did come down unto us;'
they were calling also Barnabas Zeus, and Paul Hermes, since he was the leader in speaking.
And the priest of the Zeus that is before their city, oxen and garlands unto the porches having brought, with the multitudes did wish to sacrifice,
and having heard, the apostles Barnabas and Paul, having rent their garments, did spring into the multitude, crying
and saying, 'Men, why these things do ye? and we are men like-affected with you, proclaiming good news to you, from these vanities to turn unto the living God, who made the heaven, and the earth, and the sea, and all the things in them;
who in the past generations did suffer all the nations to go on in their ways,
though, indeed, without witness He did not leave himself, doing good — from heaven giving rains to us, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness;'
and these things saying, scarcely did they restrain the multitudes from sacrificing to them.
And there came thither, from Antioch and Iconium, Jews, and they having persuaded the multitudes, and having stoned Paul, drew him outside of the city, having supposed him to be dead;
and the disciples having surrounded him, having risen he entered into the city, and on the morrow he went forth with Barnabas to Derbe.
Having proclaimed good news also to that city, and having discipled many, they turned back to Lystra, and Iconium, and Antioch,
confirming the souls of the disciples, exhorting to remain in the faith, and that through many tribulations it behoveth us to enter into the reign of God,
and having appointed to them by vote elders in every assembly, having prayed with fastings, they commended them to the Lord in whom they had believed.
And having passed through Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia,
and having spoken in Perga the word, they went down to Attalia,
and thence did sail to Antioch, whence they had been given by the grace of God for the work that they fulfilled;
and having come and gathered together the assembly, they declared as many things as God did with them, and that He did open to the nations a door of faith;
and they abode there not a little time with the disciples.
And certain having come down from Judea, were teaching the brethren — 'If ye be not circumcised after the custom of Moses, ye are not able to be saved;'
there having been, therefore, not a little dissension and disputation to Paul and Barnabas with them, they arranged for Paul and Barnabas, and certain others of them, to go up unto the apostles and elders to Jerusalem about this question,
they indeed, then, having been sent forward by the assembly, were passing through Phenice and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the nations, and they were causing great joy to all the brethren.
And having come to Jerusalem, they were received by the assembly, and the apostles, and the elders, they declared also as many things as God did with them;
and there rose up certain of those of the sect of the Pharisees who believed, saying — 'It behoveth to circumcise them, to command them also to keep the law of Moses.'
And there were gathered together the apostles and the elders, to see about this matter,
and there having been much disputing, Peter having risen up said unto them, 'Men, brethren, ye know that from former days, God among us did make choice, through my mouth, for the nations to hear the word of the good news, and to believe;
and the heart-knowing God did bare them testimony, having given to them the Holy Spirit, even as also to us,
and did put no difference also between us and them, by the faith having purified their hearts;
now, therefore, why do ye tempt God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?
but, through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, we believe to be saved, even as also they.'
And all the multitude did keep silence, and were hearkening to Barnabas and Paul, declaring as many signs and wonders as God did among the nations through them;
and after they are silent, James answered, saying, 'Men, brethren, hearken to me;
Simeon did declare how at first God did look after to take out of the nations a people for His name,
and to this agree the words of the prophets, as it hath been written:
After these things I will turn back, and I will build again the tabernacle of David, that is fallen down, and its ruins I will build again, and will set it upright —
that the residue of men may seek after the Lord, and all the nations, upon whom My name hath been called, saith the Lord, who is doing all these things.
'Known from the ages to God are all His works;
wherefore I judge: not to trouble those who from the nations do turn back to God,
but to write to them to abstain from the pollutions of the idols, and the whoredom, and the strangled thing; and the blood;
for Moses from former generations in every city hath those preaching him — in the synagogues every sabbath being read.'
Then it seemed good to the apostles and the elders, with the whole assembly, chosen men out of themselves to send to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas — Judas surnamed Barsabas, and Silas, leading men among the brethren —
having written through their hand thus: 'The apostles, and the elders, and the brethren, to those in Antioch, and Syria, and Cilicia, brethren, who [are] of the nations, greeting;
seeing we have heard that certain having gone forth from us did trouble you with words, subverting your souls, saying to be circumcised and to keep the law, to whom we did give no charge,
it seemed good to us, having come together with one accord, chosen men to send unto you, with our beloved Barnabas and Paul —
men who have given up their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ —
we have sent, therefore, Judas and Silas, and they by word are telling the same things.
'For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit, and to us, no more burden to lay upon you, except these necessary things:
to abstain from things offered to idols, and blood, and a strangled thing, and whoredom; from which keeping yourselves, ye shall do well; be strong!'
They then, indeed, having been let go, went to Antioch, and having brought the multitude together, did deliver the epistle,
and they having read, did rejoice for the consolation;
Judas also and Silas, being themselves also prophets, through much discourse did exhort the brethren, and confirm,
and having passed some time, they were let go with peace from the brethren unto the apostles;
and it seemed good to Silas to remain there still.
And Paul and Barnabas continued in Antioch, teaching and proclaiming good news — with many others also — the word of the Lord;
and after certain days, Paul said unto Barnabas, 'Having turned back again, we may look after our brethren, in every city in which we have preached the word of the Lord — how they are.'
And Barnabas counselled to take with [them] John called Mark,
and Paul was not thinking it good to take him with them who withdrew from them from Pamphylia, and did not go with them to the work;
there came, therefore, a sharp contention, so that they were parted from one another, and Barnabas having taken Mark, did sail to Cyprus,
and Paul having chosen Silas, went forth, having been given up to the grace of God by the brethren;
and he went through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the assemblies.
And he came to Derbe and Lystra, and lo, a certain disciple was there, by name Timotheus son of a certain woman, a believing Jewess, but of a father, a Greek,
who was well testified to by the brethren in Lystra and Iconium;
this one did Paul wish to go forth with him, and having taken [him], he circumcised him, because of the Jews who are in those places, for they all knew his father — that he was a Greek.
And as they were going on through the cities, they were delivering to them the decrees to keep, that have been judged by the apostles and the elders who [are] in Jerusalem,
then, indeed, were the assemblies established in the faith, and were abounding in number every day;
and having gone through Phrygia and the region of Galatia, having been forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia,
having gone toward Mysia, they were trying to go on toward Bithynia, and the Spirit did not suffer them,
and having passed by Mysia, they came down to Troas.
And a vision through the night appeared to Paul — a certain man of Macedonia was standing, calling upon him, and saying, 'Having passed through to Macedonia, help us;' —
and when he saw the vision, immediately we endeavoured to go forth to Macedonia, assuredly gathering that the Lord hath called us to preach good news to them,
having set sail, therefore, from Troas, we came with a straight course to Samothracia, on the morrow also to Neapolis,
thence also to Philippi, which is a principal city of the part of Macedonia — a colony. And we were in this city abiding certain days,
on the sabbath-day also we went forth outside of the city, by a river, where there used to be prayer, and having sat down, we were speaking to the women who came together,
and a certain woman, by name Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, worshipping God, was hearing, whose heart the Lord did open to attend to the things spoken by Paul;
and when she was baptized, and her household, she did call upon us, saying, 'If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, having entered into my house, remain;' and she constrained us.
And it came to pass in our going on to prayer, a certain maid, having a spirit of Python, did meet us, who brought much employment to her masters by soothsaying,
she having followed Paul and us, was crying, saying, 'These men are servants of the Most High God, who declare to us a way of salvation;'
and this she was doing for many days, but Paul having been grieved, and having turned, said to the spirit, 'I command thee, in the name of Jesus Christ, to come forth from her;' and it came forth the same hour.
And her masters having seen that the hope of their employment was gone, having caught Paul and Silas, drew [them] to the market-place, unto the rulers,
and having brought them to the magistrates, they said, 'These men do exceedingly trouble our city, being Jews;
and they proclaim customs that are not lawful for us to receive nor to do, being Romans.'
And the multitude rose up together against them, and the magistrates having torn their garments from them, were commanding to beat [them] with rods,
many blows also having laid upon them, they cast them to prison, having given charge to the jailor to keep them safely,
who such a charge having received, did put them to the inner prison, and their feet made fast in the stocks.
And at midnight Paul and Silas praying, were singing hymns to God, and the prisoners were hearing them,
and suddenly a great earthquake came, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken, opened also presently were all the doors, and of all — the bands were loosed;
and the jailor having come out of sleep, and having seen the doors of the prison open, having drawn a sword, was about to kill himself, supposing the prisoners to be fled,
and Paul cried out with a loud voice, saying, 'Thou mayest not do thyself any harm, for we are all here.'
And, having asked for a light, he sprang in, and trembling he fell down before Paul and Silas,
and having brought them forth, said, 'Sirs, what must I do — that I may be saved?'
and they said, 'Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved — thou and thy house;'
and they spake to him the word of the Lord, and to all those in his household;
and having taken them, in that hour of the night, he did bathe [them] from the blows, and was baptized, himself and all his presently,
having brought them also into his house, he set food before [them], and was glad with all the household, he having believed in God.
And day having come, the magistrates sent the rod-bearers, saying, 'Let those men go;'
and the jailor told these words unto Paul — 'The magistrates have sent, that ye may be let go; now, therefore, having gone forth go on in peace;'
and Paul said to them, 'Having beaten us publicly uncondemned — men, Romans being — they did cast [us] to prison, and now privately do they cast us forth! why no! but having come themselves, let them bring us forth.'
And the rod-bearers told to the magistrates these sayings, and they were afraid, having heard that they are Romans,
and having come, they besought them, and having brought [them] forth, they were asking [them] to go forth from the city;
and they, having gone forth out of the prison, entered into [the house of] Lydia, and having seen the brethren, they comforted them, and went forth.
And having passed through Amphipolis, and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where was the synagogue of the Jews,
and according to the custom of Paul, he went in unto them, and for three sabbaths he was reasoning with them from the Writings,
opening and alleging, 'That the Christ it behoved to suffer, and to rise again out of the dead, and that this is the Christ — Jesus whom I proclaim to you.'
And certain of them did believe, and attached themselves to Paul and to Silas, also of the worshipping Greeks a great multitude, of the principal women also not a few.
And the unbelieving Jews, having been moved with envy, and having taken to them of the loungers certain evil men, and having made a crowd, were setting the city in an uproar; having assailed also the house of Jason, they were seeking them to bring [them] to the populace,
and not having found them, they drew Jason and certain brethren unto the city rulers, calling aloud — 'These, having put the world in commotion, are also here present,
whom Jason hath received; and these all do contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying another to be king — Jesus.'
And they troubled the multitude and the city rulers, hearing these things,
and having taking security from Jason and the rest, they let them go.
And the brethren immediately, through the night, sent forth both Paul and Silas to Berea, who having come, went to the synagogue of the Jews;
and these were more noble than those in Thessalonica, they received the word with all readiness of mind, every day examining the Writings whether those things were so;
many, indeed, therefore, of them did believe, and of the honourable Greek women and men not a few.
And when the Jews from Thessalonica knew that also in Berea was the word of God declared by Paul, they came thither also, agitating the multitudes;
and then immediately the brethren sent forth Paul, to go on as it were to the sea, but both Silas and Timothy were remaining there.
And those conducting Paul, brought him unto Athens, and having received a command unto Silas and Timotheus that with all speed they may come unto him, they departed;
and Paul waiting for them in Athens, his spirit was stirred in him, beholding the city wholly given to idolatry,
therefore, indeed, he was reasoning in the synagogue with the Jews, and with the worshipping persons, and in the market-place every day with those who met with him.
And certain of the Epicurean and of the Stoic philosophers, were meeting together to see him, and some were saying, 'What would this seed picker wish to say?' and others, 'Of strange demons he doth seem to be an announcer;' because Jesus and the rising again he did proclaim to them as good news,
having also taken him, unto the Areopagus they brought [him], saying, 'Are we able to know what [is] this new teaching that is spoken by thee,
for certain strange things thou dost bring to our ears? we wish, then, to know what these things would wish to be;'
and all Athenians, and the strangers sojourning, for nothing else were at leisure but to say something, and to hear some newer thing.
And Paul, having stood in the midst of the Areopagus, said, 'Men, Athenians, in all things I perceive you as over-religious;
for passing through and contemplating your objects of worship, I found also an erection on which had been inscribed: To God — unknown; whom, therefore — not knowing — ye do worship, this One I announce to you.
'God, who did make the world, and all things in it, this One, of heaven and of earth being Lord, in temples made with hands doth not dwell,
neither by the hands of men is He served — needing anything, He giving to all life, and breath, and all things;
He made also of one blood every nation of men, to dwell upon all the face of the earth — having ordained times before appointed, and the bounds of their dwellings —
to seek the Lord, if perhaps they did feel after Him and find, — though, indeed, He is not far from each one of us,
for in Him we live, and move, and are; as also certain of your poets have said: For of Him also we are offspring.
'Being, therefore, offspring of God, we ought not to think the Godhead to be like to gold, or silver, or stone, graving of art and device of man;
the times, indeed, therefore, of the ignorance God having overlooked, doth now command all men everywhere to reform,
because He did set a day in which He is about to judge the world in righteousness, by a man whom He did ordain, having given assurance to all, having raised him out of the dead.'
And having heard of a rising again of the dead, some, indeed, were mocking, but others said, 'We will hear thee again concerning this;'
and so Paul went forth from the midst of them,
and certain men having cleaved to him, did believe, among whom [is] also Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman, by name Damaris, and others with them.
And after these things, Paul having departed out of Athens, came to Corinth,
and having found a certain Jew, by name Aquilas, of Pontus by birth, lately come from Italy, and Priscilla his wife — because of Claudius having directed all the Jews to depart out of Rome — he came to them,
and because of being of the same craft, he did remain with them, and was working, for they were tent-makers as to craft;
and he was reasoning in the synagogue every sabbath, persuading both Jews and Greeks.
And when both Silas and Timotheus came down from Macedonia, Paul was pressed in the Spirit, testifying fully to the Jews Jesus the Christ;
and on their resisting and speaking evil, having shaken [his] garments, he said unto them, 'Your blood [is] upon your head — I am clean; henceforth to the nations I will go on.'
And having departed thence, he went to the house of a certain one, by name Justus, a worshipper of God, whose house was adjoining the synagogue,
and Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue did believe in the Lord with all his house, and many of the Corinthians hearing were believing, and they were being baptized.
And the Lord said through a vision in the night to Paul, 'Be not afraid, but be speaking and thou mayest be not silent;
because I am with thee, and no one shall set on thee to do thee evil; because I have much people in this city;'
and he continued a year and six months, teaching among them the word of God.
And Gallio being proconsul of Achaia, the Jews made a rush with one accord upon Paul, and brought him unto the tribunal,
saying — 'Against the law this one doth persuade men to worship God;'
and Paul being about to open [his] mouth, Gallio said unto the Jews, 'If, indeed, then, it was anything unrighteous, or an act of wicked profligacy, O Jews, according to reason I had borne with you,
but if it is a question concerning words and names, and of your law, look ye yourselves [to it], for a judge of these things I do not wish to be,'
and he drave them from the tribunal;
and all the Greeks having taken Sosthenes, the chief man of the synagogue, were beating [him] before the tribunal, and not even for these things was Gallio caring.
And Paul having remained yet a good many days, having taken leave of the brethren, was sailing to Syria — and with him [are] Priscilla and Aquilas — having shorn [his] head in Cenchera, for he had a vow;
and he came down to Ephesus, and did leave them there, and he himself having entered into the synagogue did reason with the Jews:
and they having requested [him] to remain a longer time with them, he did not consent,
but took leave of them, saying, 'It behoveth me by all means the coming feast to keep at Jerusalem, and again I will return unto you — God willing.' And he sailed from Ephesus,
and having come down to Caesarea, having gone up, and having saluted the assembly, he went down to Antioch.
And having made some stay he went forth, going through in order the region of Galatia and Phrygia, strengthening all the disciples.
And a certain Jew, Apollos by name, an Alexandrian by birth, a man of eloquence, being mighty in the Writings, came to Ephesus,
this one was instructed in the way of the Lord, and being fervent in the Spirit, was speaking and teaching exactly the things about the Lord, knowing only the baptism of John;
this one also began to speak boldly in the synagogue, and Aquilas and Priscilla having heard of him, took him to [them], and did more exactly expound to him the way of God,
and he being minded to go through into Achaia, the brethren wrote to the disciples, having exhorted them to receive him, who having come, did help them much who have believed through the grace,
for powerfully the Jews he was refuting publicly, shewing through the Writings Jesus to be the Christ.
And it came to pass, in Apollos' being in Corinth, Paul having gone through the upper parts, came to Ephesus, and having found certain disciples,
he said unto them, 'The Holy Spirit did ye receive — having believed?' and they said unto him, 'But we did not even hear whether there is any Holy Spirit;'
and he said unto them, 'To what, then, were ye baptized?' and they said, 'To John's baptism.'
And Paul said, 'John, indeed, did baptize with a baptism of reformation, saying to the people that in him who is coming after him they should believe — that is, in the Christ — Jesus;'
and they, having heard, were baptized — to the name of the Lord Jesus,
and Paul having laid on them [his] hands, the Holy Spirit came upon them, they were speaking also with tongues, and prophesying,
and all the men were, as it were, twelve.
And having gone into the synagogue, he was speaking boldly for three months, reasoning and persuading the things concerning the reign of God,
and when certain were hardened and were disbelieving, speaking evil of the way before the multitude, having departed from them, he did separate the disciples, every day reasoning in the school of a certain Tyrannus.
And this happened for two years so that all those dwelling in Asia did hear the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks,
mighty works also — not common — was God working through the hands of Paul,
so that even unto the ailing were brought from his body handkerchiefs or aprons, and the sicknesses departed from them; the evil spirits also went forth from them.
And certain of the wandering exorcist Jews, took upon [them] to name over those having the evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, 'We adjure you by Jesus, whom Paul doth preach;'
and there were certain — seven sons of Sceva, a Jew, a chief priest — who are doing this thing;
and the evil spirit, answering, said, 'Jesus I know, and Paul I am acquainted with; and ye — who are ye?'
And the man, in whom was the evil spirit, leaping upon them, and having overcome them, prevailed against them, so that naked and wounded they did flee out of that house,
and this became known to all, both Jews and Greeks, who are dwelling at Ephesus, and fear fell upon them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was being magnified,
many also of those who did believe were coming, confessing and declaring their acts,
and many of those who had practised the curious arts, having brought the books together, were burning [them] before all; and they reckoned together the prices of them, and found [it] five myriads of silverlings;
so powerfully was the word of God increasing and prevailing.
And when these things were fulfilled, Paul purposed in the Spirit, having gone through Macedonia and Achaia, to go on to Jerusalem, saying — 'After my being there, it behoveth me also to see Rome;'
and having sent to Macedonia two of those ministering to him — Timotheus and Erastus — he himself stayed a time in Asia.
And there came, at that time, not a little stir about the way,
for a certain one, Demetrius by name, a worker in silver, making silver sanctuaries of Artemis, was bringing to the artificers gain not a little,
whom, having brought in a crowd together, and those who did work about such things, he said, 'Men, ye know that by this work we have our wealth;
and ye see and hear, that not only at Ephesus, but almost in all Asia, this Paul, having persuaded, did turn away a great multitude, saying, that they are not gods who are made by hands;
and not only is this department in danger for us of coming into disregard, but also, that of the great goddess Artemis the temple is to be reckoned for nothing, and also her greatness is about to be brought down, whom all Asia and the world doth worship.'
And they having heard, and having become full of wrath, were crying out, saying, 'Great [is] the Artemis of the Ephesians!'
and the whole city was filled with confusion, they rushed also with one accord into the theatre, having caught Gaius and Aristarchus, Macedonians, Paul's fellow-travellers.
And on Paul's purposing to enter in unto the populace, the disciples were not suffering him,
and certain also of the chief men of Asia, being his friends, having sent unto him, were entreating him not to venture himself into the theatre.
Some indeed, therefore, were calling out one thing, and some another, for the assembly was confused, and the greater part did not know for what they were come together;
and out of the multitude they put forward Alexander — the Jews thrusting him forward — and Alexander having beckoned with the hand, wished to make defence to the populace,
and having known that he is a Jew, one voice came out of all, for about two hours, crying, 'Great [is] the Artemis of the Ephesians!'
And the public clerk having quieted the multitude, saith, 'Men, Ephesians, why, who is the man that doth not know that the city of the Ephesians is a devotee of the great goddess Artemis, and of that which fell down from Zeus?
these things, then, not being to be gainsaid, it is necessary for you to be quiet, and to do nothing rashly.
'For ye brought these men, who are neither temple-robbers nor speaking evil of your goddess;
if indeed, therefore, Demetrius and the artificers with him with any one have a matter, court [days] are held, and there are proconsuls; let them accuse one another.
'And if ye seek after anything concerning other matters, in the legal assembly it shall be determined;
for we are also in peril of being accused of insurrection in regard to this day, there being no occasion by which we shall be able to give an account of this concourse;' and these things having said, he dismissed the assembly.
And after the ceasing of the tumult, Paul having called near the disciples, and having embraced [them], went forth to go on to Macedonia;
and having gone through those parts, and having exhorted them with many words, he came to Greece;
having made also three months' [stay] — a counsel of the Jews having been against him — being about to set forth to Syria, there came [to him] a resolution of returning through Macedonia.
And there were accompanying him unto Asia, Sopater of Berea, and of Thessalonians Aristarchus and Secundus, and Gaius of Derbe, and Timotheus, and of Asiatics Tychicus and Trophimus;
these, having gone before, did remain for us in Troas,
and we sailed, after the days of the unleavened food, from Philippi, and came unto them to Troas in five days, where we abode seven days.
And on the first of the week, the disciples having been gathered together to break bread, Paul was discoursing to them, about to depart on the morrow, he was also continuing the discourse till midnight,
and there were many lamps in the upper chamber where they were gathered together,
and there was sitting a certain youth, by name Eutychus, upon the window — being borne down by a deep sleep, Paul discoursing long — he having sunk down from the sleep, fell down from the third story, and was lifted up dead.
And Paul, having gone down, fell upon him, and having embraced [him], said, 'Make no tumult, for his life is in him;'
and having come up, and having broken bread, and having tasted, for a long time also having talked — till daylight, so he went forth,
and they brought up the lad alive, and were comforted in no ordinary measure.
And we having gone before unto the ship, did sail to Assos, thence intending to take in Paul, for so he had arranged, intending himself to go on foot;
and when he met with us at Assos, having taken him up, we came to Mitylene,
and thence having sailed, on the morrow we came over-against Chios, and the next day we arrived at Samos, and having remained in Trogyllium, on the following day we came to Miletus,
for Paul decided to sail past Ephesus, that there may not be to him a loss of time in Asia, for he hasted, if it were possible for him, on the day of the Pentecost to be at Jerusalem.
And from Miletus, having sent to Ephesus, he called for the elders of the assembly,
and when they were come unto him, he said to them, 'Ye — ye know from the first day in which I came to Asia, how, with you at all times I was;
serving the Lord with all humility, and many tears, and temptations, that befell me in the counsels of the Jews against [me];
how nothing I did keep back of what things are profitable, not to declare to you, and to teach you publicly, and in every house,
testifying fully both to Jews and Greeks, toward God reformation, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.
'And now, lo, I — bound in the Spirit — go on to Jerusalem, the things that shall befall me in it not knowing,
save that the Holy Spirit in every city doth testify fully, saying, that for me bonds and tribulations remain;
but I make account of none of these, neither do I count my life precious to myself, so that I finish my course with joy, and the ministration that I received from the Lord Jesus, to testify fully the good news of the grace of God.
'And now, lo, I have known that no more shall ye see my face, — ye all among whom I did go preaching the reign of God;
wherefore I take you to witness this day, that I [am] clear from the blood of all,
for I did not keep back from declaring to you all the counsel of God.
'Take heed, therefore, to yourselves, and to all the flock, among which the Holy Spirit made you overseers, to feed the assembly of God that He acquired through His own blood,
for I have known this, that there shall enter in, after my departing, grievous wolves unto you, not sparing the flock,
and of your own selves there shall arise men, speaking perverse things, to draw away the disciples after them.
'Therefore, watch, remembering that three years, night and day, I did not cease with tears warning each one;
and now, I commend you, brethren, to God, and to the word of His grace, that is able to build up, and to give you an inheritance among all those sanctified.
'The silver or gold or garments of no one did I covet;
and ye yourselves know that to my necessities, and to those who were with me, minister did these hands;
all things I did shew you, that, thus labouring, it behoveth [us] to partake with the ailing, to be mindful also of the words of the Lord Jesus, that he himself said, It is more blessed to give than to receive.'
And these things having said, having bowed his knees, with them all, he did pray,
and there came a great weeping to all, and having fallen upon the neck of Paul, they were kissing him,
sorrowing most of all for the word that he had said — that they are about no more to see his face; and they were accompanying him to the ship.
And it came to pass, at our sailing, having been parted from them, having run direct, we came to Coos, and the succeeding [day] to Rhodes, and thence to Patara,
and having found a ship passing over to Phenicia, having gone on board, we sailed,
and having discovered Cyprus, and having left it on the left, we were sailing to Syria, and did land at Tyre, for there was the ship discharging the lading.
And having found out the disciples, we tarried there seven days, and they said to Paul, through the Spirit, not to go up to Jerusalem;
but when it came that we completed the days, having gone forth, we went on, all bringing us on the way, with women and children, unto the outside of the city, and having bowed the knees upon the shore, we prayed,
and having embraced one another, we embarked in the ship, and they returned to their own friends.
And we, having finished the course, from Tyre came down to Ptolemais, and having saluted the brethren, we remained one day with them;
and on the morrow Paul and his company having gone forth, we came to Caesarea, and having entered into the house of Philip the evangelist — who is of the seven — we remained with him,
and this one had four daughters, virgins, prophesying.
And we remaining many more days, there came down a certain one from Judea, a prophet, by name Agabus,
and he having come unto us, and having taken up the girdle of Paul, having bound also his own hands and feet, said, 'Thus saith the Holy Spirit, The man whose is this girdle — so shall the Jews in Jerusalem bind, and they shall deliver [him] up to the hands of nations.'
And when we heard these things, we called upon [him] — both we, and those of that place — not to go up to Jerusalem,
and Paul answered, 'What do ye — weeping, and crushing mine heart? for I, not only to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem, am ready, for the name of the Lord Jesus;'
and he not being persuaded, we were silent, saying, 'The will of the Lord be done.'
And after these days, having taken [our] vessels, we were going up to Jerusalem,
and there went also of the disciples from Caesarea with us, bringing with them him with whom we may lodge, a certain Mnason of Cyprus, an aged disciple.
And we having come to Jerusalem, the brethren did gladly receive us,
and on the morrow Paul was going in with us unto James, all the elders also came,
and having saluted them, he was declaring, one by one, each of the things God did among the nations through his ministration,
and they having heard, were glorifying the Lord. They said also to him, 'Thou seest, brother, how many myriads there are of Jews who have believed, and all are zealous of the law,
and they are instructed concerning thee, that apostasy from Moses thou dost teach to all Jews among the nations, saying — Not to circumcise the children, nor after the customs to walk;
what then is it? certainly the multitude it behoveth to come together, for they will hear that thou hast come.
'This, therefore, do that we say to thee: We have four men having a vow on themselves,
these having taken, be purified with them, and be at expence with them, that they may shave the head, and all may know that the things of which they have been instructed concerning thee are nothing, but thou dost walk — thyself also — the law keeping.
'And concerning those of the nations who have believed, we have written, having given judgment, that they observe no such thing, except to keep themselves both from idol-sacrifices, and blood, and a strangled thing, and whoredom.'
Then Paul, having taken the men, on the following day, with them having purified himself, was entering into the temple, announcing the fulfilment of the days of the purification, till the offering was offered for each one of them.
And, as the seven days were about to be fully ended, the Jews from Asia having beheld him in the temple, were stirring up all the multitude, and they laid hands upon him,
crying out, 'Men, Israelites, help! this is the man who, against the people, and the law, and this place, all everywhere is teaching; and further, also, Greeks he brought into the temple, and hath defiled this holy place;'
for they had seen before Trophimus, the Ephesian, in the city with him, whom they were supposing that Paul brought into the temple.
All the city also was moved and there was a running together of the people, and having laid hold on Paul, they were drawing him out of the temple, and immediately were the doors shut,
and they seeking to kill him, a rumour came to the chief captain of the band that all Jerusalem hath been thrown into confusion,
who, at once, having taken soldiers and centurions, ran down upon them, and they having seen the chief captain and the soldiers, did leave off beating Paul.
Then the chief captain, having come nigh, took him, and commanded [him] to be bound with two chains, and was inquiring who he may be, and what it is he hath been doing,
and some were crying out one thing, and some another, among the multitude, and not being able to know the certainty because of the tumult, he commanded him to be carried to the castle,
and when he came upon the steps, it happened he was borne by the soldiers, because of the violence of the multitude,
for the crowd of the people was following after, crying, 'Away with him.'
And Paul being about to be led into the castle, saith to the chief captain, 'Is it permitted to me to say anything unto thee?' and he said, 'Greek dost thou know?
art not thou, then, the Egyptian who before these days made an uprising, and did lead into the desert the four thousand men of the assassins?'
And Paul said, 'I, indeed, am a man, a Jew, of Tarsus of Cilicia, of no mean city a citizen; and I beseech thee, suffer me to speak unto the people.'
And he having given him leave, Paul having stood upon the stairs, did beckon with the hand to the people, and there having been a great silence, he spake unto them in the Hebrew dialect, saying:
'Men, brethren, and fathers, hear my defence now unto you;' —
and they having heard that in the Hebrew dialect he was speaking to them, gave the more silence, and he saith, —
'I, indeed, am a man, a Jew, having been born in Tarsus of Cilicia, and brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, having been taught according to the exactitude of a law of the fathers, being zealous of God, as all ye are to-day.
'And this way I persecuted unto death, binding and delivering up to prisons both men and women,
as also the chief priest doth testify to me, and all the eldership; from whom also having received letters unto the brethren, to Damascus, I was going on, to bring also those there bound to Jerusalem that they might be punished,
and it came to pass, in my going on and coming nigh to Damascus, about noon, suddenly out of the heaven there shone a great light round about me,
I fell also to the ground, and I heard a voice saying to me, Saul, Saul, why me dost thou persecute?
'And I answered, Who art thou, Lord? and he said unto me, I am Jesus the Nazarene whom thou dost persecute —
and they who are with me the light did see, and became afraid, and the voice they heard not of him who is speaking to me —
and I said, What shall I do, Lord? and the Lord said unto me, Having risen, go on to Damascus, and there it shall be told thee concerning all things that have been appointed for thee to do.
'And when I did not see from the glory of that light, being led by the hand by those who are with me, I came to Damascus,
and a certain one, Ananias, a pious man according to the law, being testified to by all the Jews dwelling [there],
having come unto me and stood by [me], said to me, Saul, brother, look up; and I the same hour did look up to him;
and he said, The God of our fathers did choose thee beforehand to know His will, and to see the Righteous One, and to hear a voice out of his mouth,
because thou shalt be his witness unto all men of what thou hast seen and heard;
and now, why tarriest thou? having risen, baptize thyself, and wash away thy sins, calling upon the name of the Lord.
'And it came to pass when I returned to Jerusalem, and while I was praying in the temple, I came into a trance,
and I saw him saying to me, Haste and go forth in haste out of Jerusalem, because they will not receive thy testimony concerning me;
and I said, Lord, they — they know that I was imprisoning and was scourging in every synagogue those believing on thee;
and when the blood of thy witness Stephen was being poured forth, I also was standing by and assenting to his death, and keeping the garments of those putting him to death;
and he said unto me, Go, because to nations far off I will send thee.'
And they were hearing him unto this word, and they lifted up their voice, saying, 'Away from the earth with such an one; for it is not fit for him to live.'
And they crying out and casting up their garments, and throwing dust into the air,
the chief captain commanded him to be brought into the castle, saying, 'By scourges let him be examined;' that he might know for what cause they were crying so against him.
And as he was stretching him with the thongs, Paul said unto the centurion who was standing by, 'A man, a Roman, uncondemned — is it lawful to you to scourge;'
and the centurion having heard, having gone near to the chief captain, told, saying, 'Take heed what thou art about to do, for this man is a Roman;'
and the chief captain having come near, said to him, 'Tell me, art thou a Roman?' and he said, 'Yes;'
and the chief captain answered, 'I, with a great sum, did obtain this citizenship;' but Paul said, 'But I have been even born [so].'
Immediately, therefore, they departed from him who are about to examine him, and the chief captain also was afraid, having learned that he is a Roman, and because he had bound him,
and on the morrow, intending to know the certainty wherefore he is accused by the Jews, he did loose him from the bonds, and commanded the chief priests and all their sanhedrim to come, and having brought down Paul, he set [him] before them.
And Paul having earnestly beheld the sanhedrim, said, 'Men, brethren, I in all good conscience have lived to God unto this day;'
and the chief priest Ananias commanded those standing by him to smite him on the mouth,
then Paul said unto him, 'God is about to smite thee, thou whitewashed wall, and thou — thou dost sit judging me according to the law, and, violating law, dost order me to be smitten!'
And those who stood by said, 'The chief priest of God dost thou revile?'
and Paul said, 'I did not know, brethren, that he is chief priest: for it hath been written, Of the ruler of thy people thou shalt not speak evil;'
and Paul having known that the one part are Sadducees, and the other Pharisees, cried out in the sanhedrim, 'Men, brethren, I am a Pharisee — son of a Pharisee — concerning hope and rising again of dead men I am judged.'
And he having spoken this, there came a dissension of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees, and the crowd was divided,
for Sadducees, indeed, say there is no rising again, nor messenger, nor spirit, but Pharisees confess both.
And there came a great cry, and the scribes of the Pharisees' part having arisen, were striving, saying, 'No evil do we find in this man; and if a spirit spake to him, or a messenger, we may not fight against God;'
and a great dissension having come, the chief captain having been afraid lest Paul may be pulled to pieces by them, commanded the soldiery, having gone down, to take him by force out of the midst of them, and to bring [him] to the castle.
And on the following night, the Lord having stood by him, said, 'Take courage, Paul, for as thou didst fully testify the things concerning me at Jerusalem, so it behoveth thee also at Rome to testify.'
And day having come, certain of the Jews having made a concourse, did anathematize themselves, saying neither to eat nor to drink till they may kill Paul;
and they were more than forty who made this conspiracy by oath,
who having come near to the chief priests and to the elders said, 'With an anathema we did anathematize ourselves — to taste nothing till we have killed Paul;
now, therefore, ye, signify ye to the chief captain, with the sanhedrim, that to-morrow he may bring him down unto you, as being about to know more exactly the things concerning him; and we, before his coming nigh, are ready to put him to death.'
And the son of Paul's sister having heard of the lying in wait, having gone and entered into the castle, told Paul,
and Paul having called near one of the centurions, said, 'This young man lead unto the chief captain, for he hath something to tell him.'
He indeed, then, having taken him, brought him unto the chief captain, and saith, 'The prisoner Paul, having called me near, asked [me] this young man to bring unto thee, having something to say to thee.'
And the chief captain having taken him by the hand, and having withdrawn by themselves, inquired, 'What is that which thou hast to tell me?'
and he said — 'The Jews agreed to request thee, that to-morrow to the sanhedrim thou mayest bring down Paul, as being about to enquire something more exactly concerning him;
thou, therefore, mayest thou not yield to them, for there lie in wait for him of them more than forty men, who did anathematize themselves — not to eat nor to drink till they kill him, and now they are ready, waiting for the promise from thee.'
The chief captain, then, indeed, let the young man go, having charged [him] to tell no one, 'that these things thou didst shew unto me;'
and having called near a certain two of the centurions, he said, 'Make ready soldiers two hundred, that they may go on unto Caesarea, and horsemen seventy, and spearmen two hundred, from the third hour of the night;
beasts also provide, that, having set Paul on, they may bring him safe unto Felix the governor;'
he having written a letter after this description:
'Claudius Lysias, to the most noble governor Felix, hail:
This man having been taken by the Jews, and being about to be killed by them — having come with the soldiery, I rescued him, having learned that he is a Roman;
and, intending to know the cause for which they were accusing him, I brought him down to their sanhedrim,
whom I found accused concerning questions of their law, and having no accusation worthy of death or bonds;
and a plot having been intimated to me against this man — about to be of the Jews — at once I sent unto thee, having given command also to the accusers to say the things against him before thee; be strong.'
Then, indeed, the soldiers according to that directed them, having taken up Paul, brought him through the night to Antipatris,
and on the morrow, having suffered the horsemen to go on with him, they returned to the castle;
those having entered into Caesarea, and delivered the letter to the governor, did present also Paul to him.
And the governor having read [it], and inquired of what province he is, and understood that [he is] from Cilicia;
'I will hear thee — said he — when thine accusers also may have come;' he also commanded him to be kept in the praetorium of Herod.
And after five days came down the chief priest Ananias, with the elders, and a certain orator — Tertullus, and they made manifest to the governor [the things] against Paul;
and he having been called, Tertullus began to accuse [him], saying, 'Much peace enjoying through thee, and worthy deeds being done to this nation through thy forethought,
always, also, and everywhere we receive it, most noble Felix, with all thankfulness;
and that I may not be further tedious to thee, I pray thee to hear us concisely in thy gentleness;
for having found this man a pestilence, and moving a dissension to all the Jews through the world — a ringleader also of the sect of the Nazarenes —
who also the temple did try to profane, whom also we took, and according to our law did wish to judge,
and Lysias the chief captain having come near, with much violence, out of our hands did take away,
having commanded his accusers to come to thee, from whom thou mayest be able, thyself having examined, to know concerning all these things of which we accuse him;'
and the Jews also agreed, professing these things to be so.
And Paul answered — the governor having beckoned to him to speak — 'Knowing [that] for many years thou hast been a judge to this nation, the more cheerfully the things concerning myself I do answer;
thou being able to know that it is not more than twelve days to me since I went up to worship in Jerusalem,
and neither in the temple did they find me reasoning with any one, or making a dissension of the multitude, nor in the synagogues, nor in the city;
nor are they able to prove against me the things concerning which they now accuse me.
'And I confess this to thee, that, according to the way that they call a sect, so serve I the God of the fathers, believing all things that in the law and the prophets have been written,
having hope toward God, which they themselves also wait for, [that] there is about to be a rising again of the dead, both of righteous and unrighteous;
and in this I do exercise myself, to have a conscience void of offence toward God and men always.
'And after many years I came, about to do kind acts to my nation, and offerings,
in which certain Jews from Asia did find me purified in the temple, not with multitude, nor with tumult,
whom it behoveth to be present before thee, and to accuse, if they had anything against me,
or let these same say if they found any unrighteousness in me in my standing before the sanhedrim,
except concerning this one voice, in which I cried, standing among them — Concerning a rising again of the dead I am judged to-day by you.'
And having heard these things, Felix delayed them — having known more exactly of the things concerning the way — saying, 'When Lysias the chief captain may come down, I will know fully the things concerning you;'
having given also a direction to the centurion to keep Paul, to let [him] also have liberty, and to forbid none of his own friends to minister or to come near to him.
And after certain days, Felix having come with Drusilla his wife, being a Jewess, he sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith toward Christ,
and he reasoning concerning righteousness, and temperance, and the judgment that is about to be, Felix, having become afraid, answered, 'For the present be going, and having got time, I will call for thee;'
and at the same time also hoping that money shall be given to him by Paul, that he may release him, therefore, also sending for him the oftener, he was conversing with him;
and two years having been fulfilled, Felix received a successor, Porcius Festus; Felix also willing to lay a favour on the Jews, left Paul bound.
Festus, therefore, having come into the province, after three days went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea,
and the chief priest and the principal men of the Jews made manifest to him [the things] against Paul, and were calling on him,
asking favour against him, that he may send for him to Jerusalem, making an ambush to put him to death in the way.
Then, indeed, Festus answered that Paul is kept in Caesarea, and himself is about speedily to go on thither,
'Therefore those able among you — saith he — having come down together, if there be anything in this man — let them accuse him;'
and having tarried among them more than ten days, having gone down to Caesarea, on the morrow having sat upon the tribunal, he commanded Paul to be brought;
and he having come, there stood round about the Jews who have come down from Jerusalem — many and weighty charges they are bringing against Paul, which they were not able to prove,
he making defence — 'Neither in regard to the law of the Jews, nor in regard to the temple, nor in regard to Caesar — did I commit any sin.'
And Festus willing to lay on the Jews a favour, answering Paul, said, 'Art thou willing, to Jerusalem having gone up, there concerning these things to be judged before me?'
and Paul said, 'At the tribunal of Caesar I am standing, where it behoveth me to be judged; to Jews I did no unrighteousness, as thou dost also very well know;
for if indeed I am unrighteous, and anything worthy of death have done, I deprecate not to die; and if there is none of the things of which these accuse me, no one is able to make a favour of me to them; to Caesar I appeal!'
then Festus, having communed with the council, answered, 'To Caesar thou hast appealed; to Caesar thou shalt go.'
And certain days having passed, Agrippa the king, and Bernice, came down to Caesarea saluting Festus,
and as they were continuing there more days, Festus submitted to the king the things concerning Paul, saying, 'There is a certain man, left by Felix, a prisoner,
about whom, in my being at Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews laid information, asking a decision against him,
unto whom I answered, that it is not a custom of Romans to make a favour of any man to die, before that he who is accused may have the accusers face to face, and may receive place of defence in regard to the charge laid against [him].
'They, therefore, having come together — I, making no delay, on the succeeding [day] having sat upon the tribunal, did command the man to be brought,
concerning whom the accusers, having stood up, were bringing against [him] no accusation of the things I was thinking of,
but certain questions concerning their own religion they had against him, and concerning a certain Jesus who was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive;
and I, doubting in regard to the question concerning this, said, If he would wish to go on to Jerusalem, and there to be judged concerning these things —
but Paul having appealed to be kept to the hearing of Sebastus, I did command him to be kept till I might send him unto Caesar.'
And Agrippa said unto Festus, 'I was wishing also myself to hear the man;' and he said, 'To-morrow thou shalt hear him;'
on the morrow, therefore — on the coming of Agrippa and Bernice with much display, and they having entered into the audience chamber, with the chief captains also, and the principal men of the city, and Festus having ordered — Paul was brought forth.
And Festus said, 'King Agrippa, and all men who are present with us, ye see this one, about whom all the multitude of the Jews did deal with me, both in Jerusalem and here, crying out, He ought not to live any longer;
and I, having found him to have done nothing worthy of death, and he also himself having appealed to Sebastus, I decided to send him,
concerning whom I have no certain thing to write to [my] lord, wherefore I brought him forth before you, and specially before thee, king Agrippa, that the examination having been made, I may have something to write;
for it doth seem to me irrational, sending a prisoner, not also to signify the charges against him.'
And Agrippa said unto Paul, 'It is permitted to thee to speak for thyself;' then Paul having stretched forth the hand, was making a defence:
'Concerning all things of which I am accused by Jews, king Agrippa, I have thought myself happy, being about to make a defence before thee to-day,
especially knowing thee to be acquainted with all things — both customs and questions — among Jews; wherefore, I beseech thee, patiently to hear me.
'The manner of my life then, indeed, from youth — which from the beginning was among my nation, in Jerusalem — know do all the Jews,
knowing me before from the first, (if they may be willing to testify,) that after the most exact sect of our worship, I lived a Pharisee;
and now for the hope of the promise made to the fathers by God, I have stood judged,
to which our twelve tribes, intently night and day serving, do hope to come, concerning which hope I am accused, king Agrippa, by the Jews;
why is it judged incredible with you, if God doth raise the dead?
'I, indeed, therefore, thought with myself, that against the name of Jesus of Nazareth it behoved [me] many things to do,
which also I did in Jerusalem, and many of the saints I in prison did shut up, from the chief priests having received the authority; they also being put to death, I gave my vote against them,
and in every synagogue, often punishing them, I was constraining [them] to speak evil, being also exceedingly mad against them, I was also persecuting [them] even unto strange cities.
'In which things, also, going on to Damascus — with authority and commission from the chief priests —
at mid-day, I saw in the way, O king, out of heaven, above the brightness of the sun, shining round about me a light — and those going on with me;
and we all having fallen to the earth, I heard a voice speaking unto me, and saying in the Hebrew dialect, Saul, Saul, why me dost thou persecute? hard for thee against pricks to kick!
'And I said, Who art thou, Lord? and he said, I am Jesus whom thou dost persecute;
but rise, and stand upon thy feet, for for this I appeared to thee, to appoint thee an officer and a witness both of the things thou didst see, and of the things [in which] I will appear to thee,
delivering thee from the people, and the nations, to whom now I send thee,
to open their eyes, to turn [them] from darkness to light, and [from] the authority of the Adversary unto God, for their receiving forgiveness of sins, and a lot among those having been sanctified, by faith that [is] toward me.
'Whereupon, king Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision,
but to those in Damascus first, and to those in Jerusalem, to all the region also of Judea, and to the nations, I was preaching to reform, and to turn back unto God, doing works worthy of reformation;
because of these things the Jews — having caught me in the temple — were endeavouring to kill [me].
'Having obtained, therefore, help from God, till this day, I have stood witnessing both to small and to great, saying nothing besides the things that both the prophets and Moses spake of as about to come,
that the Christ is to suffer, whether first by a rising from the dead, he is about to proclaim light to the people and to the nations.'
And, he thus making a defence, Festus with a loud voice said, 'Thou art mad, Paul; much learning doth turn thee mad;'
and he saith, 'I am not mad, most noble Festus, but of truth and soberness the sayings I speak forth;
for the king doth know concerning these things, before whom also I speak boldly, for none of these things, I am persuaded, are hidden from him; for this thing hath not been done in a corner;
thou dost believe, king Agrippa, the prophets? I have known that thou dost believe!'
And Agrippa said unto Paul, 'In a little thou dost persuade me to become a Christian!'
and Paul said, 'I would have wished to God, both in a little, and in much, not only thee, but also all those hearing me to-day, to become such as I also am — except these bonds.'
And, he having spoken these things, the king rose up, and the governor, Bernice also, and those sitting with them,
and having withdrawn, they were speaking unto one another, saying — 'This man doth nothing worthy of death or of bonds;'
and Agrippa said to Festus, 'This man might have been released if he had not appealed to Caesar.'
And when our sailing to Italy was determined, they were delivering up both Paul and certain others, prisoners, to a centurion, by name Julius, of the band of Sebastus,
and having embarked in a ship of Adramyttium, we, being about to sail by the coasts of Asia, did set sail, there being with us Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica,
on the next [day] also we touched at Sidon, and Julius, courteously treating Paul, did permit [him], having gone on unto friends, to receive [their] care.
And thence, having set sail, we sailed under Cyprus, because of the winds being contrary,
and having sailed over the sea over-against Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myria of Lycia,
and there the centurion having found a ship of Alexandria, sailing to Italy, did put us into it,
and having sailed slowly many days, and with difficulty coming over-against Cnidus, the wind not suffering us, we sailed under Crete, over-against Salmone,
and hardly passing it, we came to a certain place called 'Fair Havens,' nigh to which was the city [of] Lasaea.
And much time being spent, and the sailing being now dangerous — because of the fast also being already past — Paul was admonishing,
saying to them, 'Men, I perceive that with hurt, and much damage, not only of the lading and of the ship, but also of our lives — the voyage is about to be;'
but the centurion to the pilot and to the shipowner gave credence more than to the things spoken by Paul;
and the haven being incommodious to winter in, the more part gave counsel to sail thence also, if by any means they might be able, having attained to Phenice, [there] to winter, [which is] a haven of Crete, looking to the south-west and north-west,
and a south wind blowing softly, having thought they had obtained [their] purpose, having lifted anchor, they sailed close by Crete,
and not long after there arose against it a tempestuous wind, that is called Euroclydon,
and the ship being caught, and not being able to bear up against the wind, having given [her] up, we were borne on,
and having run under a certain little isle, called Clauda, we were hardly able to become masters of the boat,
which having taken up, they were using helps, undergirding the ship, and fearing lest they may fall on the quicksand, having let down the mast — so were borne on.
And we, being exceedingly tempest-tossed, the succeeding [day] they were making a clearing,
and on the third [day] with our own hands the tackling of the ship we cast out,
and neither sun nor stars appearing for more days, and not a little tempest lying upon us, thenceforth all hope was taken away of our being saved.
And there having been long fasting, then Paul having stood in the midst of them, said, 'It behoved [you], indeed, O men — having hearkened to me — not to set sail from Crete, and to save this hurt and damage;
and now I exhort you to be of good cheer, for there shall be no loss of life among you — but of the ship;
for there stood by me this night a messenger of God — whose I am, and whom I serve —
saying, Be not afraid Paul; before Caesar it behoveth thee to stand; and, lo, God hath granted to thee all those sailing with thee;
wherefore be of good cheer, men! for I believe God, that so it shall be, even as it hath been spoken to me,
and on a certain island it behoveth us to be cast.'
And when the fourteenth night came — we being borne up and down in the Adria — toward the middle of the night the sailors were supposing that some country drew nigh to them;
and having sounded they found twenty fathoms, and having gone a little farther, and again having sounded, they found fifteen fathoms,
and fearing lest on rough places we may fall, out of the stern having cast four anchors, they were wishing day to come.
And the sailors seeking to flee out of the ship, and having let down the boat to the sea, in pretence as [if] out of the foreship they are about to cast anchors,
Paul said to the centurion and to the soldiers, 'If these do not remain in the ship — ye are not able to be saved;'
then the soldiers did cut off the ropes of the boat, and suffered it to fall off.
And till the day was about to be, Paul was calling upon all to partake of nourishment, saying, 'Fourteen days to-day, waiting, ye continue fasting, having taken nothing,
wherefore I call upon you to take nourishment, for this is for your safety, for of not one of you shall a hair from the head fall;'
and having said these things, and having taken bread, he gave thanks to God before all, and having broken [it], he began to eat;
and all having become of good cheer, themselves also took food,
(and we were — all the souls in the ship — two hundred, seventy and six),
and having eaten sufficient nourishment, they were lightening the ship, casting forth the wheat into the sea.
And when the day came, they were not discerning the land, but a certain creek were perceiving having a beach, into which they took counsel, if possible, to thrust forward the ship,
and the anchors having taken up, they were committing [it] to the sea, at the same time — having loosed the bands of the rudders, and having hoisted up the mainsail to the wind — they were making for the shore,
and having fallen into a place of two seas, they ran the ship aground, and the fore-part, indeed, having stuck fast, did remain immoveable, but the hinder-part was broken by the violence of the waves.
And the soldiers' counsel was that they should kill the prisoners, lest any one having swam out should escape,
but the centurion, wishing to save Paul, hindered them from the counsel, and did command those able to swim, having cast themselves out first — to get unto the land,
and the rest, some indeed upon boards, and some upon certain things of the ship; and thus it came to pass that all came safe unto the land.
And having been saved, then they knew that the island is called Melita,
and the foreigners were shewing us no ordinary kindness, for having kindled a fire, they received us all, because of the pressing rain, and because of the cold;
but Paul having gathered together a quantity of sticks, and having laid [them] upon the fire, a viper — out of the heat having come — did fasten on his hand.
And when the foreigners saw the beast hanging from his hand, they said unto one another, 'Certainly this man is a murderer, whom, having been saved out of the sea, the justice did not suffer to live;'
he then, indeed, having shaken off the beast into the fire, suffered no evil,
and they were expecting him to be about to be inflamed, or to fall down suddenly dead, and they, expecting [it] a long time, and seeing nothing uncommon happening to him, changing [their] minds, said he was a god.
And in the neighbourhood of that place were lands of the principal man of the island, by name Publius, who, having received us, three days did courteously lodge [us];
and it came to pass, the father of Publius with feverish heats and dysentery pressed, was laid, unto whom Paul having entered, and having prayed, having laid [his] hands on him, healed him;
this, therefore, being done, the others also in the island having infirmities were coming and were healed;
who also with many honours did honour us, and we setting sail — they were lading [us] with the things that were necessary.
And after three months, we set sail in a ship (that had wintered in the isle) of Alexandria, with the sign Dioscuri,
and having landed at Syracuse, we remained three days,
thence having gone round, we came to Rhegium, and after one day, a south wind having sprung up, the second [day] we came to Puteoli;
where, having found brethren, we were called upon to remain with them seven days, and thus to Rome we came;
and thence, the brethren having heard the things concerning us, came forth to meet us, unto Appii Forum, and Three Taverns — whom Paul having seen, having given thanks to God, took courage.
And when we came to Rome, the centurion delivered up the prisoners to the captain of the barrack, but Paul was suffered to remain by himself, with the soldier guarding him.
And it came to pass after three days, Paul called together those who are the principal men of the Jews, and they having come together, he said unto them: 'Men, brethren, I — having done nothing contrary to the people, or to the customs of the fathers — a prisoner from Jerusalem, was delivered up to the hands of the Romans;
who, having examined me, were wishing to release [me], because of their being no cause of death in me,
and the Jews having spoken against [it], I was constrained to appeal unto Caesar — not as having anything to accuse my nation of;
for this cause, therefore, I called for you to see and to speak with [you], for because of the hope of Israel with this chain I am bound.'
And they said unto him, 'We did neither receive letters concerning thee from Judea, nor did any one who came of the brethren declare or speak any evil concerning thee,
and we think it good from thee to hear what thou dost think, for, indeed, concerning this sect it is known to us that everywhere it is spoken against;'
and having appointed him a day, they came, more of them unto him, to the lodging, to whom he was expounding, testifying fully the reign of God, persuading them also of the things concerning Jesus, both from the law of Moses, and the prophets, from morning till evening,
and, some, indeed, were believing the things spoken, and some were not believing.
And not being agreed with one another, they were going away, Paul having spoken one word — 'Well did the Holy Spirit speak through Isaiah the prophet unto our fathers,
saying, Go on unto this people and say, With hearing ye shall hear, and ye shall not understand, and seeing ye shall see, and ye shall not perceive,
for made gross was the heart of this people, and with the ears they heard heavily, and their eyes they did close, lest they may see with the eyes, and with the heart may understand, and be turned back, and I may heal them.
'Be it known, therefore, to you, that to the nations was sent the salvation of God, these also will hear it;'
and he having said these things, the Jews went away, having much disputation among themselves;
and Paul remained an entire two years in his own hired [house], and was receiving all those coming in unto him,
preaching the reign of God, and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness — unforbidden.
Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, a called apostle, having been separated to the good news of God —
which He announced before through His prophets in holy writings —
concerning His Son, (who is come of the seed of David according to the flesh,
who is marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of sanctification, by the rising again from the dead,) Jesus Christ our Lord;
through whom we did receive grace and apostleship, for obedience of faith among all the nations, in behalf of his name;
among whom are also ye, the called of Jesus Christ;
to all who are in Rome, beloved of God, called saints; Grace to you, and peace, from God our Father, and [from] the Lord Jesus Christ!
first, indeed, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith is proclaimed in the whole world;
for God is my witness, whom I serve in my spirit in the good news of His Son, how unceasingly I make mention of you,
always in my prayers beseeching, if by any means now at length I shall have a prosperous journey, by the will of God, to come unto you,
for I long to see you, that I may impart to you some spiritual gift, that ye may be established;
and that is, that I may be comforted together among you, through the faith in one another, both yours and mine.
And I do not wish you to be ignorant, brethren, that many times I did purpose to come unto you — and was hindered till the present time — that some fruit I might have also among you, even as also among the other nations.
Both to Greeks and to foreigners, both to wise and to thoughtless, I am a debtor,
so, as much as in me is, I am ready also to you who [are] in Rome to proclaim good news,
for I am not ashamed of the good news of the Christ, for it is the power of God to salvation to every one who is believing, both to Jew first, and to Greek.
For the righteousness of God in it is revealed from faith to faith, according as it hath been written, 'And the righteous one by faith shall live,'
for revealed is the wrath of God from heaven upon all impiety and unrighteousness of men, holding down the truth in unrighteousness.
Because that which is known of God is manifest among them, for God did manifest [it] to them,
for the invisible things of Him from the creation of the world, by the things made being understood, are plainly seen, both His eternal power and Godhead — to their being inexcusable;
because, having known God they did not glorify [Him] as God, nor gave thanks, but were made vain in their reasonings, and their unintelligent heart was darkened,
professing to be wise, they were made fools,
and changed the glory of the incorruptible God into the likeness of an image of corruptible man, and of fowls, and of quadrupeds, and of reptiles.
Wherefore also God did give them up, in the desires of their hearts, to uncleanness, to dishonour their bodies among themselves;
who did change the truth of God into a falsehood, and did honour and serve the creature rather than the Creator, who is blessed to the ages. Amen.
Because of this did God give them up to dishonourable affections, for even their females did change the natural use into that against nature;
and in like manner also the males having left the natural use of the female, did burn in their longing toward one another; males with males working shame, and the recompense of their error that was fit, in themselves receiving.
And, according as they did not approve of having God in knowledge, God gave them up to a disapproved mind, to do the things not seemly;
having been filled with all unrighteousness, whoredom, wickedness, covetousness, malice; full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, evil dispositions; whisperers,
evil-speakers, God-haters, insulting, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents,
unintelligent, faithless, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful;
who the righteous judgment of God having known — that those practising such things are worthy of death — not only do them, but also have delight with those practising them.
Therefore, thou art inexcusable, O man — every one who is judging — for in that in which thou dost judge the other, thyself thou dost condemn, for the same things thou dost practise who art judging,
and we have known that the judgment of God is according to truth, upon those practising such things.
And dost thou think this, O man, who art judging those who such things are practising, and art doing them, that thou shalt escape the judgment of God?
or the riches of His goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, dost thou despise? — not knowing that the goodness of God doth lead thee to reformation!
but, according to thy hardness and impenitent heart, thou dost treasure up to thyself wrath, in a day of wrath and of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God,
who shall render to each according to his works;
to those, indeed, who in continuance of a good work, do seek glory, and honour, and incorruptibility — life age-during;
and to those contentious, and disobedient, indeed, to the truth, and obeying the unrighteousness — indignation and wrath,
tribulation and distress, upon every soul of man that is working the evil, both of Jew first, and of Greek;
and glory, and honour, and peace, to every one who is working the good, both to Jew first, and to Greek.
For there is no acceptance of faces with God,
for as many as without law did sin, without law also shall perish, and as many as did sin in law, through law shall be judged,
for not the hearers of the law [are] righteous before God, but the doers of the law shall be declared righteous: —
For, when nations that have not a law, by nature may do the things of the law, these not having a law — to themselves are a law;
who do shew the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also witnessing with them, and between one another the thoughts accusing or else defending,
in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men, according to my good news, through Jesus Christ.
Lo, thou art named a Jew, and dost rest upon the law, and dost boast in God,
and dost know the will, and dost approve the distinctions, being instructed out of the law,
and hast confidence that thou thyself art a leader of blind ones, a light of those in darkness,
an instructor of foolish ones, a teacher of babes, having the form of the knowledge and of the truth in the law.
Thou, then, who art teaching another, thyself dost thou not teach?
thou who art preaching not to steal, dost thou steal? thou who art saying not to commit adultery, dost thou commit adultery? thou who art abhorring the idols, dost thou rob temples?
thou who in the law dost boast, through the transgression of the law God dost thou dishonour?
for the name of God because of you is evil spoken of among the nations, according as it hath been written.
For circumcision, indeed, doth profit, if law thou mayest practise, but if a transgressor of law thou mayest be, thy circumcision hath become uncircumcision.
If, therefore the uncircumcision the righteousness of the law may keep, shall not his uncircumcision for circumcision be reckoned?
and the uncircumcision, by nature, fulfilling the law, shall judge thee who, through letter and circumcision, [art] a transgressor of law.
For he is not a Jew who is [so] outwardly, neither [is] circumcision that which is outward in flesh;
but a Jew [is] he who is [so] inwardly, and circumcision [is] of the heart, in spirit, not in letter, of which the praise is not of men, but of God.
What, then, [is] the superiority of the Jew? or what the profit of the circumcision?
much in every way; for first, indeed, that they were intrusted with the oracles of God;
for what, if certain were faithless? shall their faithlessness the faithfulness of god make useless?
let it not be! and let God become true, and every man false, according as it hath been written, 'That Thou mayest be declared righteous in Thy words, and mayest overcome in Thy being judged.'
And, if our unrighteousness God's righteousness doth establish, what shall we say? is God unrighteous who is inflicting the wrath? (after the manner of a man I speak)
let it not be! since how shall God judge the world?
for if the truth of God in my falsehood did more abound to His glory, why yet am I also as a sinner judged?
and not, as we are evil spoken of, and as certain affirm us to say — 'We may do the evil things, that the good ones may come?' whose judgment is righteous.
What, then? are we better? not at all! for we did before charge both Jews and Greeks with being all under sin,
according as it hath been written — 'There is none righteous, not even one;
There is none who is understanding, there is none who is seeking after God.
All did go out of the way, together they became unprofitable, there is none doing good, there is not even one.
A sepulchre opened [is] their throat; with their tongues they used deceit; poison of asps [is] under their lips.
Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.
Swift [are] their feet to shed blood.
Ruin and misery [are] in their ways.
And a way of peace they did not know.
There is no fear of God before their eyes.'
And we have known that as many things as the law saith, to those in the law it doth speak, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may come under judgment to God;
wherefore by works of law shall no flesh be declared righteous before Him, for through law is a knowledge of sin.
And now apart from law hath the righteousness of God been manifested, testified to by the law and the prophets,
and the righteousness of God [is] through the faith of Jesus Christ to all, and upon all those believing, — for there is no difference,
for all did sin, and are come short of the glory of God —
being declared righteous freely by His grace through the redemption that [is] in Christ Jesus,
whom God did set forth a mercy seat, through the faith in his blood, for the shewing forth of His righteousness, because of the passing over of the bygone sins in the forbearance of God —
for the shewing forth of His righteousness in the present time, for His being righteous, and declaring him righteous who [is] of the faith of Jesus.
Where then [is] the boasting? it was excluded; by what law? of works? no, but by a law of faith:
therefore do we reckon a man to be declared righteous by faith, apart from works of law.
The God of Jews only [is He], and not also of nations?
yes, also of nations; since one [is] God who shall declare righteous the circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision through the faith.
Law then do we make useless through the faith? let it not be! yea, we do establish law.
What, then, shall we say Abraham our father, to have found, according to flesh?
for if Abraham by works was declared righteous, he hath to boast — but not before God;
for what doth the writing say? 'And Abraham did believe God, and it was reckoned to him — to righteousness;'
and to him who is working, the reward is not reckoned of grace, but of debt;
and to him who is not working, and is believing upon Him who is declaring righteous the impious, his faith is reckoned — to righteousness:
even as David also doth speak of the happiness of the man to whom God doth reckon righteousness apart from works:
'Happy they whose lawless acts were forgiven, and whose sins were covered;
happy the man to whom the Lord may not reckon sin.'
[Is] this happiness, then, upon the circumcision, or also upon the uncircumcision — for we say that the faith was reckoned to Abraham — to righteousness?
how then was it reckoned? he being in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision;
and a sign he did receive of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith in the uncircumcision, for his being father of all those believing through uncircumcision, for the righteousness also being reckoned to them,
and father of circumcision to those not of circumcision only, but who also walk in the steps of the faith, that [is] in the uncircumcision of our father Abraham.
For not through law [is] the promise to Abraham, or to his seed, of his being heir of the world, but through the righteousness of faith;
for if they who are of law [are] heirs, the faith hath been made void, and the promise hath been made useless;
for the law doth work wrath; for where law is not, neither [is] transgression.
Because of this [it is] of faith, that [it may be] according to grace, for the promise being sure to all the seed, not to that which [is] of the law only, but also to that which [is] of the faith of Abraham,
who is father of us all (according as it hath been written — 'A father of many nations I have set thee,') before Him whom he did believe — God, who is quickening the dead, and is calling the things that be not as being.
Who, against hope in hope did believe, for his becoming father of many nations according to that spoken: 'So shall thy seed be;'
and not having been weak in the faith, he did not consider his own body, already become dead, (being about a hundred years old,) and the deadness of Sarah's womb,
and at the promise of God did not stagger in unbelief, but was strengthened in faith, having given glory to God,
and having been fully persuaded that what He hath promised He is able also to do:
wherefore also it was reckoned to him to righteousness.
And it was not written on his account alone, that it was reckoned to him,
but also on ours, to whom it is about to be reckoned — to us believing on Him who did raise up Jesus our Lord out of the dead,
who was delivered up because of our offences, and was raised up because of our being declared righteous.
Having been declared righteous, then, by faith, we have peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
through whom also we have the access by the faith into this grace in which we have stood, and we boast on the hope of the glory of God.
And not only [so], but we also boast in the tribulations, knowing that the tribulation doth work endurance;
and the endurance, experience; and the experience, hope;
and the hope doth not make ashamed, because the love of God hath been poured forth in our hearts through the Holy Spirit that hath been given to us.
For in our being still ailing, Christ in due time did die for the impious;
for scarcely for a righteous man will any one die, for for the good man perhaps some one also doth dare to die;
and God doth commend His own love to us, that, in our being still sinners, Christ did die for us;
much more, then, having been declared righteous now in his blood, we shall be saved through him from the wrath;
for if, being enemies, we have been reconciled to God through the death of His Son, much more, having been reconciled, we shall be saved in his life.
And not only [so], but we are also boasting in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom now we did receive the reconciliation;
because of this, even as through one man the sin did enter into the world, and through the sin the death; and thus to all men the death did pass through, for that all did sin;
for till law sin was in the world: and sin is not reckoned when there is not law;
but the death did reign from Adam till Moses, even upon those not having sinned in the likeness of Adam's transgression, who is a type of him who is coming.
But, not as the offence so also [is] the free gift; for if by the offence of the one the many did die, much more did the grace of God, and the free gift in grace of the one man Jesus Christ, abound to the many;
and not as through one who did sin [is] the free gift, for the judgment indeed [is] of one to condemnation, but the gift [is] of many offences to a declaration of 'Righteous,'
for if by the offence of the one the death did reign through the one, much more those, who the abundance of the grace and of the free gift of the righteousness are receiving, in life shall reign through the one — Jesus Christ.
So, then, as through one offence to all men [it is] to condemnation, so also through one declaration of 'Righteous' [it is] to all men to justification of life;
for as through the disobedience of the one man, the many were constituted sinners: so also through the obedience of the one, shall the many be constituted righteous.
And law came in, that the offence might abound, and where the sin did abound, the grace did overabound,
that even as the sin did reign in the death, so also the grace may reign, through righteousness, to life age-during, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
What, then, shall we say? shall we continue in the sin that the grace may abound?
let it not be! we who died to the sin — how shall we still live in it?
are ye ignorant that we, as many as were baptized to Christ Jesus, to his death were baptized?
we were buried together, then, with him through the baptism to the death, that even as Christ was raised up out of the dead through the glory of the Father, so also we in newness of life might walk.
For, if we have become planted together to the likeness of his death, [so] also we shall be of the rising again;
this knowing, that our old man was crucified with [him], that the body of the sin may be made useless, for our no longer serving the sin;
for he who hath died hath been set free from the sin.
And if we died with Christ, we believe that we also shall live with him,
knowing that Christ, having been raised up out of the dead, doth no more die, death over him hath no more lordship;
for in that he died, to the sin he died once, and in that he liveth, he liveth to God;
so also ye, reckon yourselves to be dead indeed to the sin, and living to God in Jesus Christ our Lord.
Let not then the sin reign in your mortal body, to obey it in its desires;
neither present ye your members instruments of unrighteousness to the sin, but present yourselves to God as living out of the dead, and your members instruments of righteousness to God;
for sin over you shall not have lordship, for ye are not under law, but under grace.
What then? shall we sin because we are not under law but under grace? let it not be!
have ye not known that to whom ye present yourselves servants for obedience, servants ye are to him to whom ye obey, whether of sin to death, or of obedience to righteousness?
and thanks to God, that ye were servants of the sin, and — were obedient from the heart to the form of teaching to which ye were delivered up;
and having been freed from the sin, ye became servants to the righteousness.
In the manner of men I speak, because of the weakness of your flesh, for even as ye did present your members servants to the uncleanness and to the lawlessness — to the lawlessness, so now present your members servants to the righteousness — to sanctification,
for when ye were servants of the sin, ye were free from the righteousness,
what fruit, therefore, were ye having then, in the things of which ye are now ashamed? for the end of those [is] death.
And now, having been freed from the sin, and having become servants to God, ye have your fruit — to sanctification, and the end life age-during;
for the wages of the sin [is] death, and the gift of God [is] life age-during in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Are ye ignorant, brethren — for to those knowing law I speak — that the law hath lordship over the man as long as he liveth?
for the married woman to the living husband hath been bound by law, and if the husband may die, she hath been free from the law of the husband;
so, then, the husband being alive, an adulteress she shall be called if she may become another man's; and if the husband may die, she is free from the law, so as not to be an adulteress, having become another man's.
So that, my brethren, ye also were made dead to the law through the body of the Christ, for your becoming another's, who out of the dead was raised up, that we might bear fruit to God;
for when we were in the flesh, the passions of the sins, that [are] through the law, were working in our members, to bear fruit to the death;
and now we have ceased from the law, that being dead in which we were held, so that we may serve in newness of spirit, and not in oldness of letter.
What, then, shall we say? the law [is] sin? let it not be! but the sin I did not know except through law, for also the covetousness I had not known if the law had not said:
'Thou shalt not covet;' and the sin having received an opportunity, through the command, did work in me all covetousness — for apart from law sin is dead.
And I was alive apart from law once, and the command having come, the sin revived, and I died;
and the command that [is] for life, this was found by me for death;
for the sin, having received an opportunity, through the command, did deceive me, and through it did slay [me];
so that the law, indeed, [is] holy, and the command holy, and righteous, and good.
That which is good then, to me hath it become death? let it not be! but the sin, that it might appear sin, through the good, working death to me, that the sin might become exceeding sinful through the command,
for we have known that the law is spiritual, and I am fleshly, sold by the sin;
for that which I work, I do not acknowledge; for not what I will, this I practise, but what I hate, this I do.
And if what I do not will, this I do, I consent to the law that [it is] good,
and now it is no longer I that work it, but the sin dwelling in me,
for I have known that there doth not dwell in me, that is, in my flesh, good: for to will is present with me, and to work that which is right I do not find,
for the good that I will, I do not; but the evil that I do not will, this I practise.
And if what I do not will, this I do, it is no longer I that work it, but the sin that is dwelling in me.
I find, then, the law, that when I desire to do what is right, with me the evil is present,
for I delight in the law of God according to the inward man,
and I behold another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of the sin that [is] in my members.
A wretched man I [am]! who shall deliver me out of the body of this death?
I thank God — through Jesus Christ our Lord; so then, I myself indeed with the mind do serve the law of God, and with the flesh, the law of sin.
There is, then, now no condemnation to those in Christ Jesus, who walk not according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit;
for the law of the Spirit of the life in Christ Jesus did set me free from the law of the sin and of the death;
for what the law was not able to do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God, His own Son having sent in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, did condemn the sin in the flesh,
that the righteousness of the law may be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit.
For those who are according to the flesh, the things of the flesh do mind; and those according to the Spirit, the things of the Spirit;
for the mind of the flesh [is] death, and the mind of the Spirit — life and peace;
because the mind of the flesh [is] enmity to God, for to the law of God it doth not subject itself,
for neither is it able; and those who are in the flesh are not able to please God.
And ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if indeed the Spirit of God doth dwell in you; and if any one hath not the Spirit of Christ — this one is not His;
and if Christ [is] in you, the body, indeed, [is] dead because of sin, and the Spirit [is] life because of righteousness,
and if the Spirit of Him who did raise up Jesus out of the dead doth dwell in you, He who did raise up the Christ out of the dead shall quicken also your dying bodies, through His Spirit dwelling in you.
So, then, brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live according to the flesh;
for if according to the flesh ye do live, ye are about to die; and if, by the Spirit, the deeds of the body ye put to death, ye shall live;
for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are the sons of God;
for ye did not receive a spirit of bondage again for fear, but ye did receive a spirit of adoption in which we cry, 'Abba — Father.'
The Spirit himself doth testify with our spirit, that we are children of God;
and if children, also heirs, heirs, indeed, of God, and heirs together of Christ — if, indeed, we suffer together, that we may also be glorified together.
For I reckon that the sufferings of the present time [are] not worthy [to be compared] with the glory about to be revealed in us;
for the earnest looking out of the creation doth expect the revelation of the sons of God;
for to vanity was the creation made subject — not of its will, but because of Him who did subject [it] — in hope,
that also the creation itself shall be set free from the servitude of the corruption to the liberty of the glory of the children of God;
for we have known that all the creation doth groan together, and doth travail in pain together till now.
And not only [so], but also we ourselves, having the first-fruit of the Spirit, we also ourselves in ourselves do groan, adoption expecting — the redemption of our body;
for in hope we were saved, and hope beheld is not hope; for what any one doth behold, why also doth he hope for [it]?
and if what we do not behold we hope for, through continuance we expect [it].
And, in like manner also, the Spirit doth help our weaknesses; for, what we may pray for, as it behoveth [us], we have not known, but the Spirit himself doth make intercession for us with groanings unutterable,
and He who is searching the hearts hath known what [is] the mind of the Spirit, because according to God he doth intercede for saints.
And we have known that to those loving God all things do work together for good, to those who are called according to purpose;
because whom He did foreknow, He also did fore-appoint, conformed to the image of His Son, that he might be first-born among many brethren;
and whom He did fore-appoint, these also He did call; and whom He did call, these also He declared righteous; and whom He declared righteous, these also He did glorify.
What, then, shall we say unto these things? if God [is] for us, who [is] against us?
He who indeed His own Son did not spare, but for us all did deliver him up, how shall He not also with him the all things grant to us?
Who shall lay a charge against the choice ones of God? God [is] He that is declaring righteous,
who [is] he that is condemning? Christ [is] He that died, yea, rather also, was raised up; who is also on the right hand of God — who also doth intercede for us.
Who shall separate us from the love of the Christ? tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?
(according as it hath been written — 'For Thy sake we are put to death all the day long, we were reckoned as sheep of slaughter,')
but in all these we more than conquer, through him who loved us;
for I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor messengers, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present,
nor things about to be, nor height, nor depth, nor any other created thing, shall be able to separate us from the love of god, that [is] in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Truth I say in Christ, I lie not, my conscience bearing testimony with me in the Holy Spirit,
that I have great grief and unceasing pain in my heart —
for I was wishing, I myself, to be anathema from the Christ — for my brethren, my kindred, according to the flesh,
who are Israelites, whose [is] the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the lawgiving, and the service, and the promises,
whose [are] the fathers, and of whom [is] the Christ, according to the flesh, who is over all, God blessed to the ages. Amen.
And it is not possible that the word of God hath failed; for not all who [are] of Israel are these Israel;
nor because they are seed of Abraham [are] all children, but — 'in Isaac shall a seed be called to thee;'
that is, the children of the flesh — these [are] not children of God; but the children of the promise are reckoned for seed;
for the word of promise [is] this; 'According to this time I will come, and there shall be to Sarah a son.'
And not only [so], but also Rebecca, having conceived by one — Isaac our father —
(for they being not yet born, neither having done anything good or evil, that the purpose of God, according to choice, might remain; not of works, but of Him who is calling,) it was said to her —
'The greater shall serve the less;'
according as it hath been written, 'Jacob I did love, and Esau I did hate.'
What, then, shall we say? unrighteousness [is] with God? let it not be!
for to Moses He saith, 'I will do kindness to whom I do kindness, and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion;'
so, then — not of him who is willing, nor of him who is running, but of God who is doing kindness:
for the Writing saith to Pharaoh — 'For this very thing I did raise thee up, that I might shew in thee My power, and that My name might be declared in all the land;'
so, then, to whom He willeth, He doth kindness, and to whom He willeth, He doth harden.
Thou wilt say, then, to me, 'Why yet doth He find fault? for His counsel who hath resisted?'
nay, but, O man, who art thou that art answering again to God? shall the thing formed say to Him who did form [it], Why me didst thou make thus?
hath not the potter authority over the clay, out of the same lump to make the one vessel to honour, and the one to dishonour?
And if God, willing to shew the wrath and to make known His power, did endure, in much long suffering, vessels of wrath fitted for destruction,
and that He might make known the riches of His glory on vessels of kindness, that He before prepared for glory, whom also He did call — us —
not only out of Jews, but also out of nations,
as also in Hosea He saith, 'I will call what [is] not My people — My people; and her not beloved — Beloved,
and it shall be — in the place where it was said to them, Ye [are] not My people; there they shall be called sons of the living God.'
And Isaiah doth cry concerning Israel, 'If the number of the sons of Israel may be as the sand of the sea, the remnant shall be saved;
for a matter He is finishing, and is cutting short in righteousness, because a matter cut short will the Lord do upon the land.
and according as Isaiah saith before, 'Except the Lord of Sabaoth did leave to us a seed, as Sodom we had become, and as Gomorrah we had been made like.'
What, then, shall we say? that nations who are not pursuing righteousness did attain to righteousness, and righteousness that [is] of faith,
and Israel, pursuing a law of righteousness, at a law of righteousness did not arrive;
wherefore? because — not by faith, but as by works of law; for they did stumble at the stone of stumbling,
according as it hath been written, 'Lo, I place in Sion a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence; and every one who is believing thereon shall not be ashamed.'
Brethren, the pleasure indeed of my heart, and my supplication that [is] to God for Israel, is — for salvation;
for I bear them testimony that they have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge,
for not knowing the righteousness of God, and their own righteousness seeking to establish, to the righteousness of God they did not submit.
For Christ is an end of law for righteousness to every one who is believing,
for Moses doth describe the righteousness that [is] of the law, that, 'The man who did them shall live in them,'
and the righteousness of faith doth thus speak: 'Thou mayest not say in thine heart, Who shall go up to the heaven,' that is, Christ to bring down?
or, 'Who shall go down to the abyss,' that is, Christ out of the dead to bring up.
But what doth it say? 'Nigh thee is the saying — in thy mouth, and in thy heart:' that is, the saying of the faith, that we preach;
that if thou mayest confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and mayest believe in thy heart that God did raise him out of the dead, thou shalt be saved,
for with the heart doth [one] believe to righteousness, and with the mouth is confession made to salvation;
for the Writing saith, 'Every one who is believing on him shall not be ashamed,'
for there is no difference between Jew and Greek, for the same Lord of all [is] rich to all those calling upon Him,
for every one — whoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, he shall be saved.'
How then shall they call upon [him] in whom they did not believe? and how shall they believe [on him] of whom they did not hear? and how shall they hear apart from one preaching?
and how shall they preach, if they may not be sent? according as it hath been written, 'How beautiful the feet of those proclaiming good tidings of peace, of those proclaiming good tidings of the good things!'
But they were not all obedient to the good tidings, for Isaiah saith, 'Lord, who did give credence to our report?'
so then the faith [is] by a report, and the report through a saying of God,
but I say, Did they not hear? yes, indeed — 'to all the earth their voice went forth, and to the ends of the habitable world their sayings.'
But I say, Did not Israel know? first Moses saith, 'I will provoke you to jealousy by [that which is] not a nation; by an unintelligent nation I will anger you,'
and Isaiah is very bold, and saith, 'I was found by those not seeking Me; I became manifest to those not inquiring after Me;'
and unto Israel He saith, 'All the day I did stretch out My hands unto a people unbelieving and gainsaying.'
I say, then, Did God cast away His people? let it not be! for I also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin:
God did not cast away His people whom He knew before; have ye not known — in Elijah — what the Writing saith? how he doth plead with God concerning Israel, saying,
'Lord, Thy prophets they did kill, and Thy altars they dug down, and I was left alone, and they seek my life;'
but what saith the divine answer to him? 'I left to Myself seven thousand men, who did not bow a knee to Baal.'
So then also in the present time a remnant according to the choice of grace there hath been;
and if by grace, no more of works, otherwise the grace becometh no more grace; and if of works, it is no more grace, otherwise the work is no more work.
What then? What Israel doth seek after, this it did not obtain, and the chosen did obtain, and the rest were hardened,
according as it hath been written, 'God gave to them a spirit of deep sleep, eyes not to see, and ears not to hear,' — unto this very day,
and David saith, 'Let their table become for a snare, and for a trap, and for a stumbling-block, and for a recompense to them;
let their eyes be darkened — not to behold, and their back do Thou always bow down.'
I say, then, Did they stumble that they might fall? let it not be! but by their fall the salvation [is] to the nations, to arouse them to jealousy;
and if the fall of them [is] the riches of a world, and the diminution of them the riches of nations, how much more the fulness of them?
For to you I speak — to the nations — inasmuch as I am indeed an apostle of nations, my ministration I do glorify;
if by any means I shall arouse to jealousy mine own flesh, and shall save some of them,
for if the casting away of them [is] a reconciliation of the world, what the reception — if not life out of the dead?
and if the first-fruit [is] holy, the lump also; and if the root [is] holy, the branches also.
And if certain of the branches were broken off, and thou, being a wild olive tree, wast graffed in among them, and a fellow-partaker of the root and of the fatness of the olive tree didst become —
do not boast against the branches; and if thou dost boast, thou dost not bear the root, but the root thee!
Thou wilt say, then, 'The branches were broken off, that I might be graffed in;' right!
by unbelief they were broken off, and thou hast stood by faith; be not high-minded, but be fearing;
for if God the natural branches did not spare — lest perhaps He also shall not spare thee.
Lo, then, goodness and severity of God — upon those indeed who fell, severity; and upon thee, goodness, if thou mayest remain in the goodness, otherwise, thou also shalt be cut off.
And those also, if they may not remain in unbelief, shall be graffed in, for God is able again to graff them in;
for if thou, out of the olive tree, wild by nature, wast cut out, and, contrary to nature, wast graffed into a good olive tree, how much rather shall they, who [are] according to nature, be graffed into their own olive tree?
For I do not wish you to be ignorant, brethren, of this secret — that ye may not be wise in your own conceits — that hardness in part to Israel hath happened till the fulness of the nations may come in;
and so all Israel shall be saved, according as it hath been written, 'There shall come forth out of Sion he who is delivering, and he shall turn away impiety from Jacob,
and this to them [is] the covenant from Me, when I may take away their sins.'
As regards, indeed, the good tidings, [they are] enemies on your account; and as regards the choice — beloved on account of the fathers;
for unrepented of [are] the gifts and the calling of God;
for as ye also once did not believe in God, and now did find kindness by the unbelief of these:
so also these now did not believe, that in your kindness they also may find kindness;
for God did shut up together the whole to unbelief, that to the whole He might do kindness.
O depth of riches, and wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable His judgments, and untraceable His ways!
for who did know the mind of the Lord? or who did become His counsellor?
or who did first give to Him, and it shall be given back to him again?
because of Him, and through Him, and to Him [are] the all things; to Him [is] the glory — to the ages. Amen.
I call upon you, therefore, brethren, through the compassions of God, to present your bodies a sacrifice — living, sanctified, acceptable to God — your intelligent service;
and be not conformed to this age, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, for your proving what [is] the will of God — the good, and acceptable, and perfect.
For I say, through the grace that was given to me, to every one who is among you, not to think above what it behoveth to think; but to think so as to think wisely, as to each God did deal a measure of faith,
for as in one body we have many members, and all the members have not the same office,
so we, the many, one body are in Christ, and members each one of one another.
And having gifts, different according to the grace that was given to us; whether prophecy — 'According to the proportion of faith!'
or ministration — 'In the ministration!' or he who is teaching — 'In the teaching!'
or he who is exhorting — 'In the exhortation!' he who is sharing — 'In simplicity!' he who is leading — 'In diligence?' he who is doing kindness — 'In cheerfulness.'
The love unfeigned: abhorring the evil; cleaving to the good;
in the love of brethren, to one another kindly affectioned: in the honour going before one another;
in the diligence not slothful; in the spirit fervent; the Lord serving;
in the hope rejoicing; in the tribulation enduring; in the prayer persevering;
to the necessities of the saints communicating; the hospitality pursuing.
Bless those persecuting you; bless, and curse not;
to rejoice with the rejoicing, and to weep with the weeping,
of the same mind one toward another, not minding the high things, but with the lowly going along; become not wise in your own conceit;
giving back to no one evil for evil; providing right things before all men.
If possible — so far as in you — with all men being in peace;
not avenging yourselves, beloved, but give place to the wrath, for it hath been written, 'Vengeance [is] Mine,
I will recompense again, saith the Lord;' if, then, thine enemy doth hunger, feed him; if he doth thirst, give him drink; for this doing, coals of fire thou shalt heap upon his head;
Be not overcome by the evil, but overcome, in the good, the evil.
Let every soul to the higher authorities be subject, for there is no authority except from God, and the authorities existing are appointed by God,
so that he who is setting himself against the authority, against God's ordinance hath resisted; and those resisting, to themselves shall receive judgment.
For those ruling are not a terror to the good works, but to the evil; and dost thou wish not to be afraid of the authority? that which is good be doing, and thou shalt have praise from it,
for of God it is a ministrant to thee for good; and if that which is evil thou mayest do, be fearing, for not in vain doth it bear the sword; for of God it is a ministrant, an avenger for wrath to him who is doing that which is evil.
Wherefore it is necessary to be subject, not only because of the wrath, but also because of the conscience,
for because of this also pay ye tribute; for servants of God they are, on this very thing attending continually;
render, therefore, to all [their] dues; to whom tribute, the tribute; to whom custom, the custom; to whom fear, the fear; to whom honour, the honour.
To no one owe anything, except to love one another; for he who is loving the other — law he hath fulfilled,
for, 'Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt do no murder, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false testimony, Thou shalt not covet;' and if there is any other command, in this word it is summed up, in this: 'Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself;'
the love to the neighbour doth work no ill; the love, therefore, [is] the fulness of law.
And this, knowing the time, that for us, the hour already [is] to be aroused out of sleep, for now nearer [is] our salvation than when we did believe;
the night did advance, and the day came nigh; let us lay aside, therefore, the works of the darkness, and let us put on the armour of the light;
as in day-time, let us walk becomingly; not in revellings and drunkennesses, not in chamberings and lasciviousnesses, not in strife and emulation;
but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and for the flesh take no forethought — for desires.
And him who is weak in the faith receive ye — not to determinations of reasonings;
one doth believe that he may eat all things — and he who is weak doth eat herbs;
let not him who is eating despise him who is not eating: and let not him who is not eating judge him who is eating, for God did receive him.
Thou — who art thou that art judging another's domestic? to his own master he doth stand or fall; and he shall be made to stand, for God is able to make him stand.
One doth judge one day above another, and another doth judge every day [alike]; let each in his own mind be fully assured.
He who is regarding the day, to the Lord he doth regard [it], and he who is not regarding the day, to the Lord he doth not regard [it]. He who is eating, to the Lord he doth eat, for he doth give thanks to God; and he who is not eating, to the Lord he doth not eat, and doth give thanks to God.
For none of us to himself doth live, and none to himself doth die;
for both, if we may live, to the Lord we live; if also we may die, to the Lord we die; both then if we may live, also if we may die, we are the Lord's;
for because of this Christ both died and rose again, and lived again, that both of dead and of living he may be Lord.
And thou, why dost thou judge thy brother? or again, thou, why dost thou set at nought thy brother? for we shall all stand at the tribunal of the Christ;
for it hath been written, 'I live! saith the Lord — to Me bow shall every knee, and every tongue shall confess to God;'
so, then, each of us concerning himself shall give reckoning to God;
no longer, therefore, may we judge one another, but this judge ye rather, not to put a stumbling-stone before the brother, or an offence.
I have known, and am persuaded, in the Lord Jesus, that nothing [is] unclean of itself, except to him who is reckoning anything to be unclean — to that one [it is] unclean;
and if through victuals thy brother is grieved, no more dost thou walk according to love; do not with thy victuals destroy that one for whom Christ died.
Let not, then, your good be evil spoken of,
for the reign of God is not eating and drinking, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit;
for he who in these things is serving the Christ, [is] acceptable to God and approved of men.
So, then, the things of peace may we pursue, and the things of building up one another;
for the sake of victuals cast not down the work of God; all things, indeed, [are] pure, but evil [is] to the man who is eating through stumbling.
Right [it is] not to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor to [do anything] in which thy brother doth stumble, or is made to fall, or is weak.
Thou hast faith! to thyself have [it] before God; happy is he who is not judging himself in what he doth approve,
and he who is making a difference, if he may eat, hath been condemned, because [it is] not of faith; and all that [is] not of faith is sin.
And we ought — we who are strong — to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves;
for let each one of us please the neighbour for good, unto edification,
for even the Christ did not please himself, but, according as it hath been written, 'The reproaches of those reproaching Thee fell upon me;'
for, as many things as were written before, for our instruction were written before, that through the endurance, and the exhortation of the Writings, we might have the hope.
And may the God of the endurance, and of the exhortation, give to you to have the same mind toward one another, according to Christ Jesus;
that with one accord — with one mouth — ye may glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ;
wherefore receive ye one another, according as also the Christ did receive us, to the glory of God.
And I say Jesus Christ to have become a ministrant of circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promises to the fathers,
and the nations for kindness to glorify God, according as it hath been written, 'Because of this I will confess to Thee among nations, and to Thy name I will sing praise,'
and again it saith, 'Rejoice ye nations, with His people;'
and again, 'Praise the Lord, all ye nations; and laud Him, all ye peoples;'
and again, Isaiah saith, 'There shall be the root of Jesse, and he who is rising to rule nations — upon him shall nations hope;'
and the God of the hope shall fill you with all joy and peace in the believing, for your abounding in the hope in power of the Holy Spirit.
And I am persuaded, my brethren — I myself also — concerning you, that ye yourselves also are full of goodness, having been filled with all knowledge, able also one another to admonish;
and the more boldly I did write to you, brethren, in part, as putting you in mind, because of the grace that is given to me by God,
for my being a servant of Jesus Christ to the nations, acting as priest in the good news of God, that the offering up of the nations may become acceptable, sanctified by the Holy Spirit.
I have, then, a boasting in Christ Jesus, in the things pertaining to God,
for I will not dare to speak anything of the things that Christ did not work through me, to obedience of nations, by word and deed,
in power of signs and wonders, in power of the Spirit of God; so that I, from Jerusalem, and in a circle as far as Illyricum, have fully preached the good news of the Christ;
and so counting it honour to proclaim good news, not where Christ was named — that upon another's foundation I might not build —
but according as it hath been written, 'To whom it was not told concerning him, they shall see; and they who have not heard, shall understand.'
Wherefore, also, I was hindered many times from coming unto you,
and now, no longer having place in these parts, and having a longing to come unto you for many years,
when I may go on to Spain I will come unto you, for I hope in going through, to see you, and by you to be set forward thither, if of you first, in part, I shall be filled.
And, now, I go on to Jerusalem, ministering to the saints;
for it pleased Macedonia and Achaia well to make a certain contribution for the poor of the saints who [are] in Jerusalem;
for it pleased well, and their debtors they are, for if in their spiritual things the nations did participate, they ought also, in the fleshly things, to minister to them.
This, then, having finished, and having sealed to them this fruit, I will return through you, to Spain;
and I have known that coming unto you — in the fulness of the blessing of the good news of Christ I shall come.
And I call upon you, brethren, through our Lord Jesus Christ, and through the love of the Spirit, to strive together with me in the prayers for me unto God,
that I may be delivered from those not believing in Judea, and that my ministration, that [is] for Jerusalem, may become acceptable to the saints;
that in joy I may come unto you, through the will of God, and may be refreshed with you,
and the God of the peace [be] with you all. Amen.
And I commend you to Phebe our sister — being a ministrant of the assembly that [is] in Cenchrea —
that ye may receive her in the Lord, as doth become saints, and may assist her in whatever matter she may have need of you — for she also became a leader of many, and of myself.
Salute Priscilla and Aquilas, my fellow-workmen in Christ Jesus —
who for my life their own neck did lay down, to whom not only I give thanks, but also all the assemblies of the nations —
and the assembly at their house; salute Epaenetus, my beloved, who is first-fruit of Achaia to Christ.
Salute Mary, who did labour much for us;
salute Andronicus and Junias, my kindred, and my fellow-captives, who are of note among the apostles, who also have been in Christ before me.
Salute Amplias, my beloved in the Lord;
salute Arbanus, our fellow-workman in Christ, and Stachys, my beloved;
salute Apelles, the approved in Christ; salute those of the [household] of Aristobulus;
salute Herodion, my kinsman; salute those of the [household] of Narcissus, who are in the Lord;
salute Tryphaena, and Tryphosa, who are labouring in the Lord; salute Persis, the beloved, who did labour much in the Lord.
Salute Rufus, the choice one in the Lord, and his mother and mine,
salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren with them;
salute Philologus, and Julias, Nereus, and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints with them;
salute one another in a holy kiss; the assemblies of Christ do salute you.
And I call upon you, brethren, to mark those who the divisions and the stumbling-blocks, contrary to the teaching that ye did learn, are causing, and turn ye away from them;
for such our Lord Jesus Christ do not serve, but their own belly; and through the good word and fair speech they deceive the hearts of the harmless,
for your obedience did reach to all; I rejoice, therefore, as regards you, and I wish you to be wise, indeed, as to the good, and harmless as to the evil;
and the God of the peace shall bruise the Adversary under your feet quickly; the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ [be] with you. Amen!
Salute you do Timotheus, my fellow-workman, and Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater, my kindred;
I Tertius salute you (who wrote the letter) in the Lord;
salute you doth Gaius, my host, and of the whole assembly; salute you doth Erastus, the steward of the city, and Quartus the brother,
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ [be] with you all. Amen.
And to Him who is able to establish you, according to my good news, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the secret, in the times of the ages having been kept silent,
and now having been made manifest, also, through prophetic writings, according to a command of the age-during God, having been made known to all the nations for obedience of faith —
to the only wise God, through Jesus Christ, to him [be] glory to the ages. Amen.
Paul, a called apostle of Jesus Christ, through the will of God, and Sosthenes the brother,
to the assembly of God that is in Corinth, to those sanctified in Christ Jesus, called saints, with all those calling upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place — both theirs and ours:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ!
I give thanks to my God always concerning you for the grace of God that was given to you in Christ Jesus,
that in every thing ye were enriched in him, in all discourse and all knowledge,
according as the testimony of the Christ was confirmed in you,
so that ye are not behind in any gift, waiting for the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who also shall confirm you unto the end — unblamable in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ;
faithful [is] God, through whom ye were called to the fellowship of His Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
And I call upon you, brethren, through the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that the same thing ye may all say, and there may not be divisions among you, and ye may be perfected in the same mind, and in the same judgment,
for it was signified to me concerning you, my brethren, by those of Chloe, that contentions are among you;
and I say this, that each one of you saith, 'I, indeed, am of Paul' — 'and I of Apollos,' — 'and I of Cephas,' — 'and I of Christ.'
Hath the Christ been divided? was Paul crucified for you? or to the name of Paul were ye baptized;
I give thanks to God that no one of you did I baptize, except Crispus and Gaius —
that no one may say that to my own name I did baptize;
and I did baptize also Stephanas' household — further, I have not known if I did baptize any other.
For Christ did not send me to baptize, but — to proclaim good news; not in wisdom of discourse, that the cross of the Christ may not be made of none effect;
for the word of the cross to those indeed perishing is foolishness, and to us — those being saved — it is the power of God,
for it hath been written, 'I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and the intelligence of the intelligent I will bring to nought;'
where [is] the wise? where the scribe? where a disputer of this age? did not God make foolish the wisdom of this world?
for, seeing in the wisdom of God the world through the wisdom knew not God, it did please God through the foolishness of the preaching to save those believing.
Since also Jews ask a sign, and Greeks seek wisdom,
also we — we preach Christ crucified, to Jews, indeed, a stumbling-block, and to Greeks foolishness,
and to those called — both Jews and Greeks — Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God,
because the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men;
for see your calling, brethren, that not many [are] wise according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble;
but the foolish things of the world did God choose, that the wise He may put to shame; and the weak things of the world did God choose that He may put to shame the strong;
and the base things of the world, and the things despised did God choose, and the things that are not, that the things that are He may make useless —
that no flesh may glory before Him;
and of Him ye — ye are in Christ Jesus, who became to us from God wisdom, righteousness also, and sanctification, and redemption,
that, according as it hath been written, 'He who is glorying — in the Lord let him glory.'
And I, having come unto you, brethren, came — not in superiority of discourse or wisdom — declaring to you the testimony of God,
for I decided not to know any thing among you, except Jesus Christ, and him crucified;
and I, in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling, was with you;
and my word and my preaching was not in persuasive words of human wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power —
that your faith may not be in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.
And wisdom we speak among the perfect, and wisdom not of this age, nor of the rulers of this age — of those becoming useless,
but we speak the hidden wisdom of God in a secret, that God foreordained before the ages to our glory,
which no one of the rulers of this age did know, for if they had known, the Lord of the glory they would not have crucified;
but, according as it hath been written, 'What eye did not see, and ear did not hear, and upon the heart of man came not up, what God did prepare for those loving Him — '
but to us did God reveal [them] through His Spirit, for the Spirit all things doth search, even the depths of God,
for who of men hath known the things of the man, except the spirit of the man that [is] in him? so also the things of God no one hath known, except the Spirit of God.
And we the spirit of the world did not receive, but the Spirit that [is] of God, that we may know the things conferred by God on us,
which things also we speak, not in words taught by human wisdom, but in those taught by the Holy Spirit, with spiritual things spiritual things comparing,
and the natural man doth not receive the things of the Spirit of God, for to him they are foolishness, and he is not able to know [them], because spiritually they are discerned;
and he who is spiritual, doth discern indeed all things, and he himself is by no one discerned;
for who did know the mind of the Lord that he shall instruct Him? and we — we have the mind of Christ.
And I, brethren, was not able to speak to you as to spiritual, but as to fleshly — as to babes in Christ;
with milk I fed you, and not with meat, for ye were not yet able, but not even yet are ye now able,
for yet ye are fleshly, for where [there is] among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not fleshly, and in the manner of men do walk?
for when one may say, 'I, indeed, am of Paul;' and another, 'I — of Apollos;' are ye not fleshly?
Who, then, is Paul, and who Apollos, but ministrants through whom ye did believe, and to each as the Lord gave?
I planted, Apollos watered, but God was giving growth;
so that neither is he who is planting anything, nor he who is watering, but He who is giving growth — God;
and he who is planting and he who is watering are one, and each his own reward shall receive, according to his own labour,
for of God we are fellow-workmen; God's tillage, God's building ye are.
According to the grace of God that was given to me, as a wise master-builder, a foundation I have laid, and another doth build on [it],
for other foundation no one is able to lay except that which is laid, which is Jesus the Christ;
and if any one doth build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, straw —
of each the work shall become manifest, for the day shall declare [it], because in fire it is revealed, and the work of each, what kind it is, the fire shall prove;
if of any one the work doth remain that he built on [it], a wage he shall receive;
if of any the work is burned up, he shall suffer loss; and himself shall be saved, but so as through fire.
have ye not known that ye are a sanctuary of God, and the Spirit of God doth dwell in you?
if any one the sanctuary of God doth waste, him shall God waste; for the sanctuary of God is holy, the which ye are.
Let no one deceive himself; if any one doth seem to be wise among you in this age — let him become a fool, that he may become wise,
for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, for it hath been written, 'Who is taking the wise in their craftiness;'
and again, 'The Lord doth know the reasonings of the wise, that they are vain.'
So then, let no one glory in men, for all things are yours,
whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things about to be — all are yours,
and ye [are] Christ's, and Christ [is] God's.
Let a man so reckon us as officers of Christ, and stewards of the secrets of God,
and as to the rest, it is required in the stewards that one may be found faithful,
and to me it is for a very little thing that by you I may be judged, or by man's day, but not even myself do I judge,
for of nothing to myself have I been conscious, but not in this have I been declared right — and he who is discerning me is the Lord:
so, then, nothing before the time judge ye, till the Lord may come, who will both bring to light the hidden things of the darkness, and will manifest the counsels of the hearts, and then the praise shall come to each from God.
And these things, brethren, I did transfer to myself and to Apollos because of you, that in us ye may learn not to think above that which hath been written, that ye may not be puffed up one for one against the other,
for who doth make thee to differ? and what hast thou, that thou didst not receive? and if thou didst also receive, why dost thou glory as not having received?
Already ye are having been filled, already ye were rich, apart from us ye did reign, and I would also ye did reign, that we also with you may reign together,
for I think that God did set forth us the apostles last — as appointed to death, because a spectacle we became to the world, and messengers, and men;
we [are] fools because of Christ, and ye wise in Christ; we [are] ailing, and ye strong; ye glorious, and we dishonoured;
unto the present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and wander about,
and labour, working with [our] own hands; being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer;
being spoken evil of, we entreat; as filth of the world we did become — of all things an offscouring — till now.
Not [as] putting you to shame do I write these things, but as my beloved children I do admonish,
for if a myriad of child-conductors ye may have in Christ, yet not many fathers; for in Christ Jesus, through the good news, I — I did beget you;
I call upon you, therefore, become ye followers of me;
because of this I sent to you Timotheus, who is my child, beloved and faithful in the Lord, who shall remind you of my ways in Christ, according as everywhere in every assembly I teach.
And as if I were not coming unto you certain were puffed up;
but I will come quickly unto you, if the Lord may will, and I will know not the word of those puffed up, but the power;
for not in word is the reign of God, but in power?
what do ye wish? with a rod shall I come unto you, or in love, with a spirit also of meekness?
Whoredom is actually heard of among you, and such whoredom as is not even named among the nations — as that one hath the wife of the father! —
and ye are having been puffed up, and did not rather mourn, that he may be removed out of the midst of you who did this work,
for I indeed, as being absent as to the body, and present as to the spirit, have already judged, as being present, him who so wrought this thing:
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ — ye being gathered together, also my spirit — with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to deliver up such a one to the Adversary for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.
Not good [is] your glorying; have ye not known that a little leaven the whole lump doth leaven?
cleanse out, therefore, the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, according as ye are unleavened, for also our passover for us was sacrificed — Christ,
so that we may keep the feast, not with old leaven, nor with the leaven of evil and wickedness, but with unleavened food of sincerity and truth.
I did write to you in the epistle, not to keep company with whoremongers —
and not certainly with the whoremongers of this world, or with the covetous, or extortioners, or idolaters, seeing ye ought then to go forth out of the world —
and now, I did write to you not to keep company with [him], if any one, being named a brother, may be a whoremonger, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner — with such a one not even to eat together;
for what have I also those without to judge? those within do ye not judge?
and those without God doth judge; and put ye away the evil from among yourselves.
Dare any one of you, having a matter with the other, go to be judged before the unrighteous, and not before the saints?
have ye not known that the saints shall judge the world? and if by you the world is judged, are ye unworthy of the smaller judgments?
have ye not known that we shall judge messengers? why not then the things of life?
of the things of life, indeed, then, if ye may have judgment, those despised in the assembly — these cause ye to sit;
unto your shame I speak: so there is not among you one wise man, not even one, who shall be able to discern in the midst of his brethren!
but brother with brother doth go to be judged, and this before unbelievers!
Already, indeed, then, there is altogether a fault among you, that ye have judgments with one another; wherefore do ye not rather suffer injustice? wherefore be ye not rather defrauded?
but ye — ye do injustice, and ye defraud, and these — brethren!
have ye not known that the unrighteous the reign of God shall not inherit? be not led astray; neither whoremongers, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor sodomites,
nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, the reign of God shall inherit.
And certain of you were these! but ye were washed, but ye were sanctified, but ye were declared righteous, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and in the Spirit of our God.
All things are lawful to me, but all things are not profitable; all things are lawful to me, but I — I will not be under authority by any;
the meats [are] for the belly, and the belly for the meats. And God both this and these shall make useless; and the body [is] not for whoredom, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body;
and God both the Lord did raise, and us will raise up through His power.
Have ye not known that your bodies are members of Christ? having taken, then, the members of the Christ, shall I make [them] members of an harlot? let it be not!
have ye not known that he who is joined to the harlot is one body? 'for they shall be — saith He — the two for one flesh.'
And he who is joined to the Lord is one spirit;
flee the whoredom; every sin — whatever a man may commit — is without the body, and he who is committing whoredom, against his own body doth sin.
Have ye not known that your body is a sanctuary of the Holy Spirit in you, which ye have from God? and ye are not your own,
for ye were bought with a price; glorify, then, God in your body and in your spirit, which are God's.
And concerning the things of which ye wrote to me: good [it is] for a man not to touch a woman,
and because of the whoredom let each man have his own wife, and let each woman have her proper husband;
to the wife let the husband the due benevolence render, and in like manner also the wife to the husband;
the wife over her own body hath not authority, but the husband; and, in like manner also, the husband over his own body hath not authority, but the wife.
Defraud not one another, except by consent for a time, that ye may be free for fasting and prayer, and again may come together, that the Adversary may not tempt you because of your incontinence;
and this I say by way of concurrence — not of command,
for I wish all men to be even as I myself [am]; but each his own gift hath of God, one indeed thus, and one thus.
And I say to the unmarried and to the widows: it is good for them if they may remain even as I [am];
and if they have not continence — let them marry, for it is better to marry than to burn;
and to the married I announce — not I, but the Lord — let not a wife separate from a husband:
but and if she may separate, let her remain unmarried, or to the husband let her be reconciled, and let not a husband send away a wife.
And to the rest I speak — not the Lord — if any brother hath a wife unbelieving, and she is pleased to dwell with him, let him not send her away;
and a woman who hath a husband unbelieving, and he is pleased to dwell with her, let her not send him away;
for the unbelieving husband hath been sanctified in the wife, and the unbelieving wife hath been sanctified in the husband; otherwise your children are unclean, but now they are holy.
And, if the unbelieving doth separate himself — let him separate himself: the brother or the sister is not under servitude in such [cases], and in peace hath God called us;
for what, hast thou known, O wife, whether the husband thou shalt save? or what, hast thou known, O husband, whether the wife thou shalt save?
if not, as God did distribute to each, as the Lord hath called each — so let him walk; and thus in all the assemblies do I direct:
being circumcised — was any one called? let him not become uncircumcised; in uncircumcision was any one called? let him not be circumcised;
the circumcision is nothing, and the uncircumcision is nothing — but a keeping of the commands of God.
Each in the calling in which he was called — in this let him remain;
a servant — wast thou called? be not anxious; but if also thou art able to become free — use [it] rather;
for he who [is] in the Lord — having been called a servant — is the Lord's freedman: in like manner also he the freeman, having been called, is servant of Christ:
with a price ye were bought, become not servants of men;
each, in that in which he was called, brethren, in this let him remain with God.
And concerning the virgins, a command of the Lord I have not; and I give judgment as having obtained kindness from the Lord to be faithful:
I suppose, therefore, this to be good because of the present necessity, that [it is] good for a man that the matter be thus: —
Hast thou been bound to a wife? seek not to be loosed; hast thou been loosed from a wife? seek not a wife.
But and if thou mayest marry, thou didst not sin; and if the virgin may marry, she did not sin; and such shall have tribulation in the flesh: and I spare you.
And this I say, brethren, the time henceforth is having been shortened — that both those having wives may be as not having;
and those weeping, as not weeping; and those rejoicing, as not rejoicing; and those buying, as not possessing;
and those using this world, as not using [it] up; for passing away is the fashion of this world.
And I wish you to be without anxiety; the unmarried is anxious for the things of the Lord, how he shall please the Lord;
and the married is anxious for the things of the world, how he shall please the wife.
The wife and the virgin have been distinguished: the unmarried is anxious for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and in spirit, and the married is anxious for the things of the world, how she shall please the husband.
And this for your own profit I say: not that I may cast a noose upon you, but for the seemliness and devotedness to the Lord, undistractedly,
and if any one doth think [it] to be unseemly to his virgin, if she may be beyond the bloom of age, and it ought so to be, what he willeth let him do; he doth not sin — let him marry.
And he who hath stood stedfast in the heart — not having necessity — and hath authority over his own will, and this he hath determined in his heart — to keep his own virgin — doth well;
so that both he who is giving in marriage doth well, and he who is not giving in marriage doth better.
A wife hath been bound by law as long time as her husband may live, and if her husband may sleep, she is free to be married to whom she will — only in the Lord;
and she is happier if she may so remain — according to my judgment; and I think I also have the Spirit of God.
And concerning the things sacrificed to idols, we have known that we all have knowledge: knowledge puffeth up, but love buildeth up;
and if any one doth think to know anything, he hath not yet known anything according as it behoveth [him] to know;
and if any one doth love God, this one hath been known by Him.
Concerning the eating then of the things sacrificed to idols, we have known that an idol [is] nothing in the world, and that there is no other God except one;
for even if there are those called gods, whether in heaven, whether upon earth — as there are gods many and lords many —
yet to us [is] one God, the Father, of whom [are] the all things, and we to Him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom [are] the all things, and we through Him;
but not in all men [is] the knowledge, and certain with conscience of the idol, till now, as a thing sacrificed to an idol do eat [it], and their conscience, being weak, is defiled.
But victuals do not commend us to God, for neither if we may eat are we in advance; nor if we may not eat, are we behind;
but see, lest this privilege of yours may become a stumbling-block to the infirm,
for if any one may see thee that hast knowledge in an idol's temple reclining at meat — shall not his conscience — he being infirm — be emboldened to eat the things sacrificed to idols,
and the brother who is infirm shall perish by thy knowledge, because of whom Christ died?
and thus sinning in regard to the brethren, and smiting their weak conscience — in regard to Christ ye sin;
wherefore, if victuals cause my brother to stumble, I may eat no flesh — to the age — that my brother I may not cause to stumble.
Am not I an apostle? am not I free? Jesus Christ our Lord have I not seen? my work are not ye in the Lord?
if to others I am not an apostle — yet doubtless to you I am; for the seal of my apostleship are ye in the Lord.
My defence to those who examine me in this;
have we not authority to eat and to drink?
have we not authority a sister — a wife — to lead about, as also the other apostles, and the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas?
or only I and Barnabas, have we not authority — not to work?
who doth serve as a soldier at his own charges at any time? who doth plant a vineyard, and of its fruit doth not eat? or who doth feed a flock, and of the milk of the flock doth not eat?
According to man do I speak these things? or doth not also the law say these things?
for in the law of Moses it hath been written, 'thou shalt not muzzle an ox treading out corn;' for the oxen doth God care?
or because of us by all means doth He say [it]? yes, because of us it was written, because in hope ought the plower to plow, and he who is treading [ought] of his hope to partake in hope.
If we to you the spiritual things did sow — great [is it] if we your fleshly things do reap?
if others do partake of the authority over you — not we more? but we did not use this authority, but all things we bear, that we may give no hindrance to the good news of the Christ.
Have ye not known that those working about the things of the temple — of the temple do eat, and those waiting at the altar — with the altar are partakers?
so also did the Lord direct to those proclaiming the good news: of the good news to live.
And I have used none of these things; neither did I write these things that it may be so done in my case, for [it is] good for me rather to die, than that any one may make my glorying void;
for if I may proclaim good news, it is no glorying for me, for necessity is laid upon me, and woe is to me if I may not proclaim good news;
for if willing I do this, I have a reward; and if unwillingly — with a stewardship I have been entrusted!
What, then, is my reward? — that proclaiming good news, without charge I shall make the good news of the Christ, not to abuse my authority in the good news;
for being free from all men, to all men I made myself servant, that the more I might gain;
and I became to the Jews as a Jew, that Jews I might gain; to those under law as under law, that those under law I might gain;
to those without law, as without law — (not being without law to God, but within law to Christ) — that I might gain those without law;
I became to the infirm as infirm, that the infirm I might gain; to all men I have become all things, that by all means I may save some.
And this I do because of the good news, that a fellow-partaker of it I may become;
have ye not known that those running in a race — all indeed run, but one doth receive the prize? so run ye, that ye may obtain;
and every one who is striving, is in all things temperate; these, indeed, then, that a corruptible crown they may receive, but we an incorruptible;
I, therefore, thus run, not as uncertainly, thus I fight, as not beating air;
but I chastise my body, and bring [it] into servitude, lest by any means, having preached to others — I myself may become disapproved.
And I do not wish you to be ignorant, brethren, that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea,
and all to Moses were baptized in the cloud, and in the sea;
and all the same spiritual food did eat,
and all the same spiritual drink did drink, for they were drinking of a spiritual rock following them, and the rock was the Christ;
but in the most of them God was not well pleased, for they were strewn in the wilderness,
and those things became types of us, for our not passionately desiring evil things, as also these did desire.
Neither become ye idolaters, as certain of them, as it hath been written, 'The people sat down to eat and to drink, and stood up to play;'
neither may we commit whoredom, as certain of them did commit whoredom, and there fell in one day twenty-three thousand;
neither may we tempt the Christ, as also certain of them did tempt, and by the serpents did perish;
neither murmur ye, as also some of them did murmur, and did perish by the destroyer.
And all these things as types did happen to those persons, and they were written for our admonition, to whom the end of the ages did come,
so that he who is thinking to stand — let him observe, lest he fall.
No temptation hath taken you — except human; and God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what ye are able, but He will make, with the temptation, also the outlet, for your being able to bear [it].
Wherefore, my beloved, flee from the idolatry;
as to wise men I speak — judge ye what I say:
The cup of the blessing that we bless — is it not the fellowship of the blood of the Christ? the bread that we break — is it not the fellowship of the body of the Christ?
because one bread, one body, are we the many — for we all of the one bread do partake.
See Israel according to the flesh! are not those eating the sacrifices in the fellowship of the altar?
what then do I say? that an idol is anything? or that a sacrifice offered to an idol is anything? —
[no,] but that the things that the nations sacrifice — they sacrifice to demons and not to God; and I do not wish you to come into the fellowship of the demons.
Ye are not able the cup of the Lord to drink, and the cup of demons; ye are not able of the table of the Lord to partake, and of the table of demons;
do we arouse the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than He?
All things to me are lawful, but all things are not profitable; all things to me are lawful, but all things do not build up;
let no one seek his own — but each another's.
Whatever in the meat-market is sold eat ye, not inquiring, because of the conscience,
for the Lord's [is] the earth, and its fulness;
and if any one of the unbelieving do call you, and ye wish to go, all that is set before you eat, nothing inquiring, because of the conscience;
and if any one may say to you, 'This is a thing sacrificed to an idol,' — do not eat, because of that one who shewed [it], and of the conscience, for the Lord's [is] the earth and its fulness:
and conscience, I say, not of thyself, but of the other, for why [is it] that my liberty is judged by another's conscience?
and if I thankfully do partake, why am I evil spoken of, for that for which I give thanks?
Whether, then, ye eat, or drink, or do anything, do all to the glory of God;
become offenceless, both to Jews and Greeks, and to the assembly of God;
as I also in all things do please all, not seeking my own profit, but that of many — that they may be saved.
Followers of me become ye, as I also [am] of Christ.
And I praise you, brethren, that in all things ye remember me, and according as I did deliver to you, the deliverances ye keep,
and I wish you to know that of every man the head is the Christ, and the head of a woman is the husband, and the head of Christ is God.
Every man praying or prophesying, having the head covered, doth dishonour his head,
and every woman praying or prophesying with the head uncovered, doth dishonour her own head, for it is one and the same thing with her being shaven,
for if a woman is not covered — then let her be shorn, and if [it is] a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven — let her be covered;
for a man, indeed, ought not to cover the head, being the image and glory of God, and a woman is the glory of a man,
for a man is not of a woman, but a woman [is] of a man,
for a man also was not created because of the woman, but a woman because of the man;
because of this the woman ought to have [a token of] authority upon the head, because of the messengers;
but neither [is] a man apart from a woman, nor a woman apart from a man, in the Lord,
for as the woman [is] of the man, so also the man [is] through the woman, and the all things [are] of God.
In your own selves judge ye; is it seemly for a woman uncovered to pray to God?
doth not even nature itself teach you, that if a man indeed have long hair, a dishonour it is to him?
and a woman, if she have long hair, a glory it is to her, because the hair instead of a covering hath been given to her;
and if any one doth think to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the assemblies of God.
And this declaring, I give no praise, because not for the better, but for the worse ye come together;
for first, indeed, ye coming together in an assembly, I hear of divisions being among you, and partly I believe [it],
for it behoveth sects also to be among you, that those approved may become manifest among you;
ye, then, coming together at the same place — it is not to eat the Lord's supper;
for each his own supper doth take before in the eating, and one is hungry, and another is drunk;
why, have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or the assembly of God do ye despise, and shame those not having? what may I say to you? shall I praise you in this? I do not praise!
For I — I received from the Lord that which also I did deliver to you, that the Lord Jesus in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread,
and having given thanks, he brake, and said, 'Take ye, eat ye, this is my body, that for you is being broken; this do ye — to the remembrance of me.'
In like manner also the cup after the supping, saying, 'This cup is the new covenant in my blood; this do ye, as often as ye may drink [it] — to the remembrance of me;'
for as often as ye may eat this bread, and this cup may drink, the death of the Lord ye do shew forth — till he may come;
so that whoever may eat this bread or may drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, guilty he shall be of the body and blood of the Lord:
and let a man be proving himself, and so of the bread let him eat, and of the cup let him drink;
for he who is eating and drinking unworthily, judgment to himself he doth eat and drink — not discerning the body of the Lord.
Because of this, among you many [are] weak and sickly, and sleep do many;
for if ourselves we were discerning, we would not be being judged,
and being judged by the Lord, we are chastened, that with the world we may not be condemned;
so then, my brethren, coming together to eat, for one another wait ye;
and if any one is hungry, at home let him eat, that to judgment ye may not come together; and the rest, whenever I may come, I shall arrange.
And concerning the spiritual things, brethren, I do not wish you to be ignorant;
ye have known that ye were nations, unto the dumb idols — as ye were led — being carried away;
wherefore, I give you to understand that no one, in the Spirit of God speaking, saith Jesus [is] anathema, and no one is able to say Jesus [is] Lord, except in the Holy Spirit.
And there are diversities of gifts, and the same Spirit;
and there are diversities of ministrations, and the same Lord;
and there are diversities of workings, and it is the same God — who is working the all in all.
And to each hath been given the manifestation of the Spirit for profit;
for to one through the Spirit hath been given a word of wisdom, and to another a word of knowledge, according to the same Spirit;
and to another faith in the same Spirit, and to another gifts of healings in the same Spirit;
and to another in-workings of mighty deeds; and to another prophecy; and to another discernings of spirits; and to another [divers] kinds of tongues; and to another interpretation of tongues:
and all these doth work the one and the same Spirit, dividing to each severally as he intendeth.
For, even as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members of the one body, being many, are one body, so also [is] the Christ,
for also in one Spirit we all to one body were baptized, whether Jews or Greeks, whether servants or freemen, and all into one Spirit were made to drink,
for also the body is not one member, but many;
if the foot may say, 'Because I am not a hand, I am not of the body;' it is not, because of this, not of the body;
and if the ear may say, 'Because I am not an eye, I am not of the body;' it is not, because of this, not of the body?
If the whole body [were] an eye, where the hearing? if the whole hearing, where the smelling?
and now, God did set the members each one of them in the body, according as He willed,
and if all were one member, where the body?
and now, indeed, [are] many members, and one body;
and an eye is not able to say to the hand, 'I have no need of thee;' nor again the head to the feet, 'I have no need of you.'
But much more the members of the body which seem to be more infirm are necessary,
and those that we think to be less honourable of the body, around these we put more abundant honour, and our unseemly things have seemliness more abundant,
and our seemly things have no need; but God did temper the body together, to the lacking part having given more abundant honour,
that there may be no division in the body, but that the members may have the same anxiety for one another,
and whether one member doth suffer, suffer with [it] do all the members, or one member is glorified, rejoice with [it] do all the members;
and ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.
And some, indeed, did God set in the assembly, first apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly teachers, afterwards powers, afterwards gifts of healings, helpings, governings, divers kinds of tongues;
[are] all apostles? [are] all prophets? [are] all teachers? [are] all powers?
have all gifts of healings? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret?
and desire earnestly the better gifts; and yet a far excelling way do I shew to you:
If with the tongues of men and of messengers I speak, and have not love, I have become brass sounding, or a cymbal tinkling;
and if I have prophecy, and know all the secrets, and all the knowledge, and if I have all the faith, so as to remove mountains, and have not love, I am nothing;
and if I give away to feed others all my goods, and if I give up my body that I may be burned, and have not love, I am profited nothing.
The love is long-suffering, it is kind, the love doth not envy, the love doth not vaunt itself, is not puffed up,
doth not act unseemly, doth not seek its own things, is not provoked, doth not impute evil,
rejoiceth not over the unrighteousness, and rejoiceth with the truth;
all things it beareth, all it believeth, all it hopeth, all it endureth.
The love doth never fail; and whether [there be] prophecies, they shall become useless; whether tongues, they shall cease; whether knowledge, it shall become useless;
for in part we know, and in part we prophecy;
and when that which is perfect may come, then that which [is] in part shall become useless.
When I was a babe, as a babe I was speaking, as a babe I was thinking, as a babe I was reasoning, and when I have become a man, I have made useless the things of the babe;
for we see now through a mirror obscurely, and then face to face; now I know in part, and then I shall fully know, as also I was known;
and now there doth remain faith, hope, love — these three; and the greatest of these [is] love.
Pursue the love, and seek earnestly the spiritual things, and rather that ye may prophecy,
for he who is speaking in an [unknown] tongue — to men he doth not speak, but to God, for no one doth hearken, and in spirit he doth speak secrets;
and he who is prophesying to men doth speak edification, and exhortation, and comfort;
he who is speaking in an [unknown] tongue, himself doth edify, and he who is prophesying, an assembly doth edify;
and I wish you all to speak with tongues, and more that ye may prophecy, for greater is he who is prophesying than he who is speaking with tongues, except one may interpret, that the assembly may receive edification.
And now, brethren, if I may come unto you speaking tongues, what shall I profit you, except I shall speak to you either in revelation, or in knowledge, or in prophesying, or in teaching?
yet the things without life giving sound — whether pipe or harp — if a difference in the sounds they may not give, how shall be known that which is piped or that which is harped?
for if also an uncertain sound a trumpet may give, who shall prepare himself for battle?
so also ye, if through the tongue, speech easily understood ye may not give — how shall that which is spoken be known? for ye shall be speaking to air.
There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and none of them is unmeaning,
if, then, I do not know the power of the voice, I shall be to him who is speaking a foreigner, and he who is speaking, is to me a foreigner;
so also ye, since ye are earnestly desirous of spiritual gifts, for the building up of the assembly seek that ye may abound;
wherefore he who is speaking in an [unknown] tongue — let him pray that he may interpret;
for if I pray in an [unknown] tongue, my spirit doth pray, and my understanding is unfruitful.
What then is it? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray also with the understanding; I will sing psalms with the spirit, and I will sing psalms also with the understanding;
since, if thou mayest bless with the spirit, he who is filling the place of the unlearned, how shall he say the Amen at thy giving of thanks, since what thou dost say he hath not known?
for thou, indeed, dost give thanks well, but the other is not built up!
I give thanks to my God — more than you all with tongues speaking —
but in an assembly I wish to speak five words through my understanding, that others also I may instruct, rather than myriads of words in an [unknown] tongue.
Brethren, become not children in the understanding, but in the evil be ye babes, and in the understanding become ye perfect;
in the law it hath been written, that, 'With other tongues and with other lips I will speak to this people, and not even so will they hear Me, saith the Lord;'
so that the tongues are for a sign, not to the believing, but to the unbelieving; and the prophesy [is] not for the unbelieving, but for the believing,
If, therefore, the whole assembly may come together, to the same place, and all may speak with tongues, and there may come in unlearned or unbelievers, will they not say that ye are mad?
and if all may prophecy, and any one may come in, an unbeliever or unlearned, he is convicted by all, he is discerned by all,
and so the secrets of his heart become manifest, and so having fallen upon [his] face, he will bow before God, declaring that God really is among you.
What then is it, brethren? whenever ye may come together, each of you hath a psalm, hath a teaching, hath a tongue, hath a revelation, hath an interpretation? let all things be for building up;
if an [unknown] tongue any one do speak, by two, or at the most, by three, and in turn, and let one interpret;
and if there may be no interpreter, let him be silent in an assembly, and to himself let him speak, and to God.
And prophets — let two or three speak, and let the others discern,
and if to another sitting [anything] may be revealed, let the first be silent;
for ye are able, one by one, all to prophesy, that all may learn, and all may be exhorted,
and the spiritual gift of prophets to prophets are subject,
for God is not [a God] of tumult, but of peace, as in all the assemblies of the saints.
Your women in the assemblies let them be silent, for it hath not been permitted to them to speak, but to be subject, as also the law saith;
and if they wish to learn anything, at home their own husbands let them question, for it is a shame to women to speak in an assembly.
From you did the word of God come forth? or to you alone did it come?
if any one doth think to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge the things that I write to you — that of the Lord they are commands;
and if any one is ignorant — let him be ignorant;
so that, brethren, earnestly desire to prophesy, and to speak with tongues do not forbid;
let all things be done decently and in order.
And I make known to you, brethren, the good news that I proclaimed to you, which also ye did receive, in which also ye have stood,
through which also ye are being saved, in what words I proclaimed good news to you, if ye hold fast, except ye did believe in vain,
for I delivered to you first, what also I did receive, that Christ died for our sins, according to the Writings,
and that he was buried, and that he hath risen on the third day, according to the Writings,
and that he appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve,
afterwards he appeared to above five hundred brethren at once, of whom the greater part remain till now, and certain also did fall asleep;
afterwards he appeared to James, then to all the apostles.
And last of all — as to the untimely birth — he appeared also to me,
for I am the least of the apostles, who am not worthy to be called an apostle, because I did persecute the assembly of God,
and by the grace of God I am what I am, and His grace that [is] towards me came not in vain, but more abundantly than they all did I labour, yet not I, but the grace of God that [is] with me;
whether, then, I or they, so we preach, and so ye did believe.
And if Christ is preached, that out of the dead he hath risen, how say certain among you, that there is no rising again of dead persons?
and if there be no rising again of dead persons, neither hath Christ risen;
and if Christ hath not risen, then void [is] our preaching, and void also your faith,
and we also are found false witnesses of God, because we did testify of God that He raised up the Christ, whom He did not raise if then dead persons do not rise;
for if dead persons do not rise, neither hath Christ risen,
and if Christ hath not risen, vain is your faith, ye are yet in your sins;
then, also, those having fallen asleep in Christ did perish;
if in this life we have hope in Christ only, of all men we are most to be pitied.
And now, Christ hath risen out of the dead — the first-fruits of those sleeping he became,
for since through man [is] the death, also through man [is] a rising again of the dead,
for even as in Adam all die, so also in the Christ all shall be made alive,
and each in his proper order, a first-fruit Christ, afterwards those who are the Christ's, in his presence,
then — the end, when he may deliver up the reign to God, even the Father, when he may have made useless all rule, and all authority and power —
for it behoveth him to reign till he may have put all the enemies under his feet —
the last enemy is done away — death;
for all things He did put under his feet, and, when one may say that all things have been subjected, [it is] evident that He is excepted who did subject the all things to him,
and when the all things may be subjected to him, then the Son also himself shall be subject to Him, who did subject to him the all things, that God may be the all in all.
Seeing what shall they do who are baptized for the dead, if the dead do not rise at all? why also are they baptized for the dead?
why also do we stand in peril every hour?
Every day do I die, by the glorying of you that I have in Christ Jesus our Lord:
if after the manner of a man with wild beasts I fought in Ephesus, what the advantage to me if the dead do not rise? let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die!
Be not led astray; evil communications corrupt good manners;
awake up, as is right, and sin not; for certain have an ignorance of God; for shame to you I say [it].
But some one will say, 'How do the dead rise?
unwise! thou — what thou dost sow is not quickened except it may die;
and that which thou dost sow, not the body that shall be dost thou sow, but bare grain, it may be of wheat, or of some one of the others,
and God doth give to it a body according as He willed, and to each of the seeds its proper body.
All flesh [is] not the same flesh, but there is one flesh of men, and another flesh of beasts, and another of fishes, and another of birds;
and [there are] heavenly bodies, and earthly bodies; but one [is] the glory of the heavenly, and another that of the earthly;
one glory of sun, and another glory of moon, and another glory of stars, for star from star doth differ in glory.
So also [is] the rising again of the dead: it is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption;
it is sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power;
it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body; there is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body;
so also it hath been written, 'The first man Adam became a living creature,' the last Adam [is] for a life-giving spirit,
but that which is spiritual [is] not first, but that which [was] natural, afterwards that which [is] spiritual.
The first man [is] out of the earth, earthy; the second man [is] the Lord out of heaven;
as [is] the earthy, such [are] also the earthy; and as [is] the heavenly, such [are] also the heavenly;
and, according as we did bear the image of the earthy, we shall bear also the image of the heavenly.
And this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood the reign of God is not able to inherit, nor doth the corruption inherit the incorruption;
lo, I tell you a secret; we indeed shall not all sleep, and we all shall be changed;
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, in the last trumpet, for it shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we — we shall be changed:
for it behoveth this corruptible to put on incorruption, and this mortal to put on immortality;
and when this corruptible may have put on incorruption, and this mortal may have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the word that hath been written, 'The Death was swallowed up — to victory;
where, O Death, thy sting? where, O Hades, thy victory?'
and the sting of the death [is] the sin, and the power of the sin the law;
and to God — thanks, to Him who is giving us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ;
so that, my brethren beloved, become ye stedfast, unmovable, abounding in the work of the Lord at all times, knowing that your labour is not vain in the Lord.
And concerning the collection that [is] for the saints, as I directed to the assemblies of Galatia, so also ye — do ye;
on every first [day] of the week, let each one of you lay by him, treasuring up whatever he may have prospered, that when I may come then collections may not be made;
and whenever I may come, whomsoever ye may approve, through letters, these I will send to carry your favour to Jerusalem;
and if it be meet for me also to go, with me they shall go.
And I will come unto you, when I pass through Macedonia — for Macedonia I do pass through —
and with you, it may be, I will abide, or even winter, that ye may send me forward whithersoever I go,
for I do not wish to see you now in the passing, but I hope to remain a certain time with you, if the Lord may permit;
and I will remain in Ephesus till the Pentecost,
for a door to me hath been opened — great and effectual — and withstanders [are] many.
And if Timotheus may come, see that he may become without fear with you, for the work of the Lord he doth work, even as I,
no one, then, may despise him; and send ye him forward in peace, that he may come to me, for I expect him with the brethren;
and concerning Apollos our brother, much I did entreat him that he may come unto you with the brethren, and it was not at all [his] will that he may come now, and he will come when he may find convenient.
Watch ye, stand in the faith; be men, be strong;
let all your things be done in love.
And I entreat you, brethren, ye have known the household of Stephanas, that it is the first-fruit of Achaia, and to the ministration to the saints they did set themselves —
that ye also be subject to such, and to every one who is working with [us] and labouring;
and I rejoice over the presence of Stephanas, and Fortunatus, and Achaicus, because the lack of you did these fill up;
for they did refresh my spirit and yours; acknowledge ye, therefore, those who [are] such.
Salute you do the assemblies of Asia; salute you much in the Lord do Aquilas and Priscilla, with the assembly in their house;
salute you do all the brethren; salute ye one another in an holy kiss.
The salutation of [me] Paul with my hand;
if any one doth not love the Lord Jesus Christ — let him be anathema! The Lord hath come!
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ [is] with you;
my love [is] with you all in Christ Jesus. Amen.
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, through the will of God, and Timotheus the brother, to the assembly of God that is in Corinth, with all the saints who are in all Achaia:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ!
Blessed [is] God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of the mercies, and God of all comfort,
who is comforting us in all our tribulation, for our being able to comfort those in any tribulation through the comfort with which we are comforted ourselves by God;
because, as the sufferings of the Christ do abound to us, so through the Christ doth abound also our comfort;
and whether we be in tribulation, [it is] for your comfort and salvation, that is wrought in the enduring of the same sufferings that we also suffer; whether we are comforted, [it is] for your comfort and salvation;
and our hope [is] stedfast for you, knowing that even as ye are partakers of the sufferings — so also of the comfort.
For we do not wish you to be ignorant, brethren, of our tribulation that happened to us in Asia, that we were exceedingly burdened above [our] power, so that we despaired even of life;
but we ourselves in ourselves the sentence of the death have had, that we may not be trusting on ourselves, but on God, who is raising the dead,
who out of so great a death did deliver us, and doth deliver, in whom we have hoped that even yet He will deliver;
ye working together also for us by your supplication, that the gift through many persons to us, through many may be thankfully acknowledged for us.
For our glorying is this: the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and sincerity of God, not in fleshly wisdom, but in the grace of God, we did conduct ourselves in the world, and more abundantly toward you;
for no other things do we write to you, but what ye either do read or also acknowledge, and I hope that also unto the end ye shall acknowledge,
according as also ye did acknowledge us in part, that your glory we are, even as also ye [are] ours, in the day of the Lord Jesus;
and in this confidence I was purposing to come unto you before, that a second favour ye might have,
and through you to pass to Macedonia, and again from Macedonia to come unto you, and by you to be sent forward to Judea.
This, therefore, counselling, did I then use the lightness; or the things that I counsel, according to the flesh do I counsel, that it may be with me Yes, yes, and No, no?
and God [is] faithful, that our word unto you became not Yes and No,
for the Son of God, Jesus Christ, among you through us having been preached — through me and Silvanus and Timotheus — did not become Yes and No, but in him it hath become Yes;
for as many as [are] promises of God, in him [are] the Yes, and in him the Amen, for glory to God through us;
and He who is confirming you with us into Christ, and did anoint us, [is] God,
who also sealed us, and gave the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.
And I for a witness on God do call upon my soul, that sparing you, I came not yet to Corinth;
not that we are lords over your faith, but we are workers together with your joy, for by the faith ye stand.
And I decided this to myself, not again to come in sorrow unto you,
for if I make you sorry, then who is he who is making me glad, except he who is made sorry by me?
and I wrote to you this same thing, that having come, I may not have sorrow from them of whom it behoved me to have joy, having confidence in you all, that my joy is of you all,
for out of much tribulation and pressure of heart I wrote to you through many tears, not that ye might be made sorry, but that ye might know the love that I have more abundantly toward you.
And if any one hath caused sorrow, he hath not caused sorrow to me, but in part, that I may not burden you all;
sufficient to such a one is this punishment, that [is] by the more part,
so that, on the contrary, [it is] rather for you to forgive and to comfort, lest by over abundant sorrow such a one may be swallowed up;
wherefore, I call upon you to confirm love to him,
for, for this also did I write, that I might know the proof of you, whether in regard to all things ye are obedient.
And to whom ye forgive anything — I also; for I also, if I have forgiven anything, to whom I have forgiven [it], because of you — in the person of Christ — [I forgive it,]
that we may not be over-reached by the Adversary, for of his devices we are not ignorant.
And having come to Troas for the good news of the Christ, and a door to me having been opened in the Lord,
I have not had rest to my spirit, on my not finding Titus my brother, but having taken leave of them, I went forth to Macedonia;
and to God [are] thanks, who at all times is leading us in triumph in the Christ, and the fragrance of His knowledge He is manifesting through us in every place,
because of Christ a sweet fragrance we are to God, in those being saved, and in those being lost;
to the one, indeed, a fragrance of death to death, and to the other, a fragrance of life to life; and for these things who is sufficient?
for we are not as the many, adulterating the word of God, but as of sincerity — but as of God; in the presence of God, in Christ we do speak.
Do we begin again to recommend ourselves, except we need, as some, letters of recommendation unto you, or from you?
our letter ye are, having been written in our hearts, known and read by all men,
manifested that ye are a letter of Christ ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in the tablets of stone, but in fleshy tablets of the heart,
and such trust we have through the Christ toward God,
not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think anything, as of ourselves, but our sufficiency [is] of God,
who also made us sufficient [to be] ministrants of a new covenant, not of letter, but of spirit; for the letter doth kill, and the spirit doth make alive.
and if the ministration of the death, in letters, engraved in stones, came in glory, so that the sons of Israel were not able to look stedfastly to the face of Moses, because of the glory of his face — which was being made useless,
how shall the ministration of the Spirit not be more in glory?
for if the ministration of the condemnation [is] glory, much more doth the ministration of the righteousness abound in glory;
for also even that which hath been glorious, hath not been glorious — in this respect, because of the superior glory;
for if that which is being made useless [is] through glory, much more that which is remaining [is] in glory.
Having, then, such hope, we use much freedom of speech,
and [are] not as Moses, who was putting a vail upon his own face, for the sons of Israel not stedfastly to look to the end of that which is being made useless,
but their minds were hardened, for unto this day the same vail at the reading of the Old Covenant doth remain unwithdrawn — which in Christ is being made useless —
but till to-day, when Moses is read, a vail upon their heart doth lie,
and whenever they may turn unto the Lord, the vail is taken away.
And the Lord is the Spirit; and where the Spirit of the Lord [is], there [is] liberty;
and we all, with unvailed face, the glory of the Lord beholding in a mirror, to the same image are being transformed, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.
Because of this, having this ministration, according as we did receive kindness, we do not faint,
but did renounce for ourselves the hidden things of shame, not walking in craftiness, nor deceitfully using the word of God, but by the manifestation of the truth recommending ourselves unto every conscience of men, before God;
and if also our good news is vailed, in those perishing it is vailed,
in whom the god of this age did blind the minds of the unbelieving, that there doth not shine forth to them the enlightening of the good news of the glory of the Christ, who is the image of God;
for not ourselves do we preach, but Christ Jesus — Lord, and ourselves your servants because of Jesus;
because [it is] God who said, Out of darkness light [is] to shine, who did shine in our hearts, for the enlightening of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.
And we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us;
on every side being in tribulation, but not straitened; perplexed, but not in despair;
persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed;
at all times the dying of the Lord Jesus bearing about in the body, that the life also of Jesus in our body may be manifested,
for always are we who are living delivered up to death because of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our dying flesh,
so that, the death indeed in us doth work, and the life in you.
And having the same spirit of the faith, according to that which hath been written, 'I believed, therefore I did speak;' we also do believe, therefore also do we speak;
knowing that He who did raise up the Lord Jesus, us also through Jesus shall raise up, and shall present with you,
for the all things [are] because of you, that the grace having been multiplied, because of the thanksgiving of the more, may abound to the glory of God;
wherefore, we faint not, but if also our outward man doth decay, yet the inward is renewed day by day;
for the momentary light matter of our tribulation, more and more exceedingly an age-during weight of glory doth work out for us —
we not looking to the things seen, but to the things not seen; for the things seen [are] temporary, but the things not seen [are] age-during.
For we have known that if our earthly house of the tabernacle may be thrown down, a building from God we have, an house not made with hands — age-during — in the heavens,
for also in this we groan, with our dwelling that is from heaven earnestly desiring to clothe ourselves,
if so be that, having clothed ourselves, we shall not be found naked,
for we also who are in the tabernacle do groan, being burdened, seeing we wish not to unclothe ourselves, but to clothe ourselves, that the mortal may be swallowed up of the life.
And He who did work us to this self-same thing [is] God, who also did give to us the earnest of the Spirit;
having courage, then, at all times, and knowing that being at home in the body, we are away from home from the Lord, —
for through faith we walk, not through sight —
we have courage, and are well pleased rather to be away from the home of the body, and to be at home with the Lord.
Wherefore also we are ambitious, whether at home or away from home, to be well pleasing to him,
for all of us it behoveth to be manifested before the tribunal of the Christ, that each one may receive the things [done] through the body, in reference to the things that he did, whether good or evil;
having known, therefore, the fear of the Lord, we persuade men, and to God we are manifested, and I hope also in your consciences to have been manifested;
for not again ourselves do we recommend to you, but we are giving occasion to you of glorifying in our behalf, that ye may have [something] in reference to those glorifying in face and not in heart;
for whether we were beside ourselves, [it was] to God; whether we be of sound mind — [it is] to you,
for the love of the Christ doth constrain us, having judged thus: that if one for all died, then the whole died,
and for all he died, that those living, no more to themselves may live, but to him who died for them, and was raised again.
So that we henceforth have known no one according to the flesh, and even if we have known Christ according to the flesh, yet now we know him no more;
so that if any one [is] in Christ — [he is] a new creature; the old things did pass away, lo, become new have the all things.
And the all things [are] of God, who reconciled us to Himself through Jesus Christ, and did give to us the ministration of the reconciliation,
how that God was in Christ — a world reconciling to Himself, not reckoning to them their trespasses; and having put in us the word of the reconciliation,
in behalf of Christ, then, we are ambassadors, as if God were calling through us, we beseech, in behalf of Christ, 'Be ye reconciled to God;'
for him who did not know sin, in our behalf He did make sin, that we may become the righteousness of God in him.
And working together also we call upon [you] that ye receive not in vain the grace of God —
for He saith, 'In an acceptable time I did hear thee, and in a day of salvation I did help thee, lo, now [is] a well-accepted time; lo, now, a day of salvation,' —
in nothing giving any cause of offence, that the ministration may be not blamed,
but in everything recommending ourselves as God's ministrants; in much patience, in tribulations, in necessities, in distresses,
in stripes, in imprisonments, in insurrections, in labours, in watchings, in fastings,
in pureness, in knowledge, in long-suffering, in kindness, in the Holy Spirit, in love unfeigned,
in the word of truth, in the power of God, through the armour of the righteousness, on the right and on the left,
through glory and dishonour, through evil report and good report, as leading astray, and true;
as unknown, and recognized; as dying, and lo, we live; as chastened, and not put to death;
as sorrowful, and always rejoicing; as poor, and making many rich; as having nothing, and possessing all things.
Our mouth hath been open unto you, O Corinthians, our heart hath been enlarged!
ye are not straitened in us, and ye are straitened in your [own] bowels,
and [as] a recompense of the same kind, (as to children I say [it],) be ye enlarged — also ye!
Become not yoked with others — unbelievers, for what partaking [is there] to righteousness and lawlessness?
and what fellowship to light with darkness? and what concord to Christ with Belial? or what part to a believer with an unbeliever?
and what agreement to the sanctuary of God with idols? for ye are a sanctuary of the living God, according as God said — 'I will dwell in them, and will walk among [them], and I will be their God, and they shall be My people,
wherefore, come ye forth out of the midst of them, and be separated, saith the Lord, and an unclean thing do not touch, and I — I will receive you,
and I will be to you for a Father, and ye — ye shall be to Me for sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.'
Having, then, these promises, beloved, may we cleanse ourselves from every pollution of flesh and spirit, perfecting sanctification in the fear of God;
receive us; no one did we wrong; no one did we waste; no one did we defraud;
not to condemn you do I say [it], for I have said before that in our hearts ye are to die with and to live with;
great [is] my freedom of speech unto you, great my glory on your behalf; I have been filled with the comfort, I overabound with the joy on all our tribulation,
for also we, having come to Macedonia, no relaxation hath our flesh had, but on every side we are in tribulation, without [are] fightings, within — fears;
but He who is comforting the cast-down — God — He did comfort us in the presence of Titus;
and not only in his presence, but also in the comfort with which he was comforted over you, declaring to us your longing desire, your lamentation, your zeal for me, so that the more I did rejoice,
because even if I made you sorry in the letter, I do not repent — if even I did repent — for I perceive that the letter, even if for an hour, did make you sorry.
I now do rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye were made sorry to reformation, for ye were made sorry toward God, that in nothing ye might receive damage from us;
for the sorrow toward God reformation to salvation not to be repented of doth work, and the sorrow of the world doth work death,
for, lo, this same thing — your being made sorry toward God — how much diligence it doth work in you! but defence, but displeasure, but fear, but longing desire, but zeal, but revenge; in every thing ye did approve yourselves to be pure in the matter.
If, then, I also wrote to you — not for his cause who did wrong, nor for his cause who did suffer wrong, but for our diligence in your behalf being manifested unto you before God —
because of this we have been comforted in your comfort, and more abundantly the more did we rejoice in the joy of Titus, that his spirit hath been refreshed from you all;
because if anything to him in your behalf I have boasted, I was not put to shame; but as all things in truth we did speak to you, so also our boasting before Titus became truth,
and his tender affection is more abundantly toward you, remembering the obedience of you all, how with fear and trembling ye did receive him;
I rejoice, therefore, that in everything I have courage in you.
And we make known to you, brethren, the grace of God, that hath been given in the assemblies of Macedonia,
because in much trial of tribulation the abundance of their joy, and their deep poverty, did abound to the riches of their liberality;
because, according to [their] power, I testify, and above [their] power, they were willing of themselves,
with much entreaty calling on us to receive the favour and the fellowship of the ministration to the saints,
and not according as we expected, but themselves they did give first to the Lord, and to us, through the will of God,
so that we exhorted Titus, that, according as he did begin before, so also he may finish to you also this favour,
but even as in every thing ye do abound, in faith, and word, and knowledge, and all diligence, and in your love to us, that also in this grace ye may abound;
not according to command do I speak, but because of the diligence of others, and of your love proving the genuineness,
for ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that because of you he became poor — being rich, that ye by that poverty may become rich.
and an opinion in this do I give: for this to you [is] expedient, who not only to do, but also to will, did begin before — a year ago,
and now also finish doing [it], that even as [there is] the readiness of the will, so also the finishing, out of that which ye have,
for if the willing mind is present, according to that which any one may have it is well-accepted, not according to that which he hath not;
for not that for others release, and ye pressured, [do I speak,]
but by equality, at the present time your abundance — for their want, that also their abundance may be for your want, that there may be equality,
according as it hath been written, 'He who [did gather] much, had nothing over; and he who [did gather] little, had no lack.'
And thanks to God, who is putting the same diligence for you in the heart of Titus,
because indeed the exhortation he accepted, and being more diligent, of his own accord he went forth unto you,
and we sent with him the brother, whose praise in the good news [is] through all the assemblies,
and not only so, but who was also appointed by vote by the assemblies, our fellow-traveller, with this favour that is ministered by us, unto the glory of the same Lord, and your willing mind;
avoiding this, lest any one may blame us in this abundance that is ministered by us,
providing right things, not only before the Lord, but also before men;
and we sent with them our brother, whom we proved in many things many times being diligent, and now much more diligent, by the great confidence that is toward you,
whether — about Titus — my partner and towards you fellow-worker, whether — our brethren, apostles of assemblies — glory of Christ;
the shewing therefore of your love, and of our boasting on your behalf, to them shew ye, even in the face of the assemblies.
For, indeed, concerning the ministration that [is] for the saints, it is superfluous for me to write to you,
for I have known your readiness of mind, which in your behalf I boast of to Macedonians, that Achaia hath been prepared a year ago, and the zeal of you did stir up the more part,
and I sent the brethren, that our boasting on your behalf may not be made vain in this respect; that, according as I said, ye may be ready,
lest if Macedonians may come with me, and find you unprepared, we — we may be put to shame (that we say not — ye) in this same confidence of boasting.
Necessary, therefore, I thought [it] to exhort the brethren, that they may go before to you, and may make up before your formerly announced blessing, that this be ready, as a blessing, and not as covetousness.
And this: He who is sowing sparingly, sparingly also shall reap; and he who is sowing in blessings, in blessings also shall reap;
each one, according as he doth purpose in heart, not out of sorrow or out of necessity, for a cheerful giver doth God love,
and God [is] able all grace to cause to abound to you, that in every thing always all sufficiency having, ye may abound to every good work,
(according as it hath been written, 'He dispersed abroad, he gave to the poor, his righteousness doth remain to the age,')
and may He who is supplying seed to the sower, and bread for food, supply and multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your righteousness,
in every thing being enriched to all liberality, which doth work through us thanksgiving to God,
because the ministration of this service not only is supplying the wants of the saints, but is also abounding through many thanksgivings to God,
through the proof of this ministration glorifying God for the subjection of your confession to the good news of the Christ, and [for] the liberality of the fellowship to them and to all,
and by their supplication in your behalf, longing after you because of the exceeding grace of God upon you;
thanks also to God for His unspeakable gift!
And I, Paul, myself, do call upon you — through the meekness and gentleness of the Christ — who in presence, indeed [am] humble among you, and being absent, have courage toward you,
and I beseech [you], that, being present, I may not have courage, with the confidence with which I reckon to be bold against certain reckoning us as walking according to the flesh;
for walking in the flesh, not according to the flesh do we war,
for the weapons of our warfare [are] not fleshly, but powerful to God for bringing down of strongholds,
reasonings bringing down, and every high thing lifted up against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of the Christ,
and being in readiness to avenge every disobedience, whenever your obedience may be fulfilled.
The things in presence do ye see? if any one hath trusted in himself to be Christ's, this let him reckon again from himself, that according as he is Christ's, so also we [are] Christ's;
for even if also anything more abundantly I shall boast concerning our authority, that the Lord gave us for building up, and not for casting you down, I shall not be ashamed;
that I may not seem as if I would terrify you through the letters,
'because the letters indeed — saith one — [are] weighty and strong, and the bodily presence weak, and the speech despicable.'
This one — let him reckon thus: that such as we are in word, through letters, being absent, such also, being present, [we are] in deed.
For we do not make bold to rank or to compare ourselves with certain of those commending themselves, but they, among themselves measuring themselves, and comparing themselves with themselves, are not wise,
and we in regard to the unmeasured things will not boast ourselves, but after the measure of the line that the God of measure did appoint to us — to reach even unto you;
for not as not reaching to you do we stretch ourselves overmuch, for even unto you did we come in the good news of the Christ,
not boasting of the things not measured, in other men's labours, and having hope — your faith increasing — in you to be enlarged, according to our line — into abundance,
in the [places] beyond you to proclaim good news, not in another's line in regard to the things made ready, to boast;
and he who is boasting — in the Lord let him boast;
for not he who is commending himself is approved, but he whom the Lord doth commend.
O that ye were bearing with me a little of the folly, but ye also do bear with me:
for I am zealous for you with zeal of God, for I did betroth you to one husband, a pure virgin, to present to Christ,
and I fear, lest, as the serpent did beguile Eve in his subtilty, so your minds may be corrupted from the simplicity that [is] in the Christ;
for if, indeed, he who is coming doth preach another Jesus whom we did not preach, or another Spirit ye receive which ye did not receive, or other good news which ye did not accept — well were ye bearing [it],
for I reckon that I have been nothing behind the very chiefest apostles,
and even if unlearned in word — yet not in knowledge, but in every thing we were made manifest in all things to you.
The sin did I do — myself humbling that ye might be exalted, because freely the good news of God I did proclaim to you?
other assemblies I did rob, having taken wages, for your ministration;
and being present with you, and having been in want, I was chargeable to no one, for my lack did the brethren supply — having come from Macedonia — and in everything burdenless to you I did keep myself, and will keep.
The truth of Christ is in me, because this boasting shall not be stopped in regard to me in the regions of Achaia;
wherefore? because I do not love you? God hath known!
and what I do, I also will do, that I may cut off the occasion of those wishing an occasion, that in that which they boast they may be found according as we also;
for those such [are] false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into apostles of Christ,
and no wonder — for even the Adversary doth transform himself into a messenger of light;
no great thing, then, if also his ministrants do transform themselves as ministrants of righteousness — whose end shall be according to their works.
Again I say, may no one think me to be a fool; and if otherwise, even as a fool receive me, that I also a little may boast.
That which I speak, I speak not according to the Lord, but as in foolishness, in this the confidence of boasting;
since many boast according to the flesh, I also will boast:
for gladly do ye bear with the fools — being wise,
for ye bear, if any one is bringing you under bondage, if any one doth devour, if any one doth take away, if any one doth exalt himself, if any one on the face doth smite you;
in reference to dishonour I speak, how that we were weak, and in whatever any one is bold — in foolishness I say [it] — I also am bold.
Hebrews are they? I also! Israelites are they? I also! seed of Abraham are they? I also!
ministrants of Christ are they? — as beside myself I speak — I more; in labours more abundantly, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequently, in deaths many times;
from Jews five times forty [stripes] save one I did receive;
thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice was I shipwrecked, a night and a day in the deep I have passed;
journeyings many times, perils of rivers, perils of robbers, perils from kindred, perils from nations, perils in city, perils in wilderness, perils in sea, perils among false brethren;
in labouriousness and painfulness, in watchings many times, in hunger and thirst, in fastings many times, in cold and nakedness;
apart from the things without — the crowding upon me that is daily — the care of all the assemblies.
Who is infirm, and I am not infirm? who is stumbled, and I am not fired;
if to boast it behoveth [me], of the things of my infirmity I will boast;
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ — who is blessed to the ages — hath known that I do not lie! —
In Damascus the ethnarch of Aretas the king was watching the city of the Damascenes, wishing to seize me,
and through a window in a rope basket I was let down, through the wall, and fled out of his hands.
To boast, really, is not profitable for me, for I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord.
I have known a man in Christ, fourteen years ago — whether in the body I have not known, whether out of the body I have not known, God hath known — such an one being caught away unto the third heaven;
and I have known such a man — whether in the body, whether out of the body, I have not known, God hath known, —
that he was caught away to the paradise, and heard unutterable sayings, that it is not possible for man to speak.
Of such an one I will boast, and of myself I will not boast, except in my infirmities,
for if I may wish to boast, I shall not be a fool, for truth I will say; but I forebear, lest any one in regard to me may think anything above what he doth see me, or doth hear anything of me;
and that by the exceeding greatness of the revelations I might not be exalted overmuch, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of the Adversary, that he might buffet me, that I might not be exalted overmuch.
Concerning this thing thrice the Lord did I call upon, that it might depart from me,
and He said to me, 'Sufficient for thee is My grace, for My power in infirmity is perfected;' most gladly, therefore, will I rather boast in my infirmities, that the power of the Christ may rest on me:
wherefore I am well pleased in infirmities, in damages, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses — for Christ; for whenever I am infirm, then I am powerful;
I have become a fool — boasting; ye — ye did compel me; for I ought by you to have been commended, for in nothing was I behind the very chiefest apostles — even if I am nothing.
The signs, indeed, of the apostle were wrought among you in all patience, in signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds,
for what is there in which ye were inferior to the rest of the assemblies, except that I myself was not a burden to you? forgive me this injustice!
Lo, a third time I am ready to come unto you, and I will not be a burden to you, for I seek not yours, but you, for the children ought not for the parents to lay up, but the parents for the children,
and I most gladly will spend and be entirely spent for your souls, even if, more abundantly loving you, less I am loved.
And be it [so], I — I did not burden you, but being crafty, with guile I did take you;
any one of those whom I have sent unto you — by him did I take advantage of you?
I entreated Titus, and did send with [him] the brother; did Titus take advantage of you? in the same spirit did we not walk? — did we not in the same steps?
Again, think ye that to you we are making defence? before God in Christ do we speak; and the all things, beloved, [are] for your up-building,
for I fear lest, having come, not such as I wish I may find you, and I — I may be found by you such as ye do not wish, lest there be strifes, envyings, wraths, revelries, evil-speakings, whisperings, puffings up, insurrections,
lest again having come, my God may humble me in regard to you, and I may bewail many of those having sinned before, and not having reformed concerning the uncleanness, and whoredom, and lasciviousness, that they did practise.
This third time do I come unto you; on the mouth of two witnesses or three shall every saying be established;
I have said before, and I say [it] before, as being present, the second time, and being absent, now, do I write to those having sinned before, and to all the rest, that if I come again, I will not spare,
since a proof ye seek of the Christ speaking in me, who to you is not infirm, but is powerful in you,
for even if he was crucified from infirmity, yet he doth live from the power of God; for we also are weak in him, but we shall live with him from the power of God toward you.
Your own selves try ye, if ye are in the faith; your own selves prove ye; do ye not know your own selves, that Jesus Christ is in you, if ye be not in some respect disapproved of?
and I hope that ye shall know that we — we are not disapproved of;
and I pray before God that ye do no evil, not that we may appear approved, but that ye may do that which is right, and we may be as disapproved;
for we are not able to do anything against the truth, but for the truth;
for we rejoice when we may be infirm, and ye may be powerful; and this also we pray for — your perfection!
because of this, these things — being absent — I write, that being present, I may not treat [any] sharply, according to the authority that the Lord did give me for building up, and not for casting down.
Henceforth, brethren, rejoice; be made perfect, be comforted, be of the same mind, be at peace, and the God of the love and peace shall be with you;
salute one another in an holy kiss;
salute you do all the saints;
Paul, an apostle — not from men, nor through man, but through Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who did raise him out of the dead —
and all the brethren with me, to the assemblies of Galatia:
Grace to you, and peace from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ,
who did give himself for our sins, that he might deliver us out of the present evil age, according to the will of God even our Father,
to whom [is] the glory to the ages of the ages. Amen.
I wonder that ye are so quickly removed from Him who did call you in the grace of Christ to another good news;
that is not another, except there be certain who are troubling you, and wishing to pervert the good news of the Christ;
but even if we or a messenger out of heaven may proclaim good news to you different from what we did proclaim to you — anathema let him be!
as we have said before, and now say again, If any one to you may proclaim good news different from what ye did receive — anathema let him be!
for now men do I persuade, or God? or do I seek to please men? for if yet men I did please — Christ's servant I should not be.
And I make known to you, brethren, the good news that were proclaimed by me, that it is not according to man,
for neither did I from man receive it, nor was I taught [it], but through a revelation of Jesus Christ,
for ye did hear of my behaviour once in Judaism, that exceedingly I was persecuting the assembly of God, and wasting it,
and I was advancing in Judaism above many equals in age in mine own race, being more abundantly zealous of my fathers' deliverances,
and when God was well pleased — having separated me from the womb of my mother, and having called [me] through His grace —
to reveal His Son in me, that I might proclaim him good news among the nations, immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood,
nor did I go up to Jerusalem unto those who were apostles before me, but I went away to Arabia, and again returned to Damascus,
then, after three years I went up to Jerusalem to enquire about Peter, and remained with him fifteen days,
and other of the apostles I did not see, except James, the brother of the Lord.
And the things that I write to you, lo, before God — I lie not;
then I came to the regions of Syria and of Cilicia,
and was unknown by face to the assemblies of Judea, that [are] in Christ,
and only they were hearing, that 'he who is persecuting us then, doth now proclaim good news — the faith that then he was wasting;'
and they were glorifying God in me.
Then, after fourteen years again I went up to Jerusalem with Barnabas, having taken with me also Titus;
and I went up by revelation, and did submit to them the good news that I preach among the nations, and privately to those esteemed, lest in vain I might run or did run;
but not even Titus, who [is] with me, being a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised —
and [that] because of the false brethren brought in unawares, who did come in privily to spy out our liberty that we have in Christ Jesus, that us they might bring under bondage,
to whom not even for an hour we gave place by subjection, that the truth of the good news might remain to you.
And from those who were esteemed to be something — whatever they were then, it maketh no difference to me — the face of man God accepteth not, for — to me those esteemed did add nothing,
but, on the contrary, having seen that I have been entrusted with the good news of the uncircumcision, as Peter with [that] of the circumcision,
for He who did work with Peter to the apostleship of the circumcision, did work also in me in regard to the nations,
and having known the grace that was given to me, James, and Cephas, and John, who were esteemed to be pillars, a right hand of fellowship they did give to me, and to Barnabas, that we to the nations, and they to the circumcision [may go],
only, of the poor that we should be mindful, which also I was diligent — this very thing — to do.
And when Peter came to Antioch, to the face I stood up against him, because he was blameworthy,
for before the coming of certain from James, with the nations he was eating, and when they came, he was withdrawing and separating himself, fearing those of the circumcision,
and dissemble with him also did the other Jews, so that also Barnabas was carried away by their dissimulation.
But when I saw that they are not walking uprightly to the truth of the good news, I said to Peter before all, 'If thou, being a Jew, in the manner of the nations dost live, and not in the manner of the Jews, how the nations dost thou compel to Judaize?
we by nature Jews, and not sinners of the nations,
having known also that a man is not declared righteous by works of law, if not through the faith of Jesus Christ, also we in Christ Jesus did believe, that we might be declared righteous by the faith of Christ, and not by works of law, wherefore declared righteous by works of law shall be no flesh.'
And if, seeking to be declared righteous in Christ, we ourselves also were found sinners, [is] then Christ a ministrant of sin? let it not be!
for if the things I threw down, these again I build up, a transgressor I set myself forth;
for I through law, did die, that to God I may live;
with Christ I have been crucified, and live no more do I, and Christ doth live in me; and that which I now live in the flesh — in the faith I live of the Son of God, who did love me and did give himself for me;
I do not make void the grace of God, for if righteousness [be] through law — then Christ died in vain.
O thoughtless Galatians, who did bewitch you, not to obey the truth — before whose eyes Jesus Christ was described before among you crucified?
this only do I wish to learn from you — by works of law the Spirit did ye receive, or by the hearing of faith?
so thoughtless are ye! having begun in the Spirit, now in the flesh do ye end?
so many things did ye suffer in vain! if, indeed, even in vain.
He, therefore, who is supplying to you the Spirit, and working mighty acts among you — by works of law or by the hearing of faith [is it]?
according as Abraham did believe God, and it was reckoned to him — to righteousness;
know ye, then, that those of faith — these are sons of Abraham,
and the Writing having foreseen that by faith God doth declare righteous the nations did proclaim before the good news to Abraham —
'Blessed in thee shall be all the nations;' so that those of faith are blessed with the faithful Abraham,
for as many as are of works of law are under a curse, for it hath been written, 'Cursed [is] every one who is not remaining in all things that have been written in the Book of the Law — to do them,'
and that in law no one is declared righteous with God, is evident, because 'The righteous by faith shall live;'
and the law is not by faith, but — 'The man who did them shall live in them.'
Christ did redeem us from the curse of the law, having become for us a curse, for it hath been written, 'Cursed is every one who is hanging on a tree,'
that to the nations the blessing of Abraham may come in Christ Jesus, that the promise of the Spirit we may receive through the faith.
Brethren, as a man I say [it], even of man a confirmed covenant no one doth make void or doth add to,
and to Abraham were the promises spoken, and to his seed; He doth not say, 'And to seeds,' as of many, but as of one, 'And to thy seed,' which is Christ;
and this I say, A covenant confirmed before by God to Christ, the law, that came four hundred and thirty years after, doth not set aside, to make void the promise,
for if by law [be] the inheritance, [it is] no more by promise, but to Abraham through promise did God grant [it].
Why, then, the law? on account of the transgressions it was added, till the seed might come to which the promise hath been made, having been set in order through messengers in the hand of a mediator —
and the mediator is not of one, and God is one —
the law, then, [is] against the promises of God? — let it not be! for if a law was given that was able to make alive, truly by law there would have been the righteousness,
but the Writing did shut up the whole under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ may be given to those believing.
And before the coming of the faith, under law we were being kept, shut up to the faith about to be revealed,
so that the law became our child-conductor — to Christ, that by faith we may be declared righteous,
and the faith having come, no more under a child-conductor are we,
for ye are all sons of God through the faith in Christ Jesus,
for as many as to Christ were baptized did put on Christ;
there is not here Jew or Greek, there is not here servant nor freeman, there is not here male and female, for all ye are one in Christ Jesus;
and if ye [are] of Christ then of Abraham ye are seed, and according to promise — heirs.
And I say, so long time as the heir is a babe, he differeth nothing from a servant — being lord of all,
but is under tutors and stewards till the time appointed of the father,
so also we, when we were babes, under the elements of the world were in servitude,
and when the fulness of time did come, God sent forth His Son, come of a woman, come under law,
that those under law he may redeem, that the adoption of sons we may receive;
and because ye are sons, God did send forth the spirit of His Son into your hearts, crying, 'Abba, Father!'
so that thou art no more a servant, but a son, and if a son, also an heir of God through Christ.
But then, indeed, not having known God, ye were in servitude to those not by nature gods,
and now, having known God — and rather being known by God — how turn ye again unto the weak and poor elements to which anew ye desire to be in servitude?
days ye observe, and months, and times, and years!
I am afraid of you, lest in vain I did labour toward you.
Become as I [am] — because I also [am] as ye brethren, I beseech you; to me ye did no hurt,
and ye have known that through infirmity of the flesh I did proclaim good news to you at the first,
and my trial that [is] in my flesh ye did not despise nor reject, but as a messenger of God ye did receive me — as Christ Jesus;
what then was your happiness? for I testify to you, that if possible, your eyes having plucked out, ye would have given to me;
so that your enemy have I become, being true to you?
they are zealous for you — [yet] not well, but they wish to shut us out, that for them ye may be zealous;
and [it is] good to be zealously regarded, in what is good, at all times, and not only in my being present with you;
my little children, of whom again I travail in birth, till Christ may be formed in you,
and I was wishing to be present with you now, and to change my voice, because I am in doubt about you.
Tell me, ye who are willing to be under law, the law do ye not hear?
for it hath been written, that Abraham had two sons, one by the maid-servant, and one by the free-woman,
but he who [is] of the maid-servant, according to flesh hath been, and he who [is] of the free-woman, through the promise;
which things are allegorized, for these are the two covenants: one, indeed, from mount Sinai, to servitude bringing forth, which is Hagar;
for this Hagar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and doth correspond to the Jerusalem that now [is], and is in servitude with her children,
and the Jerusalem above is the free-woman, which is mother of us all,
for it hath been written, 'Rejoice, O barren, who art not bearing; break forth and cry, thou who art not travailing, because many [are] the children of the desolate — more than of her having the husband.'
And we, brethren, as Isaac, are children of promise,
but as then he who was born according to the flesh did persecute him according to the spirit, so also now;
but what saith the Writing? 'Cast forth the maid-servant and her son, for the son of the maid-servant may not be heir with the son of the free-woman;'
then, brethren, we are not a maid-servant's children, but the free-woman's.
In the freedom, then, with which Christ did make you free — stand ye, and be not held fast again by a yoke of servitude;
lo, I Paul do say to you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing;
and I testify again to every man circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole law;
ye were freed from the Christ, ye who in law are declared righteous; from the grace ye fell away;
for we by the Spirit, by faith, a hope of righteousness do wait for,
for in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith through love working.
Ye were running well; who did hinder you — not to obey the truth?
the obedience [is] not of him who is calling you!
a little leaven the whole lump doth leaven;
I have confidence in regard to you in the Lord, that ye will be none otherwise minded; and he who is troubling you shall bear the judgment, whoever he may be.
And I, brethren, if uncircumcision I yet preach, why yet am I persecuted? then hath the stumbling-block of the cross been done away;
O that even they would cut themselves off who are unsettling you!
For ye — to freedom ye were called, brethren, only not the freedom for an occasion to the flesh, but through the love serve ye one another,
for all the law in one word is fulfilled — in this: 'Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself;'
and if one another ye do bite and devour, see — that ye may not by one another be consumed.
And I say: In the Spirit walk ye, and the desire of the flesh ye may not complete;
for the flesh doth desire contrary to the Spirit, and the Spirit contrary to the flesh, and these are opposed one to another, that the things that ye may will — these ye may not do;
and if by the Spirit ye are led, ye are not under law.
And manifest also are the works of the flesh, which are: Adultery, whoredom, uncleanness, lasciviousness,
idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, strifes, emulations, wraths, rivalries, dissensions, sects,
envyings, murders, drunkennesses, revellings, and such like, of which I tell you before, as I also said before, that those doing such things the reign of God shall not inherit.
And the fruit of the Spirit is: Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, faith,
meekness, temperance: against such there is no law;
and those who are Christ's, the flesh did crucify with the affections, and the desires;
if we may live in the Spirit, in the Spirit also we may walk;
let us not become vain-glorious — one another provoking, one another envying!
Brethren, if a man also may be overtaken in any trespass, ye who [are] spiritual restore such a one in a spirit of meekness, considering thyself — lest thou also may be tempted;
of one another the burdens bear ye, and so fill up the law of the Christ,
for if any one doth think [himself] to be something — being nothing — himself he doth deceive;
and his own work let each one prove, and then in regard to himself alone the glorying he shall have, and not in regard to the other,
for each one his own burden shall bear.
And let him who is instructed in the word share with him who is instructing — in all good things.
Be not led astray; God is not mocked; for what a man may sow — that also he shall reap,
because he who is sowing to his own flesh, of the flesh shall reap corruption; and he who is sowing to the Spirit, of the Spirit shall reap life age-during;
and in the doing good we may not be faint-hearted, for at the proper time we shall reap — not desponding;
therefore, then, as we have opportunity, may we work the good to all, and especially unto those of the household of the faith.
Ye see in how large letters I have written to you with my own hand;
as many as are willing to make a good appearance in the flesh, these constrain you to be circumcised — only that for the cross of the Christ they may not be persecuted,
for neither do those circumcised themselves keep the law, but they wish you to be circumcised, that in your flesh they may glory.
And for me, let it not be — to glory, except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which to me the world hath been crucified, and I to the world;
for in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new creation;
and as many as by this rule do walk — peace upon them, and kindness, and on the Israel of God!
Henceforth, let no one give me trouble, for I the scars of the Lord Jesus in my body do bear.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ [is] with your spirit, brethren! Amen.
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, to the saints who are in Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus:
Grace to you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ!
Blessed [is] the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who did bless us in every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in Christ,
according as He did choose us in him before the foundation of the world, for our being holy and unblemished before Him, in love,
having foreordained us to the adoption of sons through Jesus Christ to Himself, according to the good pleasure of His will,
to the praise of the glory of His grace, in which He did make us accepted in the beloved,
in whom we have the redemption through his blood, the remission of the trespasses, according to the riches of His grace,
in which He did abound toward us in all wisdom and prudence,
having made known to us the secret of His will, according to His good pleasure, that He purposed in Himself,
in regard to the dispensation of the fulness of the times, to bring into one the whole in the Christ, both the things in the heavens, and the things upon the earth — in him;
in whom also we did obtain an inheritance, being foreordained according to the purpose of Him who the all things is working according to the counsel of His will,
for our being to the praise of His glory, [even] those who did first hope in the Christ,
in whom ye also, having heard the word of the truth — the good news of your salvation — in whom also having believed, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of the promise,
which is an earnest of our inheritance, to the redemption of the acquired possession, to the praise of His glory.
Because of this I also, having heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and the love to all the saints,
do not cease giving thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers,
that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of the glory, may give to you a spirit of wisdom and revelation in the recognition of him,
the eyes of your understanding being enlightened, for your knowing what is the hope of His calling, and what the riches of the glory of His inheritance in the saints,
and what the exceeding greatness of His power to us who are believing, according to the working of the power of His might,
which He wrought in the Christ, having raised him out of the dead, and did set [him] at His right hand in the heavenly [places],
far above all principality, and authority, and might, and lordship, and every name named, not only in this age, but also in the coming one;
and all things He did put under his feet, and did give him — head over all things to the assembly,
which is his body, the fulness of Him who is filling the all in all,
Also you — being dead in the trespasses and the sins,
in which once ye did walk according to the age of this world, according to the ruler of the authority of the air, of the spirit that is now working in the sons of disobedience,
among whom also we all did walk once in the desires of our flesh, doing the wishes of the flesh and of the thoughts, and were by nature children of wrath — as also the others,
and God, being rich in kindness, because of His great love with which He loved us,
even being dead in the trespasses, did make us to live together with the Christ, (by grace ye are having been saved,)
and did raise [us] up together, and did seat [us] together in the heavenly [places] in Christ Jesus,
that He might show, in the ages that are coming, the exceeding riches of His grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus,
for by grace ye are having been saved, through faith, and this not of you — of God the gift,
not of works, that no one may boast;
for of Him we are workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to good works, which God did before prepare, that in them we may walk.
Wherefore, remember, that ye [were] once the nations in the flesh, who are called Uncircumcision by that called Circumcision in the flesh made by hands,
that ye were at that time apart from Christ, having been alienated from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the covenants of the promise, having no hope, and without God, in the world;
and now, in Christ Jesus, ye being once afar off became nigh in the blood of the Christ,
for he is our peace, who did make both one, and the middle wall of the enclosure did break down,
the enmity in his flesh, the law of the commands in ordinances having done away, that the two he might create in himself into one new man, making peace,
and might reconcile both in one body to God through the cross, having slain the enmity in it,
and having come, he did proclaim good news — peace to you — the far-off and the nigh,
because through him we have the access — we both — in one Spirit unto the Father.
Then, therefore, ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens of the saints, and of the household of God,
being built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being chief corner -[stone],
in whom all the building fitly framed together doth increase to an holy sanctuary in the Lord,
in whom also ye are builded together, for a habitation of God in the Spirit.
For this cause, I Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus for you the nations,
if, indeed, ye did hear of the dispensation of the grace of God that was given to me in regard to you,
that by revelation He made known to me the secret, according as I wrote before in few [words] —
in regard to which ye are able, reading [it], to understand my knowledge in the secret of the Christ,
which in other generations was not made known to the sons of men, as it was now revealed to His holy apostles and prophets in the Spirit —
that the nations be fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of His promise in the Christ, through the good news,
of which I became a ministrant, according to the gift of the grace of God that was given to me, according to the working of His power;
to me — the less than the least of all the saints — was given this grace, among the nations to proclaim good news — the untraceable riches of the Christ,
and to cause all to see what [is] the fellowship of the secret that hath been hid from the ages in God, who the all things did create by Jesus Christ,
that there might be made known now to the principalities and the authorities in the heavenly [places], through the assembly, the manifold wisdom of God,
according to a purpose of the ages, which He made in Christ Jesus our Lord,
in whom we have the freedom and the access in confidence through the faith of him,
wherefore, I ask [you] not to faint in my tribulations for you, which is your glory.
For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
of whom the whole family in the heavens and on earth is named,
that He may give to you, according to the riches of His glory, with might to be strengthened through His Spirit, in regard to the inner man,
that the Christ may dwell through the faith in your hearts, in love having been rooted and founded,
that ye may be in strength to comprehend, with all the saints, what [is] the breadth, and length, and depth, and height,
to know also the love of the Christ that is exceeding the knowledge, that ye may be filled — to all the fulness of God;
and to Him who is able above all things to do exceeding abundantly what we ask or think, according to the power that is working in us,
to Him [is] the glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus, to all the generations of the age of the ages. Amen.
Call upon you, then, do I — the prisoner of the Lord — to walk worthily of the calling with which ye were called,
with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another in love,
being diligent to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of the peace;
one body and one Spirit, according as also ye were called in one hope of your calling;
one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
one God and Father of all, who [is] over all, and through all, and in you all,
and to each one of you was given the grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ,
wherefore, he saith, 'Having gone up on high he led captive captivity, and gave gifts to men,' —
and that, he went up, what is it except that he also went down first to the lower parts of the earth?
he who went down is the same also who went up far above all the heavens, that He may fill all things —
and He gave some [as] apostles, and some [as] prophets, and some [as] proclaimers of good news, and some [as] shepherds and teachers,
unto the perfecting of the saints, for a work of ministration, for a building up of the body of the Christ,
till we may all come to the unity of the faith and of the recognition of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to a measure of stature of the fulness of the Christ,
that we may no more be babes, tossed and borne about by every wind of the teaching, in the sleight of men, in craftiness, unto the artifice of leading astray,
and, being true in love, we may increase to Him [in] all things, who is the head — the Christ;
from whom the whole body, being fitly joined together and united, through the supply of every joint, according to the working in the measure of each single part, the increase of the body doth make for the building up of itself in love.
This, then, I say, and I testify in the Lord; ye are no more to walk, as also the other nations walk, in the vanity of their mind,
being darkened in the understanding, being alienated from the life of God, because of the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their heart,
who, having ceased to feel, themselves did give up to the lasciviousness, for the working of all uncleanness in greediness;
and ye did not so learn the Christ,
if so be ye did hear him, and in him were taught, as truth is in Jesus;
ye are to put off concerning the former behaviour the old man, that is corrupt according to the desires of the deceit,
and to be renewed in the spirit of your mind,
and to put on the new man, which, according to God, was created in righteousness and kindness of the truth.
Wherefore, putting away the lying, speak truth each with his neighbour, because we are members one of another;
be angry and do not sin; let not the sun go down upon your wrath,
neither give place to the devil;
whoso is stealing let him no more steal, but rather let him labour, working the thing that is good with the hands, that he may have to impart to him having need.
Let no corrupt word out of your mouth go forth, but what is good unto the needful building up, that it may give grace to the hearers;
and make not sorrowful the Holy Spirit of God, in which ye were sealed to a day of redemption.
Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil-speaking, be put away from you, with all malice,
and become one to another kind, tender-hearted, forgiving one another, according as also God in Christ did forgive you.
Become, then, followers of God, as children beloved,
and walk in love, as also the Christ did love us, and did give himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for an odour of a sweet smell,
and whoredom, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not even be named among you, as becometh saints;
also filthiness, and foolish talking, or jesting, — the things not fit — but rather thanksgiving;
for this ye know, that every whoremonger, or unclean, or covetous person, who is an idolater, hath no inheritance in the reign of the Christ and God.
Let no one deceive you with vain words, for because of these things cometh the anger of God upon the sons of the disobedience,
become not, then, partakers with them,
for ye were once darkness, and now light in the Lord; as children of light walk ye,
for the fruit of the Spirit [is] in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth,
proving what is well-pleasing to the Lord,
and have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of the darkness and rather even convict,
for the things in secret done by them it is a shame even to speak of,
and all the things reproved by the light are manifested, for everything that is manifested is light;
wherefore he saith, 'Arouse thyself, thou who art sleeping, and arise out of the dead, and the Christ shall shine upon thee.'
See, then, how exactly ye walk, not as unwise, but as wise,
redeeming the time, because the days are evil;
because of this become not fools, but — understanding what [is] the will of the Lord,
and be not drunk with wine, in which is dissoluteness, but be filled in the Spirit,
speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord,
giving thanks always for all things, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to the God and Father;
subjecting yourselves to one another in the fear of God.
The wives! to your own husbands subject yourselves, as to the Lord,
because the husband is head of the wife, as also the Christ [is] head of the assembly, and he is saviour of the body,
but even as the assembly is subject to Christ, so also [are] the wives to their own husbands in everything.
The husbands! love your own wives, as also the Christ did love the assembly, and did give himself for it,
that he might sanctify it, having cleansed [it] with the bathing of the water in the saying,
that he might present it to himself the assembly in glory, not having spot or wrinkle, or any of such things, but that it may be holy and unblemished;
so ought the husbands to love their own wives as their own bodies: he who is loving his own wife — himself he doth love;
for no one ever his own flesh did hate, but doth nourish and cherish it, as also the Lord — the assembly,
because members we are of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones;
'for this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be joined to his wife, and they shall be — the two — for one flesh;'
this secret is great, and I speak in regard to Christ and to the assembly;
but ye also, every one in particular — let each his own wife so love as himself, and the wife — that she may reverence the husband.
The children! obey your parents in the Lord, for this is righteous;
honour thy father and mother,
which is the first command with a promise, 'That it may be well with thee, and thou mayest live a long time upon the land.'
And the fathers! provoke not your children, but nourish them in the instruction and admonition of the Lord.
The servants! obey the masters according to the flesh with fear and trembling, in the simplicity of your heart, as to the Christ;
not with eye-service as men-pleasers, but as servants of the Christ, doing the will of God out of soul,
with good-will serving, as to the Lord, and not to men,
having known that whatever good thing each one may do, this he shall receive from the Lord, whether servant or freeman.
And the masters! the same things do ye unto them, letting threatening alone, having known that also your Master is in the heavens, and acceptance of persons is not with him.
As to the rest, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might;
put on the whole armour of God, for your being able to stand against the wiles of the devil,
because we have not the wrestling with blood and flesh, but with the principalities, with the authorities, with the world-rulers of the darkness of this age, with the spiritual things of the evil in the heavenly places;
because of this take ye up the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to resist in the day of the evil, and all things having done — to stand.
Stand, therefore, having your loins girt about in truth, and having put on the breastplate of the righteousness,
and having the feet shod in the preparation of the good-news of the peace;
above all, having taken up the shield of the faith, in which ye shall be able all the fiery darts of the evil one to quench,
and the helmet of the salvation receive, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the saying of God,
through all prayer and supplication praying at all times in the Spirit, and in regard to this same, watching in all perseverance and supplication for all the saints —
and in behalf of me, that to me may be given a word in the opening of my mouth, in freedom, to make known the secret of the good news,
for which I am an ambassador in a chain, that in it I may speak freely — as it behoveth me to speak.
And that ye may know — ye also — the things concerning me — what I do, all things make known to you shall Tychicus, the beloved brother and faithful ministrant in the Lord,
whom I did send unto you for this very thing, that ye might know the things concerning us, and that he might comfort your hearts.
Peace to the brethren, and love, with faith, from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ!
The grace with all those loving our Lord Jesus Christ — undecayingly! Amen.
Paul and Timotheus, servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus who are in Philippi, with overseers and ministrants;
Grace to you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I give thanks to my God upon all the remembrance of you,
always, in every supplication of mine for you all, with joy making the supplication,
for your contribution to the good news from the first day till now,
having been confident of this very thing, that He who did begin in you a good work, will perform [it] till a day of Jesus Christ,
according as it is righteous for me to think this in behalf of you all, because of my having you in the heart, both in my bonds, and [in] the defence and confirmation of the good news, all of you being fellow-partakers with me of grace.
For God is my witness, how I long for you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ,
and this I pray, that your love yet more and more may abound in full knowledge, and all judgment,
for your proving the things that differ, that ye may be pure and offenceless — to a day of Christ,
being filled with the fruit of righteousness, that [is] through Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God.
And I wish you to know, brethren, that the things concerning me, rather to an advancement of the good news have come,
so that my bonds have become manifest in Christ in the whole praetorium, and to the other places — all,
and the greater part of the brethren in the Lord, having confidence by my bonds, are more abundantly bold — fearlessly to speak the word.
Certain, indeed, even through envy and contention, and certain also through good-will, do preach the Christ;
the one, indeed, of rivalry the Christ do proclaim, not purely, supposing to add affliction to my bonds,
and the other out of love, having known that for defence of the good news I am set:
what then? in every way, whether in pretence or in truth, Christ is proclaimed — and in this I rejoice, yea, and shall rejoice.
For I have known that this shall fall out to me for salvation, through your supplication, and the supply of the Spirit of Christ Jesus,
according to my earnest expectation and hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed, and in all freedom, as always, also now Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether through life or through death,
for to me to live [is] Christ, and to die gain.
And if to live in the flesh [is] to me a fruit of work, then what shall I choose? I know not;
for I am pressed by the two, having the desire to depart, and to be with Christ, for it is far better,
and to remain in the flesh is more necessary on your account,
and of this being persuaded, I have known that I shall remain and continue with you all, to your advancement and joy of the faith,
that your boasting may abound in Christ Jesus in me through my presence again to you.
Only worthily of the good news of the Christ conduct ye yourselves, that, whether having come and seen you, whether being absent I may hear of the things concerning you, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one soul, striving together for the faith of the good news,
and not terrified in anything by those opposing, which to them indeed is a token of destruction, and to you of salvation, and that from God;
because to you it was granted, on behalf of Christ, not only to believe in him, but also on behalf of him to suffer;
the same conflict having, such as ye saw in me, and now hear of in me.
If, then, any exhortation [is] in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of spirit, if any bowels and mercies,
fulfil ye my joy, that ye may mind the same thing — having the same love — of one soul — minding the one thing,
nothing in rivalry or vain-glory, but in humility of mind one another counting more excellent than yourselves —
each not to your own look ye, but each also to the things of others.
For, let this mind be in you that [is] also in Christ Jesus,
who, being in the form of God, thought [it] not robbery to be equal to God,
but did empty himself, the form of a servant having taken, in the likeness of men having been made,
and in fashion having been found as a man, he humbled himself, having become obedient unto death — death even of a cross,
wherefore, also, God did highly exalt him, and gave to him a name that [is] above every name,
that in the name of Jesus every knee may bow — of heavenlies, and earthlies, and what are under the earth —
and every tongue may confess that Jesus Christ [is] Lord, to the glory of God the Father.
So that, my beloved, as ye always obey, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, with fear and trembling your own salvation work out,
for God it is who is working in you both to will and to work for His good pleasure.
All things do without murmurings and reasonings,
that ye may become blameless and harmless, children of God, unblemished in the midst of a generation crooked and perverse, among whom ye do appear as luminaries in the world,
the word of life holding forth, for rejoicing to me in regard to a day of Christ, that not in vain did I run, nor in vain did I labour;
but if also I am poured forth upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I rejoice and joy with you all,
because of this do ye also rejoice and joy with me.
And I hope, in the Lord Jesus, Timotheus to send quickly to you, that I also may be of good spirit, having known the things concerning you,
for I have no one like-minded, who sincerely for the things concerning you will care,
for the whole seek their own things, not the things of the Christ Jesus,
and the proof of him ye know, that as a child [serveth] a father, with me he did serve in regard to the good news;
him, indeed, therefore, I hope to send, when I may see through the things concerning me — immediately;
and I trust in the Lord that I myself also shall quickly come.
And I thought [it] necessary Epaphroditus — my brother, and fellow-workman, and fellow-soldier, and your apostle and servant to my need — to send unto you,
seeing he was longing after you all, and in heaviness, because ye heard that he ailed,
for he also ailed nigh to death, but God did deal kindly with him, and not with him only, but also with me, that sorrow upon sorrow I might not have.
The more eagerly, therefore, I did send him, that having seen him again ye may rejoice, and I may be the less sorrowful;
receive him, therefore, in the Lord, with all joy, and hold such in honour,
because on account of the work of the Christ he drew near to death, having hazarded the life that he might fill up your deficiency of service unto me.
As to the rest, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord; the same things to write to you to me indeed is not tiresome, and for you [is] sure;
look to the dogs, look to the evil-workers, look to the concision;
for we are the circumcision, who by the Spirit are serving God, and glorying in Christ Jesus, and in flesh having no trust,
though I also have [cause of] trust in flesh. If any other one doth think to have trust in flesh, I more;
circumcision on the eighth day! of the race of Israel! of the tribe of Benjamin! a Hebrew of Hebrews! according to law a Pharisee!
according to zeal persecuting the assembly! according to righteousness that is in law becoming blameless!
But what things were to me gains, these I have counted, because of the Christ, loss;
yes, indeed, and I count all things to be loss, because of the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, because of whom of the all things I suffered loss, and do count them to be refuse, that Christ I may gain, and be found in him,
not having my righteousness, which [is] of law, but that which [is] through faith of Christ — the righteousness that is of God by the faith,
to know him, and the power of his rising again, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being conformed to his death,
if anyhow I may attain to the rising again of the dead.
Not that I did already obtain, or have been already perfected; but I pursue, if also I may lay hold of that for which also I was laid hold of by the Christ Jesus;
brethren, I do not reckon myself to have laid hold; and one thing — the things behind indeed forgetting, and to the things before stretching forth —
to the mark I pursue for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
As many, therefore, as [are] perfect — let us think this, and if [in] anything ye think otherwise, this also shall God reveal to you,
but to what we have come — by the same rule walk, the same thing think;
become followers together of me, brethren, and observe those thus walking, according as ye have us — a pattern;
for many walk of whom many times I told you — and now also weeping tell — the enemies of the cross of the Christ!
whose end [is] destruction, whose god [is] the belly, and whose glory [is] in their shame, who the things on earth are minding.
For our citizenship is in the heavens, whence also a Saviour we await — the Lord Jesus Christ —
who shall transform the body of our humiliation to its becoming conformed to the body of his glory, according to the working of his power, even to subject to himself the all things.
So then, my brethren, beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, so stand ye in the Lord, beloved.
Euodia I exhort, and Syntyche I exhort, to be of the same mind in the Lord;
and I ask also thee, genuine yoke-fellow, be assisting those women who in the good news did strive along with me, with Clement also, and the others, my fellow-workers, whose names [are] in the book of life.
Rejoice in the Lord always; again I will say, rejoice;
let your forbearance be known to all men; the Lord [is] near;
for nothing be anxious, but in everything by prayer, and by supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God;
and the peace of God, that is surpassing all understanding, shall guard your hearts and your thoughts in Christ Jesus.
As to the rest, brethren, as many things as are true, as many as [are] grave, as many as [are] righteous, as many as [are] pure, as many as [are] lovely, as many as [are] of good report, if any worthiness, and if any praise, these things think upon;
the things that also ye did learn, and receive, and hear, and saw in me, those do, and the God of the peace shall be with you.
And I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that now at length ye flourished again in caring for me, for which also ye were caring, and lacked opportunity;
not that in respect of want I say [it], for I did learn in the things in which I am — to be content;
I have known both to be abased, and I have known to abound; in everything and in all things I have been initiated, both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to be in want.
For all things I have strength, in Christ's strengthening me;
but ye did well, having communicated with my tribulation;
and ye have known, even ye Philippians, that in the beginning of the good news when I went forth from Macedonia, no assembly did communicate with me in regard to giving and receiving except ye only;
because also in Thessalonica, both once and again to my need ye sent;
not that I seek after the gift, but I seek after the fruit that is overflowing to your account;
and I have all things, and abound; I am filled, having received from Epaphroditus the things from you — an odour of a sweet smell — a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God:
and my God shall supply all your need, according to His riches in glory in Christ Jesus;
and to God, even our Father, [is] the glory — to the ages of the ages. Amen.
Salute ye every saint in Christ Jesus; there salute you the brethren with me;
there salute you all the saints, and specially those of Caesar's house;
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ [is] with you all. Amen.
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, and Timotheus the brother,
to the saints in Colossae, and to the faithful brethren in Christ: Grace to you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ!
We give thanks to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, always praying for you,
having heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love that [is] to all the saints,
because of the hope that is laid up for you in the heavens, which ye heard of before in the word of the truth of the good news,
which is present to you, as also in all the world, and is bearing fruit, as also in you, from the day in which ye heard, and knew the grace of God in truth;
as ye also learned from Epaphras, our beloved fellow-servant, who is for you a faithful ministrant of the Christ,
who also did declare to us your love in the Spirit.
Because of this, we also, from the day in which we heard, do not cease praying for you, and asking that ye may be filled with the full knowledge of His will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding,
to your walking worthily of the Lord to all pleasing, in every good work being fruitful, and increasing to the knowledge of God,
in all might being made mighty according to the power of His glory, to all endurance and long-suffering with joy.
Giving thanks to the Father who did make us meet for the participation of the inheritance of the saints in the light,
who did rescue us out of the authority of the darkness, and did translate [us] into the reign of the Son of His love,
in whom we have the redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of the sins,
who is the image of the invisible God, first-born of all creation,
because in him were the all things created, those in the heavens, and those upon the earth, those visible, and those invisible, whether thrones, whether lordships, whether principalities, whether authorities; all things through him, and for him, have been created,
and himself is before all, and the all things in him have consisted.
And himself is the head of the body — the assembly — who is a beginning, a first-born out of the dead, that he might become in all [things] — himself — first,
because in him it did please all the fulness to tabernacle,
and through him to reconcile the all things to himself — having made peace through the blood of his cross — through him, whether the things upon the earth, whether the things in the heavens.
And you — once being alienated, and enemies in the mind, in the evil works, yet now did he reconcile,
in the body of his flesh through the death, to present you holy, and unblemished, and unblameable before himself,
if also ye remain in the faith, being founded and settled, and not moved away from the hope of the good news, which ye heard, which was preached in all the creation that [is] under the heaven, of which I became — I Paul — a ministrant.
I now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and do fill up the things lacking of the tribulations of the Christ in my flesh for his body, which is the assembly,
of which I — I did become a ministrant according to the dispensation of God, that was given to me for you, to fulfil the word of God,
the secret that hath been hid from the ages and from the generations, but now was manifested to his saints,
to whom God did will to make known what [is] the riches of the glory of this secret among the nations — which is Christ in you, the hope of the glory,
whom we proclaim, warning every man, and teaching every man, in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus,
for which also I labour, striving according to his working that is working in me in power.
For I wish you to know how great a conflict I have for you and those in Laodicea, and as many as have not seen my face in the flesh,
that their hearts may be comforted, being united in love, and to all riches of the full assurance of the understanding, to the full knowledge of the secret of the God and Father, and of the Christ,
in whom are all the treasures of the wisdom and the knowledge hid,
and this I say, that no one may beguile you in enticing words,
for if even in the flesh I am absent — yet in the spirit I am with you, joying and beholding your order, and the stedfastness of your faith in regard to Christ;
as, then, ye did receive Christ Jesus the Lord, in him walk ye,
being rooted and built up in him, and confirmed in the faith, as ye were taught — abounding in it in thanksgiving.
See that no one shall be carrying you away as spoil through the philosophy and vain deceit, according to the deliverance of men, according to the rudiments of the world, and not according to Christ,
because in him doth tabernacle all the fulness of the Godhead bodily,
and ye are in him made full, who is the head of all principality and authority,
in whom also ye were circumcised with a circumcision not made with hands, in the putting off of the body of the sins of the flesh in the circumcision of the Christ,
being buried with him in the baptism, in which also ye rose with [him] through the faith of the working of God, who did raise him out of the dead.
And you — being dead in the trespasses and the uncircumcision of your flesh — He made alive together with him, having forgiven you all the trespasses,
having blotted out the handwriting in the ordinances that is against us, that was contrary to us, and he hath taken it out of the way, having nailed it to the cross;
having stripped the principalities and the authorities, he made a shew of them openly — having triumphed over them in it.
Let no one, then, judge you in eating or in drinking, or in respect of a feast, or of a new moon, or of sabbaths,
which are a shadow of the coming things, and the body [is] of the Christ;
let no one beguile you of your prize, delighting in humble-mindedness and [in] worship of the messengers, intruding into the things he hath not seen, being vainly puffed up by the mind of his flesh,
and not holding the head, from which all the body — through the joints and bands gathering supply, and being knit together — may increase with the increase of God.
If, then, ye did die with the Christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances?
— thou mayest not touch, nor taste, nor handle —
which are all for destruction with the using, after the commands and teachings of men,
which are, indeed, having a matter of wisdom in will-worship, and humble-mindedness, and neglecting of body — not in any honour, unto a satisfying of the flesh.
If, then, ye were raised with the Christ, the things above seek ye, where the Christ is, on the right hand of God seated,
the things above mind ye, not the things upon the earth,
for ye did die, and your life hath been hid with the Christ in God;
when the Christ — our life — may be manifested, then also we with him shall be manifested in glory.
Put to death, then, your members that [are] upon the earth — whoredom, uncleanness, passion, evil desire, and the covetousness, which is idolatry —
because of which things cometh the anger of God upon the sons of the disobedience,
in which also ye — ye did walk once, when ye lived in them;
but now put off, even ye, the whole — anger, wrath, malice, evil-speaking, filthy talking — out of your mouth.
Lie not one to another, having put off the old man with his practices,
and having put on the new, which is renewed in regard to knowledge, after the image of Him who did create him;
where there is not Greek and Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision, foreigner, Scythian, servant, freeman — but the all and in all — Christ.
Put on, therefore, as choice ones of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humble-mindedness, meekness, long-suffering,
forbearing one another, and forgiving each other, if any one with any one may have a quarrel, as also the Christ did forgive you — so also ye;
and above all these things, [have] love, which is a bond of the perfection,
and let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to which also ye were called in one body, and become thankful.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing each other, in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, in grace singing in your hearts to the Lord;
and all, whatever ye may do in word or in work, [do] all things in the name of the Lord Jesus — giving thanks to the God and Father, through him.
The wives! be subject to your own husbands, as is fit in the Lord;
the husbands! love your wives, and be not bitter with them;
the children! obey the parents in all things, for this is well-pleasing to the Lord;
the fathers! vex not your children, lest they be discouraged.
The servants! obey in all things those who are masters according to the flesh, not in eye-service as men-pleasers, but in simplicity of heart, fearing God;
and all, whatever ye may do — out of soul work — as to the Lord, and not to men,
having known that from the Lord ye shall receive the recompense of the inheritance — for the Lord Christ ye serve;
and he who is doing unrighteously shall receive what he did unrighteously, and there is no acceptance of persons.
The masters! that which is righteous and equal to the servants give ye, having known that ye also have a Master in the heavens.
In the prayer continue ye, watching in it in thanksgiving;
praying at the same time also for us, that God may open to us a door for the word, to speak the secret of the Christ, because of which also I have been bound,
that I may manifest it, as it behoveth me to speak;
in wisdom walk ye toward those without, the time forestalling;
your word always in grace — with salt being seasoned — to know how it behoveth you to answer each one.
All the things concerning me make known to you shall Tychicus — the beloved brother, and faithful ministrant, and fellow-servant in the Lord —
whom I did send unto you for this very thing, that he might know the things concerning you, and might comfort your hearts,
with Onesimus the faithful and beloved brother, who is of you; all things to you shall they make known that [are] here.
Salute you doth Aristarchus, my fellow-captive, and Marcus, the nephew of Barnabas, (concerning whom ye did receive commands — if he may come unto you receive him,)
and Jesus who is called Justus, who are of the circumcision: these only [are] fellow-workers for the reign of God who did become a comfort to me.
Salute you doth Epaphras, who [is] of you, a servant of Christ, always striving for you in the prayers, that ye may stand perfect and made full in all the will of God,
for I do testify to him, that he hath much zeal for you, and those in Laodicea, and those in Hierapolis.
Salute you doth Lukas, the beloved physician, and Demas;
salute ye those in Laodicea — brethren, and Nymphas, and the assembly in his house;
and when the epistle may be read with you, cause that also in the assembly of the Laodiceans it may be read, and the [epistle] from Laodicea that ye also may read;
and say to Archippus, 'See to the ministration that thou didst receive in the Lord, that thou mayest fulfil it.'
The salutation by the hand of me, Paul; remember my bonds; the grace [is] with you. Amen.
Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, to the assembly of Thessalonians in God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace to you, and peace, from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ!
We give thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you in our prayers,
unceasingly remembering of you the work of the faith, and the labour of the love, and the endurance of the hope, of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the presence of our God and Father,
having known, brethren beloved, by God, your election,
because our good news did not come to you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Spirit, and in much assurance, even as ye have known of what sort we became among you because of you,
and ye — ye did become imitators of us, and of the Lord, having received the word in much tribulation, with joy of the Holy Spirit,
so that ye became patterns to all those believing in Macedonia and Achaia,
for from you hath sounded forth the word of the Lord, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every place your faith toward God did go forth, so that we have no need to say anything,
for they themselves concerning us do declare what entrance we had unto you, and how ye did turn unto God from the idols, to serve a living and true God,
and to wait for His Son from the heavens, whom He did raise out of the dead — Jesus, who is rescuing us from the anger that is coming.
For yourselves have known, brethren, our entrance in unto you, that it did not become vain,
but having both suffered before, and having been injuriously treated (as ye have known) in Philippi, we were bold in our God to speak unto you the good news of God in much conflict,
for our exhortation [is] not out of deceit, nor out of uncleanness, nor in guile,
but as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the good news, so we speak, not as pleasing men, but God, who is proving our hearts,
for at no time did we come with speech of flattery, (as ye have known,) nor in a pretext for covetousness, (God [is] witness!)
nor seeking of men glory, neither from you nor from others, being able to be burdensome, as Christ's apostles.
But we became gentle in your midst, as a nurse may cherish her own children,
so being desirous of you, we are well-pleased to impart to you not only the good news of God, but also our own souls, because beloved ye have become to us,
for ye remember, brethren, our labour and travail, for, night and day working not to be a burden upon any of you, we did preach to you the good news of God;
ye [are] witnesses — God also — how kindly and righteously, and blamelessly to you who believe we became,
even as ye have known, how each one of you, as a father his own children, we are exhorting you, and comforting, and testifying,
for your walking worthily of God, who is calling you to His own reign and glory.
Because of this also, we — we do give thanks to God continually, that, having received the word of hearing from us of God, ye accepted, not the word of man, but as it is truly, the word of God, who also doth work in you who believe;
for ye became imitators, brethren, of the assemblies of God that are in Judea in Christ Jesus, because such things ye suffered, even ye, from your own countrymen, as also they from the Jews,
who did both put to death the Lord Jesus and their own prophets, and did persecute us, and God they are not pleasing, and to all men [are] contrary,
forbidding us to speak to the nations that they might be saved, to fill up their sins always, but the anger did come upon them — to the end!
And we, brethren, having been taken from you for the space of an hour — in presence, not in heart — did hasten the more abundantly to see your face in much desire,
wherefore we wished to come unto you, (I indeed Paul,) both once and again, and the Adversary did hinder us;
for what [is] our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? are not even ye before our Lord Jesus Christ in his presence?
for ye are our glory and joy.
Wherefore no longer forbearing, we thought good to be left in Athens alone,
and did send Timotheus — our brother, and a ministrant of God, and our fellow-workman in the good news of the Christ — to establish you, and to comfort you concerning your faith,
that no one be moved in these tribulations, for yourselves have known that for this we are set,
for even when we were with you, we said to you beforehand, that we are about to suffer tribulation, as also it did come to pass, and ye have known [it];
because of this also, I, no longer forbearing, did send to know your faith, lest he who is tempting did tempt you, and in vain might be our labour.
And now Timotheus having come unto us from you, and having declared good news to us of your faith and love, and that ye have a good remembrance of us always, desiring much to see us, as we also [to see] you,
because of this we were comforted, brethren, over you, in all our tribulation and necessity, through your faith,
because now we live, if ye may stand fast in the Lord;
for what thanks are we able to recompense to God for you, for all the joy with which we do joy because of you in the presence of our God?
night and day exceedingly beseeching, that we might see your face, and perfect the things lacking in your faith.
And our God and Father Himself, and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way unto you,
and you the Lord cause to increase and to abound in the love to one another, and to all, even as we also to you,
to the establishing your hearts blameless in sanctification before our God and Father, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ with all His saints.
As to the rest, then, brethren, we request you, and call upon you in the Lord Jesus, as ye did receive from us how it behoveth you to walk and to please God, that ye may abound the more,
for ye have known what commands we gave you through the Lord Jesus,
for this is the will of God — your sanctification; that ye abstain from the whoredom,
that each of you know his own vessel to possess in sanctification and honour,
not in the affection of desire, as also the nations that were not knowing God,
that no one go beyond and defraud in the matter his brother, because an avenger [is] the Lord of all these, as also we spake before to you and testified,
for God did not call us on uncleanness, but in sanctification;
he, therefore, who is despising — doth not despise man, but God, who also did give His Holy Spirit to us.
And concerning the brotherly love, ye have no need of [my] writing to you, for ye yourselves are God-taught to love one another,
for ye do it also to all the brethren who [are] in all Macedonia; and we call upon you, brethren, to abound still more,
and to study to be quiet, and to do your own business, and to work with your own hands, as we did command you,
that ye may walk becomingly unto those without, and may have lack of nothing.
And I do not wish you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning those who have fallen asleep, that ye may not sorrow, as also the rest who have not hope,
for if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, so also God those asleep through Jesus he will bring with him,
for this to you we say in the word of the Lord, that we who are living — who do remain over to the presence of the Lord — may not precede those asleep,
because the Lord himself, in a shout, in the voice of a chief-messenger, and in the trump of God, shall come down from heaven, and the dead in Christ shall rise first,
then we who are living, who are remaining over, together with them shall be caught away in clouds to meet the Lord in air, and so always with the Lord we shall be;
so, then, comfort ye one another in these words.
And concerning the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no need of my writing to you,
for yourselves have known thoroughly that the day of the Lord as a thief in the night doth so come,
for when they may say, Peace and surety, then sudden destruction doth stand by them, as the travail [doth] her who is with child, and they shall not escape;
and ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that the day may catch you as a thief;
all ye are sons of light, and sons of day; we are not of night, nor of darkness,
so, then, we may not sleep as also the others, but watch and be sober,
for those sleeping, by night do sleep, and those making themselves drunk, by night are drunken,
and we, being of the day — let us be sober, putting on a breastplate of faith and love, and an helmet — a hope of salvation,
because God did not appoint us to anger, but to the acquiring of salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ,
who did die for us, that whether we wake — whether we sleep — together with him we may live;
wherefore, comfort ye one another, and build ye up, one the one, as also ye do.
And we ask you, brethren, to know those labouring among you, and leading you in the Lord, and admonishing you,
and to esteem them very abundantly in love, because of their work; be at peace among yourselves;
and we exhort you, brethren, admonish the disorderly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the infirm, be patient unto all;
see no one evil for evil may render to any one, but always that which is good pursue ye, both to one another and to all;
always rejoice ye;
continually pray ye;
in every thing give thanks, for this [is] the will of God in Christ Jesus in regard to you.
The Spirit quench not;
prophesyings despise not;
all things prove; that which is good hold fast;
from all appearance of evil abstain ye;
and the God of the peace Himself sanctify you wholly, and may your whole spirit, and soul, and body, be preserved unblameably in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ;
stedfast is He who is calling you, who also will do [it].
Brethren, pray for us;
salute all the brethren in an holy kiss;
I charge you [by] the Lord, that the letter be read to all the holy brethren;
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ [is] with you! Amen.
Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, to the assembly of Thessalonians in God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ:
Grace to you, and peace, from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ!
We ought to give thanks to God always for you, brethren, as it is meet, because increase greatly doth your faith, and abound doth the love of each one of you all, to one another;
so that we ourselves do glory in you in the assemblies of God, for your endurance and faith in all your persecutions and tribulations that ye bear;
a token of the righteous judgment of God, for your being counted worthy of the reign of God, for which also ye suffer,
since [it is] a righteous thing with God to give back to those troubling you — trouble,
and to you who are troubled — rest with us in the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven, with messengers of his power,
in flaming fire, giving vengeance to those not knowing God, and to those not obeying the good news of our Lord Jesus Christ;
who shall suffer justice — destruction age-during — from the face of the Lord, and from the glory of his strength,
when He may come to be glorified in his saints, and to be wondered at in all those believing — because our testimony was believed among you — in that day;
for which also we do pray always for you, that our God may count you worthy of the calling, and may fulfil all the good pleasure of goodness, and the work of the faith in power,
that the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye in him, according to the grace of our God and Lord Jesus Christ.
And we ask you, brethren, in regard to the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of our gathering together unto him,
that ye be not quickly shaken in mind, nor be troubled, neither through spirit, neither through word, neither through letters as through us, as that the day of Christ hath arrived;
let not any one deceive you in any manner, because — if the falling away may not come first, and the man of sin be revealed — the son of the destruction,
who is opposing and is raising himself up above all called God or worshipped, so that he in the sanctuary of God as God hath sat down, shewing himself off that he is God — [the day doth not come].
Do ye not remember that, being yet with you, these things I said to you?
and now, what is keeping down ye have known, for his being revealed in his own time,
for the secret of the lawlessness doth already work, only he who is keeping down now [will hinder] — till he may be out of the way,
and then shall be revealed the Lawless One, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the manifestation of his presence,
[him,] whose presence is according to the working of the Adversary, in all power, and signs, and lying wonders,
and in all deceitfulness of the unrighteousness in those perishing, because the love of the truth they did not receive for their being saved,
and because of this shall God send to them a working of delusion, for their believing the lie,
that they may be judged — all who did not believe the truth, but were well pleased in the unrighteousness.
And we — we ought to give thanks to God always for you, brethren, beloved by the Lord, that God did choose you from the beginning to salvation, in sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth,
to which He did call you through our good news, to the acquiring of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ;
so, then, brethren, stand ye fast, and hold the deliverances that ye were taught, whether through word, whether through our letter;
and may our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and our God and Father, who did love us, and did give comfort age-during, and good hope in grace,
comfort your hearts, and establish you in every good word and work.
As to the rest, pray ye, brethren, concerning us, that the word of the Lord may run and may be glorified, as also with you,
and that we may be delivered from the unreasonable and evil men, for the faith [is] not of all;
and stedfast is the Lord, who shall establish you, and shall guard [you] from the evil;
and we have confidence in the Lord touching you, that the things that we command you ye both do and will do;
and the Lord direct your hearts to the love of God, and to the endurance of the Christ.
And we command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to withdraw yourselves from every brother disorderly walking, and not after the deliverance that ye received from us,
for yourselves have known how it behoveth [you] to imitate us, because we did not act disorderly among you;
nor for nought did we eat bread of any one, but in labour and in travail, night and day working, not to be chargeable to any of you;
not because we have not authority, but that ourselves a pattern we might give to you, to imitate us;
for even when we were with you, this we did command you, that if any one is not willing to work, neither let him eat,
for we hear of certain walking among you disorderly, nothing working, but over working,
and such we command and exhort through our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness working, their own bread they may eat;
and ye, brethren, may ye not be weary doing well,
and if any one do not obey our word through the letter, this one note ye, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed,
and as an enemy count [him] not, but admonish ye [him] as a brother;
and may the Lord of the peace Himself give to you the peace always in every way; the Lord [is] with you all!
The salutation by the hand of me, Paul, which is a sign in every letter; thus I write;
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ [is] with you all! Amen.
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to a command of God our Saviour, and of the Lord Jesus Christ our hope,
to Timotheus — genuine child in faith: Grace, kindness, peace, from God our Father, and Christ Jesus our Lord,
according as I did exhort thee to remain in Ephesus — I going on to Macedonia — that thou mightest charge certain not to teach any other thing,
nor to give heed to fables and endless genealogies, that cause questions rather than the building up of God that is in faith: —
And the end of the charge is love out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned,
from which certain, having swerved, did turn aside to vain discourse,
willing to be teachers of law, not understanding either the things they say, nor concerning what they asseverate,
and we have known that the law [is] good, if any one may use it lawfully;
having known this, that for a righteous man law is not set, but for lawless and insubordinate persons, ungodly and sinners, impious and profane, parricides and matricides, men-slayers,
whoremongers, sodomites, men-stealers, liars, perjured persons, and if there be any other thing that to sound doctrine is adverse,
according to the good news of the glory of the blessed God, with which I was entrusted.
And I give thanks to him who enabled me — Christ Jesus our Lord — that he did reckon me stedfast, having put [me] to the ministration,
who before was speaking evil, and persecuting, and insulting, but I found kindness, because, being ignorant, I did [it] in unbelief,
and exceedingly abound did the grace of our Lord, with faith and love that [is] in Christ Jesus:
stedfast [is] the word, and of all acceptation worthy, that Christ Jesus came to the world to save sinners — first of whom I am;
but because of this I found kindness, that in me first Jesus Christ might shew forth all long-suffering, for a pattern of those about to believe on him to life age-during:
and to the King of the ages, the incorruptible, invisible, only wise God, [is] honour and glory — to the ages of the ages! Amen.
This charge I commit to thee, child Timotheus, according to the prophesies that went before upon thee, that thou mayest war in them the good warfare,
having faith and a good conscience, which certain having thrust away, concerning the faith did make shipwreck,
of whom are Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I did deliver to the Adversary, that they might be instructed not to speak evil.
I exhort, then, first of all, there be made supplications, prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings, for all men:
for kings, and all who are in authority, that a quiet and peaceable life we may lead in all piety and gravity,
for this [is] right and acceptable before God our Saviour,
who doth will all men to be saved, and to come to the full knowledge of the truth;
for one [is] God, one also [is] mediator of God and of men, the man Christ Jesus,
who did give himself a ransom for all — the testimony in its own times —
in regard to which I was set a preacher and apostle — truth I say in Christ, I do not lie — a teacher of nations, in faith and truth.
I wish, therefore, that men pray in every place, lifting up kind hands, apart from anger and reasoning;
in like manner also the women, in becoming apparel, with modesty and sobriety to adorn themselves, not in braided hair, or gold, or pearls, or garments of great price,
but — which becometh women professing godly piety — through good works.
Let a woman in quietness learn in all subjection,
and a woman I do not suffer to teach, nor to rule a husband, but to be in quietness,
for Adam was first formed, then Eve,
and Adam was not deceived, but the woman, having been deceived, into transgression came,
and she shall be saved through the child-bearing, if they remain in faith, and love, and sanctification, with sobriety.
Stedfast [is] the word: If any one the oversight doth long for, a right work he desireth;
it behoveth, therefore, the overseer to be blameless, of one wife a husband, vigilant, sober, decent, a friend of strangers, apt to teach,
not given to wine, not a striker, not given to filthy lucre, but gentle, not contentious, not a lover of money,
his own house leading well, having children in subjection with all gravity,
(and if any one his own house [how] to lead hath not known, how an assembly of God shall he take care of?)
not a new convert, lest having been puffed up he may fall to a judgment of the devil;
and it behoveth him also to have a good testimony from those without, that he may not fall into reproach and a snare of the devil.
Ministrants — in like manner grave, not double-tongued, not given to much wine, not given to filthy lucre,
having the secret of the faith in a pure conscience,
and let these also first be proved, then let them minister, being unblameable.
Women — in like manner grave, not false accusers, vigilant, faithful in all things.
Ministrants — let them be of one wife husbands; the children leading well, and their own houses,
for those who did minister well a good step to themselves do acquire, and much boldness in faith that [is] in Christ Jesus.
These things I write to thee, hoping to come unto thee soon,
and if I delay, that thou mayest know how it behoveth [thee] to conduct thyself in the house of God, which is an assembly of the living God — a pillar and foundation of the truth,
and, confessedly, great is the secret of piety — God was manifested in flesh, declared righteous in spirit, seen by messengers, preached among nations, believed on in the world, taken up in glory!
And the Spirit expressly speaketh, that in latter times shall certain fall away from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and teachings of demons,
in hypocrisy speaking lies, being seared in their own conscience,
forbidding to marry — to abstain from meats that God created to be received with thanksgiving by those believing and acknowledging the truth,
because every creature of God [is] good, and nothing [is] to be rejected, with thanksgiving being received,
for it is sanctified through the word of God and intercession.
These things placing before the brethren, thou shalt be a good ministrant of Jesus Christ, being nourished by the words of the faith, and of the good teaching, which thou didst follow after,
and the profane and old women's fables reject thou, and exercise thyself unto piety,
for the bodily exercise is unto little profit, and the piety is to all things profitable, a promise having of the life that now is, and of that which is coming;
stedfast [is] the word, and of all acceptation worthy;
for for this we both labour and are reproached, because we hope on the living God, who is Saviour of all men — especially of those believing.
Charge these things, and teach;
let no one despise thy youth, but a pattern become thou of those believing in word, in behaviour, in love, in spirit, in faith, in purity;
till I come, give heed to the reading, to the exhortation, to the teaching;
be not careless of the gift in thee, that was given thee through prophecy, with laying on of the hands of the eldership;
of these things be careful; in these things be, that thy advancement may be manifest in all things;
take heed to thyself, and to the teaching; remain in them, for this thing doing, both thyself thou shalt save, and those hearing thee.
An aged person thou mayest not rebuke, but be entreating as a father; younger persons as brethren;
aged women as mothers, younger ones as sisters — in all purity;
honour widows who are really widows;
and if any widow have children or grandchildren, let them learn first to their own house to show piety, and to give back a recompense to the parents, for this is right and acceptable before God.
And she who is really a widow and desolate, hath hoped upon God, and doth remain in the supplications and in the prayers night and day,
and she who is given to luxury, living — hath died;
and these things charge, that they may be blameless;
and if any one for his own — and especially for those of the household — doth not provide, the faith he hath denied, and than an unbeliever he is worse.
A widow — let her not be enrolled under sixty years of age, having been a wife of one husband,
in good works being testified to: if she brought up children, if she entertained strangers, if saints' feet she washed, if those in tribulation she relieved, if every good work she followed after;
and younger widows be refusing, for when they may revel against the Christ, they wish to marry,
having judgment, because the first faith they did cast away,
and at the same time also, they learn [to be] idle, going about the houses; and not only idle, but also tattlers and busybodies, speaking the things they ought not;
I wish, therefore, younger ones to marry, to bear children, to be mistress of the house, to give no occasion to the opposer to reviling;
for already certain did turn aside after the Adversary.
If any believing man or believing woman have widows, let them relieve them, and let not the assembly be burdened, that those really widows it may relieve.
The well-leading elders of double honour let them be counted worthy, especially those labouring in word and teaching,
for the Writing saith, 'An ox treading out thou shalt not muzzle,' and 'Worthy [is] the workman of his reward.'
Against an elder an accusation receive not, except upon two or three witnesses.
Those sinning, reprove before all, that the others also may have fear;
I testify fully, before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the choice messengers, that these things thou mayest keep, without forejudging, doing nothing by partiality.
Be laying hands quickly on no one, nor be having fellowship with sins of others; be keeping thyself pure;
no longer be drinking water, but a little wine be using, because of thy stomach and of thine often infirmities;
of certain men the sins are manifest beforehand, leading before to judgment, and certain also they follow after;
in like manner also the right works are manifest beforehand, and those that are otherwise are not able to be hid.
As many as are servants under a yoke, their own masters worthy of all honour let them reckon, that the name of God and the teaching may not be evil spoken of;
and those having believing masters, let them not slight [them], because they are brethren, but rather let them serve, because they are stedfast and beloved, who of the benefit are partaking. These things be teaching and exhorting;
if any one be teaching otherwise, and do not consent to sound words — those of our Lord Jesus Christ — and to the teaching according to piety,
he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and word-striving, out of which doth come envy, strife, evil-speakings, evil-surmisings,
wranglings of men wholly corrupted in mind, and destitute of the truth, supposing the piety to be gain; depart from such;
but it is great gain — the piety with contentment;
for nothing did we bring into the world — [it is] manifest that we are able to carry nothing out;
but having food and raiment — with these we shall suffice ourselves;
and those wishing to be rich, do fall into temptation and a snare, and many desires, foolish and hurtful, that sink men into ruin and destruction,
for a root of all the evils is the love of money, which certain longing for did go astray from the faith, and themselves did pierce through with many sorrows;
and thou, O man of God, these things flee, and pursue righteousness, piety, faith, love, endurance, meekness;
be striving the good strife of the faith, be laying hold on the life age-during, to which also thou wast called, and didst profess the right profession before many witnesses.
I charge thee, before God, who is making all things alive, and of Christ Jesus, who did testify before Pontius Pilate the right profession,
that thou keep the command unspotted, unblameable, till the manifestation of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which in His own times He shall shew — the blessed and only potentate, the King of the kings and Lord of the lords,
who only is having immortality, dwelling in light unapproachable, whom no one of men did see, nor is able to see, to whom [is] honour and might age-during! Amen.
Those rich in the present age charge thou not to be high-minded, nor to hope in the uncertainty of riches, but in the living God, who is giving to us all things richly for enjoyment; —
to do good, to be rich in good works, to be ready to impart, willing to communicate,
treasuring up to themselves a right foundation for the time to come, that they may lay hold on the life age-during.
O Timotheus, the thing entrusted guard thou, avoiding the profane vain-words and opposition of the falsely-named knowledge,
which certain professing — concerning the faith did swerve; the grace [is] with you. Amen.
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, through the will of God, according to a promise of life that [is] in Christ Jesus,
to Timotheus, beloved child: Grace, kindness, peace, from God the Father, and Christ Jesus our Lord!
I am thankful to God, whom I serve from progenitors in a pure conscience, that unceasingly I have remembrance concerning thee in my supplications night and day,
desiring greatly to see thee, being mindful of thy tears, that with joy I may be filled,
taking remembrance of the unfeigned faith that is in thee, that dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice, and I am persuaded that also in thee.
For which cause I remind thee to stir up the gift of God that is in thee through the putting on of my hands,
for God did not give us a spirit of fear, but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind;
therefore thou mayest not be ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner, but do thou suffer evil along with the good news according to the power of God,
who did save us, and did call with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to His own purpose and grace, that was given to us in Christ Jesus, before the times of the ages,
and was made manifest now through the manifestation of our Saviour Jesus Christ, who indeed did abolish death, and did enlighten life and immortality through the good news,
to which I was placed a preacher and an apostle, and a teacher of nations,
for which cause also these things I suffer, but I am not ashamed, for I have known in whom I have believed, and have been persuaded that he is able that which I have committed to him to guard — to that day.
The pattern hold thou of sound words, which from me thou didst hear, in faith and love that [is] in Christ Jesus;
the good thing committed guard thou through the Holy Spirit that is dwelling in us;
thou hast known this, that they did turn from me — all those in Asia, of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes;
may the Lord give kindness to the house of Onesiphorus, because many times he did refresh me, and of my chain was not ashamed,
but being in Rome, very diligently he sought me, and found;
may the Lord give to him to find kindness from the Lord in that day; and how many things in Ephesus he did minister thou dost very well know.
Thou, therefore, my child, be strong in the grace that [is] in Christ Jesus,
and the things that thou didst hear from me through many witnesses, these things be committing to stedfast men, who shall be sufficient also others to teach;
thou, therefore, suffer evil as a good soldier of Jesus Christ;
no one serving as a soldier did entangle himself with the affairs of life, that him who did enlist him he may please;
and if also any one may strive, he is not crowned, except he may strive lawfully;
the labouring husbandman it behoveth first of the fruits to partake;
be considering what things I say, for the Lord give to thee understanding in all things.
Remember Jesus Christ, raised out of the dead, of the seed of David, according to my good news,
in which I suffer evil — unto bonds, as an evil-doer, but the word of God hath not been bound;
because of this all things do I endure, because of the choice ones, that they also salvation may obtain that [is] in Christ Jesus, with glory age-during.
Stedfast [is] the word: For if we died together — we also shall live together;
if we do endure together — we shall also reign together; if we deny [him], he also shall deny us;
if we are not stedfast, he remaineth stedfast; to deny himself he is not able.
These things remind [them] of, testifying fully before the Lord — not to strive about words to nothing profitable, but to the subversion of those hearing;
be diligent to present thyself approved to God — a workman irreproachable, rightly dividing the word of the truth;
and the profane vain talkings stand aloof from, for to more impiety they will advance,
and their word as a gangrene will have pasture, of whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus,
who concerning the truth did swerve, saying the rising again to have already been, and do overthrow the faith of some;
sure, nevertheless, hath the foundation of God stood, having this seal, 'The Lord hath known those who are His,' and 'Let him depart from unrighteousness — every one who is naming the name of Christ.'
And in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth, and some to honour, and some to dishonour:
if, then, any one may cleanse himself from these, he shall be a vessel to honour, sanctified and profitable to the master — to every good work having been prepared,
and the youthful lusts flee thou, and pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those calling upon the Lord out of a pure heart;
and the foolish and uninstructed questions be avoiding, having known that they beget strife,
and a servant of the Lord it behoveth not to strive, but to be gentle unto all, apt to teach, patient under evil,
in meekness instructing those opposing — if perhaps God may give to them repentance to an acknowledging of the truth,
and they may awake out of the devil's snare, having been caught by him at his will.
And this know thou, that in the last days there shall come perilous times,
for men shall be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boasters, proud, evil-speakers, to parents disobedient, unthankful, unkind,
without natural affection, implacable, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, not lovers of those who are good,
traitors, heady, lofty, lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God,
having a form of piety, and its power having denied; and from these be turning away,
for of these there are those coming into the houses and leading captive the silly women, laden with sins, led away with desires manifold,
always learning, and never to a knowledge of truth able to come,
and, even as Jannes and Jambres stood against Moses, so also these do stand against the truth, men corrupted in mind, disapproved concerning the faith;
but they shall not advance any further, for their folly shall be manifest to all, as theirs also did become.
And thou — thou hast followed after my teaching, manner of life, purpose, faith, long-suffering, love, endurance,
the persecutions, the afflictions, that befell me in Antioch, in Iconium, in Lystra; what persecutions I endured, and out of all the Lord did deliver me,
and all also who will to live piously in Christ Jesus shall be persecuted,
and evil men and impostors shall advance to the worse, leading astray and being led astray.
And thou — be remaining in the things which thou didst learn and wast entrusted with, having known from whom thou didst learn,
and because from a babe the Holy Writings thou hast known, which are able to make thee wise — to salvation, through faith that [is] in Christ Jesus;
every Writing [is] God-breathed, and profitable for teaching, for conviction, for setting aright, for instruction that [is] in righteousness,
that the man of God may be fitted — for every good work having been completed.
I do fully testify, then, before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who is about to judge living and dead at his manifestation and his reign —
preach the word; be earnest in season, out of season, convict, rebuke, exhort, in all long-suffering and teaching,
for there shall be a season when the sound teaching they will not suffer, but according to their own desires to themselves they shall heap up teachers — itching in the hearing,
and indeed, from the truth the hearing they shall turn away, and to the fables they shall be turned aside.
And thou — watch in all things; suffer evil; do the work of one proclaiming good news; of thy ministration make full assurance,
for I am already being poured out, and the time of my release hath arrived;
the good strife I have striven, the course I have finished, the faith I have kept,
henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of the righteousness that the Lord — the Righteous Judge — shall give to me in that day, and not only to me, but also to all those loving his manifestation.
Be diligent to come unto me quickly,
for Demas forsook me, having loved the present age, and went on to Thessalonica, Crescens to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia,
Lukas only is with me; Markus having taken, bring with thyself, for he is profitable to me for ministration;
and Tychicus I sent to Ephesus;
the cloak that I left in Troas with Carpus, coming, bring thou and the books — especially the parchments.
Alexander the coppersmith did me much evil; may the Lord repay to him according to his works,
of whom also do thou beware, for greatly hath he stood against our words;
in my first defence no one stood with me, but all forsook me, (may it not be reckoned to them!)
and the Lord stood by me, and did strengthen me, that through me the preaching might be fully assured, and all the nations might hear, and I was freed out of the mouth of a lion,
and the Lord shall free me from every evil work, and shall save [me] — to his heavenly kingdom; to whom [is] the glory to the ages of the ages! Amen.
Salute Prisca and Aquilas, and Onesiphorus' household;
Erastus did remain in Corinth, and Trophimus I left in Miletus infirm;
be diligent to come before winter. Salute thee doth Eubulus, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren.
The Lord Jesus Christ [is] with thy spirit; the grace [is] with you! Amen.
Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the faith of the choice ones of God, and an acknowledging of truth that [is] according to piety,
upon hope of life age-during, which God, who doth not lie, did promise before times of ages,
(and He manifested in proper times His word,) in preaching, which I was entrusted with, according to a charge of God our Saviour,
to Titus — true child according to a common faith: Grace, kindness, peace, from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour!
For this cause left I thee in Crete, that the things lacking thou mayest arrange, and mayest set down in every city elders, as I did appoint to thee;
if any one is blameless, of one wife a husband, having children stedfast, not under accusation of riotous living or insubordinate —
for it behoveth the overseer to be blameless, as God's steward, not self-pleased, nor irascible, not given to wine, not a striker, not given to filthy lucre;
but a lover of strangers, a lover of good men, sober-minded, righteous, kind, self-controlled,
holding — according to the teaching — to the stedfast word, that he may be able also to exhort in the sound teaching, and the gainsayers to convict;
for there are many both insubordinate, vain-talkers, and mind-deceivers — especially they of the circumcision —
whose mouth it behoveth to stop, who whole households do overturn, teaching what things it behoveth not, for filthy lucre's sake.
A certain one of them, a prophet of their own, said — 'Cretans! always liars, evil beasts, lazy bellies!'
this testimony is true; for which cause convict them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith,
not giving heed to Jewish fables and commands of men, turning themselves away from the truth;
all things, indeed, [are] pure to the pure, and to the defiled and unstedfast [is] nothing pure, but of them defiled [are] even the mind and the conscience;
God they profess to know, and in the works they deny [Him], being abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work disapproved.
And thou — be speaking what doth become the sound teaching;
aged men to be temperate, grave, sober, sound in the faith, in the love, in the endurance;
aged women, in like manner, in deportment as doth become sacred persons, not false accusers, to much wine not enslaved, of good things teachers,
that they may make the young women sober-minded, to be lovers of [their] husbands, lovers of [their] children,
sober, pure, keepers of [their own] houses, good, subject to their own husbands, that the word of God may not be evil spoken of.
The younger men, in like manner, be exhorting to be sober-minded;
concerning all things thyself showing a pattern of good works; in the teaching uncorruptedness, gravity, incorruptibility,
discourse sound, irreprehensible, that he who is of the contrary part may be ashamed, having nothing evil to say concerning you.
Servants — to their own masters [are] to be subject, in all things to be well-pleasing, not gainsaying,
not purloining, but showing all good stedfastness, that the teaching of God our Saviour they may adorn in all things.
For the saving grace of God was manifested to all men,
teaching us, that denying the impiety and the worldly desires, soberly and righteously and piously we may live in the present age,
waiting for the blessed hope and manifestation of the glory of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ,
who did give himself for us, that he might ransom us from all lawlessness, and might purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works;
these things be speaking, and exhorting, and convicting, with all charge; let no one despise thee!
Remind them to be subject to principalities and authorities, to obey rule, unto every good work to be ready,
of no one to speak evil, not to be quarrelsome — gentle, showing all meekness to all men,
for we were once — also we — thoughtless, disobedient, led astray, serving desires and pleasures manifold, in malice and envy living, odious — hating one another;
and when the kindness and the love to men of God our Saviour did appear
(not by works that [are] in righteousness that we did but according to His kindness,) He did save us, through a bathing of regeneration, and a renewing of the Holy Spirit,
which He poured upon us richly, through Jesus Christ our Saviour,
that having been declared righteous by His grace, heirs we may become according to the hope of life age-during.
Stedfast [is] the word; and concerning these things I counsel thee to affirm fully, that they may be thoughtful, to be leading in good works — who have believed God; these are the good and profitable things to men,
and foolish questions, and genealogies, and contentions, and strivings about law, stand away from — for they are unprofitable and vain.
A sectarian man, after a first and second admonition be rejecting,
having known that he hath been subverted who [is] such, and doth sin, being self-condemned.
When I shall send Artemas unto thee, or Tychicus, be diligent to come unto me to Nicopolis, for there to winter I have determined.
Zenas the lawyer and Apollos bring diligently on their way, that nothing to them may be lacking,
and let them learn — ours also — to be leading in good works to the necessary uses, that they may not be unfruitful.
Salute thee do all those with me; salute those loving us in faith; the grace [is] with you all!
Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timotheus the brother, to Philemon our beloved and fellow-worker,
and Apphia the beloved, and Archippus our fellow-soldier, and the assembly in thy house:
Grace to you, and peace, from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ!
I give thanks to my God, always making mention of thee in my prayers,
hearing of thy love and faith that thou hast unto the Lord Jesus and toward all the saints,
that the fellowship of thy faith may become working in the full knowledge of every good thing that [is] in you toward Christ Jesus;
for we have much joy and comfort in thy love, because the bowels of the saints have been refreshed through thee, brother.
Wherefore, having in Christ much boldness to command thee that which is fit —
because of the love I rather entreat, being such an one as Paul the aged, and now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ;
I entreat thee concerning my child — whom I did beget in my bonds — Onesimus,
who once was to thee unprofitable, and now is profitable to me and to thee,
whom I did send again, and thou him (that is, my own bowels) receive,
whom I did wish to retain to myself, that in thy behalf he might minister to me in the bonds of the good news,
and apart from thy mind I willed to do nothing, that as of necessity thy good deed may not be, but of willingness,
for perhaps because of this he did depart for an hour, that age-duringly thou mayest have him,
no more as a servant, but above a servant — a brother beloved, especially to me, and how much more to thee, both in the flesh and in the Lord!
If, then, with me thou hast fellowship, receive him as me,
and if he did hurt to thee, or doth owe anything, this to me be reckoning;
I, Paul did write with my hand, I — I will repay; that I may not say that also thyself, besides, to me thou dost owe.
Yes, brother, may I have profit of thee in the Lord; refresh my bowels in the Lord;
having been confident in thy obedience I did write to thee, having known that also above what I may say thou wilt do;
and at the same time also prepare for me a lodging, for I hope that through your prayers I shall be granted to you.
Salute thee doth Epaphras, (my fellow-captive in Christ Jesus,)
Markus, Aristarchus, Demas, Lukas, my fellow-workmen!
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ [is] with your spirit! Amen.
In many parts, and many ways, God of old having spoken to the fathers in the prophets,
in these last days did speak to us in a Son, whom He appointed heir of all things, through whom also He did make the ages;
who being the brightness of the glory, and the impress of His subsistence, bearing up also the all things by the saying of his might — through himself having made a cleansing of our sins, sat down at the right hand of the greatness in the highest,
having become so much better than the messengers, as he did inherit a more excellent name than they.
For to which of the messengers said He ever, 'My Son thou art — I to-day have begotten thee?' and again, 'I will be to him for a father, and he shall be to Me for a son?'
and when again He may bring in the first-born to the world, He saith, 'And let them bow before him — all messengers of God;'
and unto the messengers, indeed, He saith, 'Who is making His messengers spirits, and His ministers a flame of fire;'
and unto the Son: 'Thy throne, O God, [is] to the age of the age; a sceptre of righteousness [is] the sceptre of thy reign;
thou didst love righteousness, and didst hate lawlessness; because of this did He anoint thee — God, thy God — with oil of gladness above thy partners;'
and, 'Thou, at the beginning, Lord, the earth didst found, and a work of thy hands are the heavens;
these shall perish, and Thou dost remain, and all, as a garment, shall become old,
and as a mantle Thou shall roll them together, and they shall be changed, and Thou art the same, and Thy years shall not fail.'
And unto which of the messengers said He ever, 'Sit at My right hand, till I may make thine enemies thy footstool?'
are they not all spirits of service — for ministration being sent forth because of those about to inherit salvation?
Because of this it behoveth [us] more abundantly to take heed to the things heard, lest we may glide aside,
for if the word being spoken through messengers did become stedfast, and every transgression and disobedience did receive a just recompense,
how shall we escape, having neglected so great salvation? which a beginning receiving — to be spoken through the Lord — by those having heard was confirmed to us,
God also bearing joint-witness both with signs and wonders, and manifold powers, and distributions of the Holy Spirit, according to His will.
For not to messengers did He subject the coming world, concerning which we speak,
and one in a certain place did testify fully, saying, 'What is man, that Thou art mindful of him, or a son of man, that Thou dost look after him?
Thou didst make him some little less than messengers, with glory and honour Thou didst crown him, and didst set him over the works of Thy hands,
all things Thou didst put in subjection under his feet,' for in the subjecting to him the all things, nothing did He leave to him unsubjected, and now not yet do we see the all things subjected to him,
and him who was made some little less than messengers we see — Jesus — because of the suffering of the death, with glory and honour having been crowned, that by the grace of God for every one he might taste of death.
For it was becoming to Him, because of whom [are] the all things, and through whom [are] the all things, many sons to glory bringing, the author of their salvation through sufferings to make perfect,
for both he who is sanctifying and those sanctified [are] all of one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren,
saying, 'I will declare Thy name to my brethren, in the midst of an assembly I will sing praise to Thee;' and again, 'I will be trusting on Him;'
and again, 'Behold I and the children that God did give to me.'
Seeing, then, the children have partaken of flesh and blood, he himself also in like manner did take part of the same, that through death he might destroy him having the power of death — that is, the devil —
and might deliver those, whoever, with fear of death, throughout all their life, were subjects of bondage,
for, doubtless, of messengers it doth not lay hold, but of seed of Abraham it layeth hold,
wherefore it did behove him in all things to be made like to the brethren, that he might become a kind and stedfast chief-priest in the things with God, to make propitiation for the sins of the people,
for in that he suffered, himself being tempted, he is able to help those who are tempted.
Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of a heavenly calling, consider the apostle and chief priest of our profession, Christ Jesus,
being stedfast to Him who did appoint him, as also Moses in all his house,
for of more glory than Moses hath this one been counted worthy, inasmuch as more honour than the house hath he who doth build it,
for every house is builded by some one, and He who the all things did build [is] God,
and Moses indeed [was] stedfast in all his house, as an attendant, for a testimony of those things that were to be spoken,
and Christ, as a Son over his house, whose house are we, if the boldness and the rejoicing of the hope unto the end we hold fast.
Wherefore, (as the Holy Spirit saith, 'To-day, if His voice ye may hear —
ye may not harden your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of the temptation in the wilderness,
in which tempt Me did your fathers, they did prove Me, and saw My works forty years;
wherefore I was grieved with that generation, and said, Always do they go astray in heart, and these have not known My ways;
so I sware in My anger, If they shall enter into My rest — !')
See, brethren, lest there shall be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in the falling away from the living God,
but exhort ye one another every day, while the To-day is called, that none of you may be hardened by the deceitfulness of the sin,
for partakers we have become of the Christ, if the beginning of the confidence unto the end we may hold fast,
in its being said, 'To-day, if His voice ye may hear, ye may not harden your hearts, as in the provocation,'
for certain having heard did provoke, but not all who did come out of Egypt through Moses;
but with whom was He grieved forty years? was it not with those who did sin, whose carcasses fell in the wilderness?
and to whom did He swear that they shall not enter into His rest, except to those who did not believe? —
and we see that they were not able to enter in because of unbelief.
We may fear, then, lest a promise being left of entering into His rest, any one of you may seem to have come short,
for we also are having good news proclaimed, even as they, but the word heard did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in those who heard,
for we do enter into the rest — we who did believe, as He said, 'So I sware in My anger, If they shall enter into My rest — ;' and yet the works were done from the foundation of the world,
for He spake in a certain place concerning the seventh [day] thus: 'And God did rest in the seventh day from all His works;'
and in this [place] again, 'If they shall enter into My rest — ;'
since then, it remaineth for certain to enter into it, and those who did first hear good news entered not in because of unbelief —
again He doth limit a certain day, 'To-day,' (in David saying, after so long a time,) as it hath been said, 'To-day, if His voice ye may hear, ye may not harden your hearts,'
for if Joshua had given them rest, He would not concerning another day have spoken after these things;
there doth remain, then, a sabbatic rest to the people of God,
for he who did enter into his rest, he also rested from his works, as God from His own.
May we be diligent, then, to enter into that rest, that no one in the same example of the unbelief may fall,
for the reckoning of God is living, and working, and sharp above every two-edged sword, and piercing unto the dividing asunder both of soul and spirit, of joints also and marrow, and a discerner of thoughts and intents of the heart;
and there is not a created thing not manifest before Him, but all things [are] naked and open to His eyes — with whom is our reckoning.
Having, then, a great chief priest passed through the heavens — Jesus the Son of God — may we hold fast the profession,
for we have not a chief priest unable to sympathise with our infirmities, but [one] tempted in all things in like manner — apart from sin;
we may come near, then, with freedom, to the throne of the grace, that we may receive kindness, and find grace — for seasonable help.
For every chief priest — out of men taken — in behalf of men is set in things [pertaining] to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins,
able to be gentle to those ignorant and going astray, since himself also is compassed with infirmity;
and because of this infirmity he ought, as for the people, so also for himself to offer for sins;
and no one to himself doth take the honour, but he who is called by God, as also Aaron:
so also the Christ did not glorify himself to become chief priest, but He who spake unto him: 'My Son thou art, I to-day have begotten thee;'
as also in another [place] He saith, 'Thou [art] a priest — to the age, according to the order of Melchisedek;'
who in the days of his flesh both prayers and supplications unto Him who was able to save him from death — with strong crying and tears — having offered up, and having been heard in respect to that which he feared,
through being a Son, did learn by the things which he suffered — the obedience,
and having been made perfect, he did become to all those obeying him a cause of salvation age-during,
having been addressed by God a chief priest, according to the order of Melchisedek,
concerning whom we have much discourse and of hard explanation to say, since ye have become dull of hearing,
for even owing to be teachers, because of the time, again ye have need that one teach you what [are] the elements of the beginning of the oracles of God, and ye have become having need of milk, and not of strong food,
for every one who is partaking of milk [is] unskilled in the word of righteousness — for he is an infant,
and of perfect men is the strong food, who because of the use are having the senses exercised, unto the discernment both of good and of evil.
Wherefore, having left the word of the beginning of the Christ, unto the perfection we may advance, not again a foundation laying of reformation from dead works, and of faith on God,
of the teaching of baptisms, of laying on also of hands, of rising again also of the dead, and of judgment age-during,
and this we will do, if God may permit,
for [it is] impossible for those once enlightened, having tasted also of the heavenly gift, and partakers having became of the Holy Spirit,
and did taste the good saying of God, the powers also of the coming age,
and having fallen away, again to renew [them] to reformation, having crucified again to themselves the Son of God, and exposed to public shame.
For earth, that is drinking in the rain many times coming upon it, and is bringing forth herbs fit for those because of whom also it is dressed, doth partake of blessing from God,
and that which is bearing thorns and briers [is] disapproved of, and nigh to cursing, whose end [is] for burning;
and we are persuaded, concerning you, beloved, the things that are better, and accompanying salvation, though even thus we speak,
for God is not unrighteous to forget your work, and the labour of the love, that ye shewed to His name, having ministered to the saints and ministering;
and we desire each one of you the same diligence to shew, unto the full assurance of the hope unto the end,
that ye may not become slothful, but followers of those who through faith and patient endurance are inheriting the promises.
For to Abraham God, having made promise, seeing He was able to swear by no greater, did swear by Himself,
saying, 'Blessing indeed I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee;'
and so, having patiently endured, he did obtain the promise;
for men indeed do swear by the greater, and an end of all controversy to them for confirmation [is] the oath,
in which God, more abundantly willing to shew to the heirs of the promise the immutability of his counsel, did interpose by an oath,
that through two immutable things, in which [it is] impossible for God to lie, a strong comfort we may have who did flee for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before [us],
which we have, as an anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast, and entering into that within the vail,
whither a forerunner for us did enter — Jesus, after the order of Melchisedek chief priest having become — to the age.
For this Melchisedek, king of Salem, priest of God Most High, who did meet Abraham turning back from the smiting of the kings, and did bless him,
to whom also a tenth of all did Abraham divide, (first, indeed, being interpreted, 'King of righteousness,' and then also, King of Salem, which is, King of Peace,)
without father, without mother, without genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, and being made like to the Son of God, doth remain a priest continually.
And see how great this one [is], to whom also a tenth Abraham the patriarch did give out of the best of the spoils,
and those, indeed, out of the sons of Levi receiving the priesthood, a command have to take tithes from the people according to the law, that is, their brethren, even though they came forth out of the loins of Abraham;
and he who was not reckoned by genealogy of them, received tithes from Abraham, and him having the promises he hath blessed,
and apart from all controversy, the less by the better is blessed —
and here, indeed, men who die do receive tithes, and there [he], who is testified to that he was living,
and so to speak, through Abraham even Levi who is receiving tithes, hath paid tithes,
for he was yet in the loins of the father when Melchisedek met him.
If indeed, then, perfection were through the Levitical priesthood — for the people under it had received law — what further need, according to the order of Melchisedek, for another priest to arise, and not to be called according to the order of Aaron?
for the priesthood being changed, of necessity also, of the law a change doth come,
for he of whom these things are said in another tribe hath had part, of whom no one gave attendance at the altar,
for [it is] evident that out of Judah hath arisen our Lord, in regard to which tribe Moses spake nothing concerning priesthood.
And it is yet more abundantly most evident, if according to the similitude of Melchisedek there doth arise another priest,
who came not according to the law of a fleshly command, but according to the power of an endless life,
for He doth testify — 'Thou [art] a priest — to the age, according to the order of Melchisedek;'
for a disannulling indeed doth come of the command going before because of its weakness, and unprofitableness,
(for nothing did the law perfect) and the bringing in of a better hope, through which we draw nigh to God.
And inasmuch as [it is] not apart from oath, (for those indeed apart from oath are become priests,
and he with an oath through Him who is saying unto him, 'The Lord sware, and will not repent, Thou [art] a priest — to the age, according to the order of Melchisedek;')
by so much of a better covenant hath Jesus become surety,
and those indeed are many who have become priests, because by death they are hindered from remaining;
and he, because of his remaining — to the age, hath the priesthood not transient,
whence also he is able to save to the very end, those coming through him unto God — ever living to make intercession for them.
For such a chief priest did become us — kind, harmless, undefiled, separate from the sinners, and become higher than the heavens,
who hath no necessity daily, as the chief priests, first for his own sins to offer up sacrifice, then for those of the people; for this he did once, having offered up himself;
for the law doth appoint men chief priests, having infirmity, but the word of the oath that [is] after the law [appointeth] the Son — to the age having been perfected.
And the sum concerning the things spoken of [is]: we have such a chief priest, who did sit down at the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens,
of the holy places a servant, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord did set up, and not man,
for every chief priest to offer both gifts and sacrifices is appointed, whence [it is] necessary for this one to have also something that he may offer;
for if, indeed, he were upon earth, he would not be a priest — (there being the priests who are offering according to the law, the gifts,
who unto an example and shadow do serve of the heavenly things, as Moses hath been divinely warned, being about to construct the tabernacle, for 'See (saith He) thou mayest make all things according to the pattern that was shewn to thee in the mount;') —
and now he hath obtained a more excellent service, how much also of a better covenant is he mediator, which on better promises hath been sanctioned,
for if that first were faultless, a place would not have been sought for a second.
For finding fault, He saith to them, 'Lo, days come, saith the Lord, and I will complete with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah, a new covenant,
not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers, in the day of My taking [them] by their hand, to bring them out of the land of Egypt — because they did not remain in My covenant, and I did not regard them, saith the Lord, —
because this [is] the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, after those days, saith the Lord, giving My laws into their mind, and upon their hearts I will write them, and I will be to them for a God, and they shall be to Me for a people;
and they shall not teach each his neighbour, and each his brother, saying, Know thou the Lord, because they shall all know Me from the small one of them unto the great one of them,
because I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their lawlessnesses I will remember no more;' —
in the saying 'new,' He hath made the first old, and what doth become obsolete and is old [is] nigh disappearing.
It had, indeed, then (even the first tabernacle) ordinances of service, also a worldly sanctuary,
for a tabernacle was prepared, the first, in which was both the lamp-stand, and the table, and the bread of the presence — which is called 'Holy;'
and after the second vail a tabernacle that is called 'Holy of holies,'
having a golden censer, and the ark of the covenant overlaid all round about with gold, in which [is] the golden pot having the manna, and the rod of Aaron that budded, and the tables of the covenant,
and over it cherubim of the glory, overshadowing the mercy-seat, concerning which we are not now to speak particularly.
And these things having been thus prepared, into the first tabernacle, indeed, at all times the priests do go in, performing the services,
and into the second, once in the year, only the chief priest, not apart from blood, which he doth offer for himself and the errors of the people,
the Holy Spirit this evidencing that not yet hath been manifested the way of the holy [places], the first tabernacle having yet a standing;
which [is] a simile in regard to the present time, in which both gifts and sacrifices are offered, which are not able, in regard to conscience, to make perfect him who is serving,
only in victuals, and drinks, and different baptisms, and fleshly ordinances — till the time of reformation imposed upon [them].
And Christ being come, chief priest of the coming good things, through the greater and more perfect tabernacle not made with hands — that is, not of this creation —
neither through blood of goats and calves, but through his own blood, did enter in once into the holy places, age-during redemption having obtained;
for if the blood of bulls, and goats, and ashes of an heifer, sprinkling those defiled, doth sanctify to the purifying of the flesh,
how much more shall the blood of the Christ (who through the age-during Spirit did offer himself unblemished to God) purify your conscience from dead works to serve the living God?
And because of this, of a new covenant he is mediator, that, death having come, for redemption of the transgressions under the first covenant, those called may receive the promise of the age-during inheritance,
for where a covenant [is], the death of the covenant-victim to come in is necessary,
for a covenant over dead victims [is] stedfast, since it is no force at all when the covenant-victim liveth,
whence not even the first apart from blood hath been initiated,
for every command having been spoken, according to law, by Moses, to all the people, having taken the blood of the calves and goats, with water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, he both the book itself and all the people did sprinkle,
saying, 'This [is] the blood of the covenant that God enjoined unto you,'
and both the tabernacle and all the vessels of the service with blood in like manner he did sprinkle,
and with blood almost all things are purified according to the law, and apart from blood-shedding forgiveness doth not come.
[It is] necessary, therefore, the pattern indeed of the things in the heavens to be purified with these, and the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these;
for not into holy places made with hands did the Christ enter — figures of the true — but into the heaven itself, now to be manifested in the presence of God for us;
nor that he may many times offer himself, even as the chief priest doth enter into the holy places every year with blood of others;
since it had behoved him many times to suffer from the foundation of the world, but now once, at the full end of the ages, for putting away of sin through his sacrifice, he hath been manifested;
and as it is laid up to men once to die, and after this — judgment,
so also the Christ, once having been offered to bear the sins of many, a second time, apart from a sin-offering, shall appear, to those waiting for him — to salvation!
For the law having a shadow of the coming good things — not the very image of the matters, every year, by the same sacrifices that they offer continually, is never able to make perfect those coming near,
since, would they not have ceased to be offered, because of those serving having no more conscience of sins, having once been purified?
but in those [sacrifices] is a remembrance of sins every year,
for it is impossible for blood of bulls and goats to take away sins.
Wherefore, coming into the world, he saith, 'Sacrifice and offering Thou didst not will, and a body Thou didst prepare for me,
in burnt-offerings, and concerning sin-offerings, Thou didst not delight,
then I said, Lo, I come, (in a volume of the book it hath been written concerning me,) to do, O God, Thy will;'
saying above — 'Sacrifice, and offering, and burnt-offerings, and concerning sin-offering Thou didst not will, nor delight in,' — which according to the law are offered —
then he said, 'Lo, I come to do, O God, Thy will;' he doth take away the first that the second he may establish;
in the which will we are having been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once,
and every priest, indeed, hath stood daily serving, and the same sacrifices many times offering, that are never able to take away sins.
And He, for sin one sacrifice having offered — to the end, did sit down on the right hand of God, —
as to the rest, expecting till He may place his enemies [as] his footstool,
for by one offering he hath perfected to the end those sanctified;
and testify to us also doth the Holy Spirit, for after that He hath said before,
'This [is] the covenant that I will make with them after those days, saith the Lord, giving My laws on their hearts, and upon their minds I will write them,'
and 'their sins and their lawlessness I will remember no more;'
and where forgiveness of these [is], there is no more offering for sin.
Having, therefore, brethren, boldness for the entrance into the holy places, in the blood of Jesus,
which way he did initiate for us — new and living, through the vail, that is, his flesh —
and a high priest over the house of God,
may we draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having the hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and having the body bathed with pure water;
may we hold fast the unwavering profession of the hope, (for faithful [is] He who did promise),
and may we consider one another to provoke to love and to good works,
not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as a custom of certain [is], but exhorting, and so much the more as ye see the day coming nigh.
For we — wilfully sinning after the receiving the full knowledge of the truth — no more for sins doth there remain a sacrifice,
but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery zeal, about to devour the opposers;
any one who did set at nought a law of Moses, apart from mercies, by two or three witnesses, doth die,
of how much sorer punishment shall he be counted worthy who the Son of God did trample on, and the blood of the covenant did count a common thing, in which he was sanctified, and to the Spirit of the grace did despite?
for we have known Him who is saying, 'Vengeance [is] Mine, I will recompense, saith the Lord;' and again, 'The Lord shall judge His people;' —
fearful [is] the falling into the hands of a living God.
And call to your remembrance the former days, in which, having been enlightened, ye did endure much conflict of sufferings,
partly both with reproaches and tribulations being made spectacles, and partly having become partners of those so living,
for also with my bonds ye sympathised, and the robbery of your goods with joy ye did receive, knowing that ye have in yourselves a better substance in the heavens, and an enduring one.
Ye may not cast away, then, your boldness, which hath great recompense of reward,
for of patience ye have need, that the will of God having done, ye may receive the promise,
for yet a very very little, He who is coming will come, and will not tarry;
and 'the righteous by faith shall live,' and 'if he may draw back, My soul hath no pleasure in him,'
and we are not of those drawing back to destruction, but of those believing to a preserving of soul.
And faith is of things hoped for a confidence, of matters not seen a conviction,
for in this were the elders testified of;
by faith we understand the ages to have been prepared by a saying of God, in regard to the things seen not having come out of things appearing;
by faith a better sacrifice did Abel offer to God than Cain, through which he was testified to be righteous, God testifying of his gifts, and through it, he being dead, doth yet speak.
By faith Enoch was translated — not to see death, and was not found, because God did translate him; for before his translation he had been testified to — that he had pleased God well,
and apart from faith it is impossible to please well, for it behoveth him who is coming to God to believe that He is, and to those seeking Him He becometh a rewarder.
By faith Noah, having been divinely warned concerning the things not yet seen, having feared, did prepare an ark to the salvation of his house, through which he did condemn the world, and of the righteousness according to faith he became heir.
By faith Abraham, being called, did obey, to go forth to the place that he was about to receive for an inheritance, and he went forth, not knowing whither he doth go;
by faith he did sojourn in the land of the promise as a strange country, in tabernacles having dwelt with Isaac and Jacob, fellow-heirs of the same promise,
for he was looking for the city having the foundations, whose artificer and constructor [is] God.
By faith also Sarah herself did receive power to conceive seed, and she bare after the time of life, seeing she did judge Him faithful who did promise;
wherefore, also from one were begotten — and that of one who had become dead — as the stars of the heaven in multitude, and as sand that [is] by the sea-shore — the innumerable.
In faith died all these, not having received the promises, but from afar having seen them, and having been persuaded, and having saluted [them], and having confessed that strangers and sojourners they are upon the earth,
for those saying such things make manifest that they seek a country;
and if, indeed, they had been mindful of that from which they came forth, they might have had an opportunity to return,
but now they long for a better, that is, an heavenly, wherefore God is not ashamed of them, to be called their God, for He did prepare for them a city.
By faith Abraham hath offered up Isaac, being tried, and the only begotten he did offer up who did receive the promises,
of whom it was said — 'In Isaac shall a seed be called to thee;'
reckoning that even out of the dead God is able to raise up, whence also in a figure he did receive [him].
By faith, concerning coming things, Isaac did bless Jacob and Esau;
by faith Jacob dying — each of the sons of Joseph did bless, and did bow down upon the top of his staff;
by faith, Joseph dying, concerning the outgoing of the sons of Israel did make mention, and concerning his bones did give command.
By faith Moses, having been born, was hid three months by his parents, because they saw the child comely, and were not afraid of the decree of the king;
by faith Moses, having become great, did refuse to be called a son of the daughter of Pharaoh,
having chosen rather to be afflicted with the people of God, than to have sin's pleasure for a season,
greater wealth having reckoned the reproach of the Christ than the treasures in Egypt, for he did look to the recompense of reward;
by faith he left Egypt behind, not having been afraid of the wrath of the king, for, as seeing the Invisible One — he endured;
by faith he kept the passover, and the sprinkling of the blood, that He who is destroying the first-born might not touch them.
By faith they did pass through the Red Sea as through dry land, which the Egyptians having received a trial of, were swallowed up;
by faith the walls of Jericho did fall, having been surrounded for seven days;
by faith Rahab the harlot did not perish with those who disbelieved, having received the spies with peace.
And what shall I yet say? for the time will fail me recounting about Gideon, Barak also, and Samson, and Jephthah, David also, and Samuel, and the prophets,
who through faith did subdue kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped mouths of lions,
quenched the power of fire, escaped the mouth of the sword, were made powerful out of infirmities, became strong in battle, caused to give way camps of the aliens.
Women received by a rising again their dead, and others were tortured, not accepting the redemption, that a better rising again they might receive,
and others of mockings and scourgings did receive trial, and yet of bonds and imprisonment;
they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, they were tried; in the killing of the sword they died; they went about in sheepskins, in goatskins — being destitute, afflicted, injuriously treated,
of whom the world was not worthy; in deserts wandering, and [in] mountains, and [in] caves, and [in] the holes of the earth;
and these all, having been testified to through the faith, did not receive the promise,
God for us something better having provided, that apart from us they might not be made perfect.
Therefore, we also having so great a cloud of witnesses set around us, every weight having put off, and the closely besetting sin, through endurance may we run the contest that is set before us,
looking to the author and perfecter of faith — Jesus, who, over-against the joy set before him — did endure a cross, shame having despised, on the right hand also of the throne of God did sit down;
for consider again him who endured such gainsaying from the sinners to himself, that ye may not be wearied in your souls — being faint.
Not yet unto blood did ye resist — with the sin striving;
and ye have forgotten the exhortation that doth speak fully with you as with sons, 'My son, be not despising chastening of the Lord, nor be faint, being reproved by Him,
for whom the Lord doth love He doth chasten, and He scourgeth every son whom He receiveth;'
if chastening ye endure, as to sons God beareth Himself to you, for who is a son whom a father doth not chasten?
and if ye are apart from chastening, of which all have become partakers, then bastards are ye, and not sons.
Then, indeed, fathers of our flesh we have had, chastising [us], and we were reverencing [them]; shall we not much rather be subject to the Father of the spirits, and live?
for they, indeed, for a few days, according to what seemed good to them, were chastening, but He for profit, to be partakers of His separation;
and all chastening for the present, indeed, doth not seem to be of joy, but of sorrow, yet afterward the peaceable fruit of righteousness to those exercised through it — it doth yield.
Wherefore, the hanging-down hands and the loosened knees set ye up;
and straight paths make for your feet, that that which is lame may not be turned aside, but rather be healed;
peace pursue with all, and the separation, apart from which no one shall see the Lord,
looking diligently over lest any one be failing of the grace of God, lest any root of bitterness springing up may give trouble, and through this many may be defiled;
lest any one be a fornicator, or a profane person, as Esau, who in exchange for one morsel of food did sell his birthright,
for ye know that also afterwards, wishing to inherit the blessing, he was disapproved of, for a place of reformation he found not, though with tears having sought it.
For ye came not near to the mount touched and scorched with fire, and to blackness, and darkness, and tempest,
and a sound of a trumpet, and a voice of sayings, which those having heard did entreat that a word might not be added to them,
for they were not bearing that which is commanded, 'And if a beast may touch the mountain, it shall be stoned, or with an arrow shot through,'
and, (so terrible was the sight,) Moses said, 'I am fearful exceedingly, and trembling.'
But, ye came to Mount Zion, and to a city of the living God, to the heavenly Jerusalem, and to myriads of messengers,
to the company and assembly of the first-born in heaven enrolled, and to God the judge of all, and to spirits of righteous men made perfect,
and to a mediator of a new covenant — Jesus, and to blood of sprinkling, speaking better things than that of Abel!
See, may ye not refuse him who is speaking, for if those did not escape who refused him who upon earth was divinely speaking — much less we who do turn away from him who [speaketh] from heaven,
whose voice the earth shook then, and now hath he promised, saying, 'Yet once — I shake not only the earth, but also the heaven;'
and this — 'Yet once' — doth make evident the removal of the things shaken, as of things having been made, that the things not shaken may remain;
wherefore, a kingdom that cannot be shaken receiving, may we have grace, through which we may serve God well-pleasingly, with reverence and religious fear;
for also our God [is] a consuming fire.
Let brotherly love remain;
of the hospitality be not forgetful, for through this unawares certain did entertain messengers;
be mindful of those in bonds, as having been bound with them, of those maltreated, as also yourselves being in the body;
honourable [is] the marriage in all, and the bed undefiled, and whoremongers and adulterers God shall judge.
Without covetousness the behaviour, being content with the things present, for He hath said, 'No, I will not leave, no, nor forsake thee,'
so that we do boldly say, 'The Lord [is] to me a helper, and I will not fear what man shall do to me.'
Be mindful of those leading you, who did speak to you the word of God, whose faith — considering the issue of the behaviour — be imitating,
Jesus Christ yesterday and to-day the same, and to the ages;
with teachings manifold and strange be not carried about, for [it is] good that by grace the heart be confirmed, not with meats, in which they who were occupied were not profited;
we have an altar, of which to eat they have no authority who the tabernacle are serving,
for of those beasts whose blood is brought for sin into the holy places through the chief priest — of these the bodies are burned without the camp.
Wherefore, also Jesus — that he might sanctify through [his] own blood the people — without the gate did suffer;
now, then, may we go forth unto him without the camp, his reproach bearing;
for we have not here an abiding city, but the coming one we seek;
through him, then, we may offer up a sacrifice of praise always to God, that is, the fruit of lips, giving thanks to His name;
and of doing good, and of fellowship, be not forgetful, for with such sacrifices God is well-pleased.
Be obedient to those leading you, and be subject, for these do watch for your souls, as about to give account, that with joy they may do this, and not sighing, for this [is] unprofitable to you.
Pray for us, for we trust that we have a good conscience, in all things willing to behave well,
and more abundantly do I call upon [you] to do this, that more quickly I may be restored to you.
And the God of the peace, who did bring up out of the dead the great shepherd of the sheep — in the blood of an age-during covenant — our Lord Jesus,
make you perfect in every good work to do His will, doing in you that which is well-pleasing before Him, through Jesus Christ, to whom [is] the glory — to the ages of the ages! Amen.
And I entreat you, brethren, suffer the word of the exhortation, for also through few words I have written to you.
Know ye that the brother Timotheus is released, with whom, if he may come more shortly, I will see you.
Salute all those leading you, and all the saints; salute you doth those from Italy:
the grace [is] with you all! Amen.
James, of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ a servant, to the Twelve Tribes who are in the dispersion: Hail!
All joy count [it], my brethren, when ye may fall into temptations manifold;
knowing that the proof of your faith doth work endurance,
and let the endurance have a perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire — in nothing lacking;
and if any of you do lack wisdom, let him ask from God, who is giving to all liberally, and not reproaching, and it shall be given to him;
and let him ask in faith, nothing doubting, for he who is doubting hath been like a wave of the sea, driven by wind and tossed,
for let not that man suppose that he shall receive anything from the Lord —
a two-souled man [is] unstable in all his ways.
And let the brother who is low rejoice in his exaltation,
and the rich in his becoming low, because as a flower of grass he shall pass away;
for the sun did rise with the burning heat, and did wither the grass, and the flower of it fell, and the grace of its appearance did perish, so also the rich in his way shall fade away!
Happy the man who doth endure temptation, because, becoming approved, he shall receive the crown of the life, which the Lord did promise to those loving Him.
Let no one say, being tempted — 'From God I am tempted,' for God is not tempted of evil, and Himself doth tempt no one,
and each one is tempted, by his own desires being led away and enticed,
afterward the desire having conceived, doth give birth to sin, and the sin having been perfected, doth bring forth death.
Be not led astray, my brethren beloved;
every good giving, and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of the lights, with whom is no variation, or shadow of turning;
having counselled, He did beget us with a word of truth, for our being a certain first-fruit of His creatures.
So then, my brethren beloved, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to anger,
for the wrath of a man the righteousness of God doth not work;
wherefore having put aside all filthiness and superabundance of evil, in meekness be receiving the engrafted word, that is able to save your souls;
and become ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves,
because, if any one is a hearer of the word and not a doer, this one hath been like to a man viewing his natural face in a mirror,
for he did view himself, and hath gone away, and immediately he did forget of what kind he was;
and he who did look into the perfect law — that of liberty, and did continue there, this one — not a forgetful hearer becoming, but a doer of work — this one shall be happy in his doing.
If any one doth think to be religious among you, not bridling his tongue, but deceiving his heart, of this one vain [is] the religion;
religion pure and undefiled with the God and Father is this, to look after orphans and widows in their tribulation — unspotted to keep himself from the world.
My brethren, hold not, in respect of persons, the faith of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ,
for if there may come into your synagogue a man with gold ring, in gay raiment, and there may come in also a poor man in vile raiment,
and ye may look upon him bearing the gay raiment, and may say to him, 'Thou — sit thou here well,' and to the poor man may say, 'Thou — stand thou there, or, Sit thou here under my footstool,' —
ye did not judge fully in yourselves, and did become ill-reasoning judges.
Hearken, my brethren beloved, did not God choose the poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the reign that He promised to those loving Him?
and ye did dishonour the poor one; do not the rich oppress you and themselves draw you to judgment-seats;
do they not themselves speak evil of the good name that was called upon you?
If, indeed, royal law ye complete, according to the Writing, 'Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself,' — ye do well;
and if ye accept persons, sin ye do work, being convicted by the law as transgressors;
for whoever the whole law shall keep, and shall stumble in one [point], he hath become guilty of all;
for He who is saying, 'Thou mayest not commit adultery,' said also, 'Thou mayest do no murder;' and if thou shalt not commit adultery, and shalt commit murder, thou hast become a transgressor of law;
so speak ye and so do, as about by a law of liberty to be judged,
for the judgment without kindness [is] to him not having done kindness, and exult doth kindness over judgment.
What [is] the profit, my brethren, if faith, any one may speak of having, and works he may not have? is that faith able to save him?
and if a brother or sister may be naked, and may be destitute of the daily food,
and any one of you may say to them, 'Depart ye in peace, be warmed, and be filled,' and may not give to them the things needful for the body, what [is] the profit?
so also the faith, if it may not have works, is dead by itself.
But say may some one, Thou hast faith, and I have works, shew me thy faith out of thy works, and I will shew thee out of my works my faith:
thou — thou dost believe that God is one; thou dost well, and the demons believe, and they shudder!
And dost thou wish to know, O vain man, that the faith apart from the works is dead?
Abraham our father — was not he declared righteous out of works, having brought up Isaac his son upon the altar?
dost thou see that the faith was working with his works, and out of the works the faith was perfected?
and fulfilled was the Writing that is saying, 'And Abraham did believe God, and it was reckoned to him — to righteousness;' and, 'Friend of God' he was called.
Ye see, then, that out of works is man declared righteous, and not out of faith only;
and in like manner also Rahab the harlot — was she not out of works declared righteous, having received the messengers, and by another way having sent forth?
for as the body apart from the spirit is dead, so also the faith apart from the works is dead.
Many teachers become not, my brethren, having known that greater judgment we shall receive,
for we all make many stumbles; if any one in word doth not stumble, this one [is] a perfect man, able to bridle also the whole body;
lo, the bits we put into the mouths of the horses for their obeying us, and their whole body we turn about;
lo, also the ships, being so great, and by fierce winds being driven, are led about by a very small helm, whithersoever the impulse of the helmsman doth counsel,
so also the tongue is a little member, and doth boast greatly; lo, a little fire how much wood it doth kindle!
and the tongue [is] a fire, the world of the unrighteousness, so the tongue is set in our members, which is spotting our whole body, and is setting on fire the course of nature, and is set on fire by the gehenna.
For every nature, both of beasts and of fowls, both of creeping things and things of the sea, is subdued, and hath been subdued, by the human nature,
and the tongue no one of men is able to subdue, [it is] an unruly evil, full of deadly poison,
with it we do bless the God and Father, and with it we do curse the men made according to the similitude of God;
out of the same mouth doth come forth blessing and cursing; it doth not need, my brethren, these things so to happen;
doth the fountain out of the same opening pour forth the sweet and the bitter?
is a fig-tree able, my brethren, olives to make? or a vine figs? so no fountain salt and sweet water [is able] to make.
Who [is] wise and intelligent among you? let him shew out of the good behaviour his works in meekness of wisdom,
and if bitter zeal ye have, and rivalry in your heart, glory not, nor lie against the truth;
this wisdom is not descending from above, but earthly, physical, demon-like,
for where zeal and rivalry [are], there is insurrection and every evil matter;
and the wisdom from above, first, indeed, is pure, then peaceable, gentle, easily entreated, full of kindness and good fruits, uncontentious, and unhypocritical: —
and the fruit of the righteousness in peace is sown to those making peace.
Whence [are] wars and fightings among you? not thence — out of your passions, that are as soldiers in your members?
ye desire, and ye have not; ye murder, and are zealous, and are not able to attain; ye fight and war, and ye have not, because of your not asking;
ye ask, and ye receive not, because evilly ye ask, that in your pleasures ye may spend [it].
Adulterers and adulteresses! have ye not known that friendship of the world is enmity with God? whoever, then, may counsel to be a friend of the world, an enemy of God he is set.
Do ye think that emptily the Writing saith, 'To envy earnestly desireth the spirit that did dwell in us,'
and greater grace he doth give, wherefore he saith, 'God against proud ones doth set Himself up, and to lowly ones He doth give grace?'
be subject, then, to God; stand up against the devil, and he will flee from you;
draw nigh to God, and He will draw nigh to you; cleanse hands, ye sinners! and purify hearts, ye two-souled!
be exceeding afflicted, and mourn, and weep, let your laughter to mourning be turned, and the joy to heaviness;
be made low before the Lord, and He shall exalt you.
Speak not one against another, brethren; he who is speaking against a brother, and is judging his brother, doth speak against law, and doth judge law, and if law thou dost judge, thou art not a doer of law but a judge;
one is the lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy; thou — who art thou that dost judge the other?
Go, now, ye who are saying, 'To-day and to-morrow we will go on to such a city, and will pass there one year, and traffic, and make gain;'
who do not know the thing of the morrow; for what is your life? for it is a vapour that is appearing for a little, and then is vanishing;
instead of your saying, 'If the Lord may will, we shall live, and do this or that;'
and now ye glory in your pride; all such glorying is evil;
to him, then, knowing to do good, and not doing, sin it is to him.
Go, now, ye rich! weep, howling over your miseries that are coming upon [you];
your riches have rotted, and your garments have become moth-eaten;
your gold and silver have rotted, and the rust of them for a testimony shall be to you, and shall eat your flesh as fire. Ye made treasure in the last days!
lo, the reward of the workmen, of those who in-gathered your fields, which hath been fraudulently kept back by you — doth cry out, and the exclamations of those who did reap into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth have entered;
ye did live in luxury upon the earth, and were wanton; ye did nourish your hearts, as in a day of slaughter;
ye did condemn — ye did murder the righteous one, he doth not resist you.
Be patient, then, brethren, till the presence of the Lord; lo, the husbandman doth expect the precious fruit of the earth, being patient for it, till he may receive rain — early and latter;
be patient, ye also; establish your hearts, because the presence of the Lord hath drawn nigh;
murmur not against one another, brethren, that ye may not be condemned; lo, the Judge before the door hath stood.
An example take ye of the suffering of evil, my brethren, and of the patience, the prophets who did speak in the name of the Lord;
lo, we call happy those who are enduring; the endurance of Job ye heard of, and the end of the Lord ye have seen, that very compassionate is the Lord, and pitying.
And before all things, my brethren, do not swear, neither by the heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other oath, and let your Yes be Yes, and the No, No; that under judgment ye may not fall.
Doth any one suffer evil among you? let him pray; is any of good cheer? let him sing psalms;
is any infirm among you? let him call for the elders of the assembly, and let them pray over him, having anointed him with oil, in the name of the Lord,
and the prayer of the faith shall save the distressed one, and the Lord shall raise him up, and if sins he may have committed, they shall be forgiven to him.
Be confessing to one another the trespasses, and be praying for one another, that ye may be healed; very strong is a working supplication of a righteous man;
Elijah was a man like affected as we, and with prayer he did pray — not to rain, and it did not rain upon the land three years and six months;
and again he did pray, and the heaven did give rain, and the land did bring forth her fruit.
Brethren, if any among you may go astray from the truth, and any one may turn him back,
let him know that he who did turn back a sinner from the straying of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall cover a multitude of sins.
Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the choice sojourners of the dispersion of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,
according to a foreknowledge of God the Father, in sanctification of the Spirit, to obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ: Grace to you and peace be multiplied!
Blessed [is] the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who, according to the abundance of His kindness did beget us again to a living hope, through the rising again of Jesus Christ out of the dead,
to an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and unfading, reserved in the heavens for you,
who, in the power of God are being guarded, through faith, unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time,
in which ye are glad, a little now, if it be necessary, being made to sorrow in manifold trials,
that the proof of your faith — much more precious than of gold that is perishing, and through fire being approved — may be found to praise, and honour, and glory, in the revelation of Jesus Christ,
whom, not having seen, ye love, in whom, now not seeing and believing, ye are glad with joy unspeakable and glorified,
receiving the end of your faith — salvation of souls;
concerning which salvation seek out and search out did prophets who concerning the grace toward you did prophecy,
searching in regard to what or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ that was in them was manifesting, testifying beforehand the sufferings of Christ and the glory after these,
to whom it was revealed, that not to themselves, but to us they were ministering these, which now were told to you (through those who did proclaim good news to you,) in the Holy Spirit sent from heaven, to which things messengers do desire to bend looking.
Wherefore having girded up the loins of your mind, being sober, hope perfectly upon the grace that is being brought to you in the revelation of Jesus Christ,
as obedient children, not fashioning yourselves to the former desires in your ignorance,
but according as He who did call you [is] holy, ye also, become holy in all behaviour,
because it hath been written, 'Become ye holy, because I am holy;'
and if on the Father ye do call, who without acceptance of persons is judging according to the work of each, in fear the time of your sojourn pass ye,
having known that, not with corruptible things — silver or gold — were ye redeemed from your foolish behaviour delivered by fathers,
but with precious blood, as of a lamb unblemished and unspotted — Christ's —
foreknown, indeed, before the foundation of the world, and manifested in the last times because of you,
who through him do believe in God, who did raise out of the dead, and glory to him did give, so that your faith and hope may be in God.
Your souls having purified in the obedience of the truth through the Spirit to brotherly love unfeigned, out of a pure heart one another love ye earnestly,
being begotten again, not out of seed corruptible, but incorruptible, through a word of God — living and remaining — to the age;
because all flesh [is] as grass, and all glory of man as flower of grass; wither did the grass, and the flower of it fell away,
and the saying of the Lord doth remain — to the age; and this is the saying that was proclaimed good news to you.
Having put aside, then, all evil, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envyings, and all evil speakings,
as new-born babes the word's pure milk desire ye, that in it ye may grow,
if so be ye did taste that the Lord [is] gracious,
to whom coming — a living stone — by men, indeed, having been disapproved of, but with God choice, precious,
and ye yourselves, as living stones, are built up, a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
Wherefore, also, it is contained in the Writing: 'Lo, I lay in Zion a chief corner-stone, choice, precious, and he who is believing on him may not be put to shame;'
to you, then, who are believing [is] the preciousness; and to the unbelieving, a stone that the builders disapproved of, this one did become for the head of a corner,
and a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence — who are stumbling at the word, being unbelieving, — to which also they were set;
and ye [are] a choice race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people acquired, that the excellences ye may shew forth of Him who out of darkness did call you to His wondrous light;
who [were] once not a people, and [are] now the people of God; who had not found kindness, and now have found kindness.
Beloved, I call upon [you], as strangers and sojourners, to keep from the fleshly desires, that war against the soul,
having your behaviour among the nations right, that in that which they speak against you as evil-doers, of the good works having beheld, they may glorify God in a day of inspection.
Be subject, then, to every human creation, because of the Lord, whether to a king, as the highest,
whether to governors, as to those sent through him, for punishment, indeed, of evil-doers, and a praise of those doing good;
because, so is the will of God, doing good, to put to silence the ignorance of the foolish men;
as free, and not having the freedom as the cloak of the evil, but as servants of God;
to all give ye honour; the brotherhood love ye; God fear ye; the king honour ye.
The domestics! be subjecting yourselves in all fear to the masters, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the cross;
for this [is] gracious, if because of conscience toward God any one doth endure sorrows, suffering unrighteously;
for what renown [is it], if sinning and being buffeted, ye do endure [it]? but if, doing good and suffering [for it], ye do endure, this [is] gracious with God,
for to this ye were called, because Christ also did suffer for you, leaving to you an example, that ye may follow his steps,
who did not commit sin, nor was guile found in his mouth,
who being reviled — was not reviling again, suffering — was not threatening, and was committing himself to Him who is judging righteously,
who our sins himself did bear in his body, upon the tree, that to the sins having died, to the righteousness we may live; by whose stripes ye were healed,
for ye were as sheep going astray, but ye turned back now to the shepherd and overseer of your souls.
In like manner, the wives, be ye subject to your own husbands, that even if certain are disobedient to the word, through the conversation of the wives, without the word, they may be won,
having beheld your pure behaviour in fear,
whose adorning — let it not be that which is outward, of plaiting of hair, and of putting around of things of gold, or of putting on of garments,
but — the hidden man of the heart, in the incorruptible thing of the meek and quiet spirit, which is, before God, of great price,
for thus once also the holy women who did hope on God, were adorning themselves, being subject to their own husbands,
as Sarah was obedient to Abraham, calling him 'sir,' of whom ye did become daughters, doing good, and not fearing any terror.
The husbands, in like manner, dwelling with [them], according to knowledge, as to a weaker vessel — to the wife — imparting honour, as also being heirs together of the grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered.
And finally, being all of one mind, having fellow-feeling, loving as brethren, compassionate, courteous,
not giving back evil for evil, or railing for railing, and on the contrary, blessing, having known that to this ye were called, that a blessing ye may inherit;
for 'he who is willing to love life, and to see good days, let him guard his tongue from evil, and his lips — not to speak guile;
let him turn aside from evil, and do good, let him seek peace and pursue it;
because the eyes of the Lord [are] upon the righteous, and His ears — to their supplication, and the face of the Lord [is] upon those doing evil;'
and who [is] he who will be doing you evil, if of Him who is good ye may become imitators?
but if ye also should suffer because of righteousness, happy [are ye]! and of their fear be not afraid, nor be troubled,
and the Lord God sanctify in your hearts. And [be] ready always for defence to every one who is asking of you an account concerning the hope that [is] in you, with meekness and fear;
having a good conscience, that in that in which they speak against you as evil-doers, they may be ashamed who are traducing your good behaviour in Christ;
for [it is] better doing good, if the will of God will it, to suffer, than doing evil;
because also Christ once for sin did suffer — righteous for unrighteous — that he might lead us to God, having been put to death indeed, in the flesh, and having been made alive in the spirit,
in which also to the spirits in prison having gone he did preach,
who sometime disbelieved, when once the long-suffering of God did wait, in days of Noah — an ark being preparing — in which few, that is, eight souls, were saved through water;
also to which an antitype doth now save us — baptism, (not a putting away of the filth of flesh, but the question of a good conscience in regard to God,) through the rising again of Jesus Christ,
who is at the right hand of God, having gone on to heaven — messengers, and authorities, and powers, having been subjected to him.
Christ, then, having suffered for us in the flesh, ye also with the same mind arm yourselves, because he who did suffer in the flesh hath done with sin,
no more in the desires of men, but in the will of God, to live the rest of the time in the flesh;
for sufficient to us [is] the past time of life the will of the nations to have wrought, having walked in lasciviousnesses, desires, excesses of wines, revellings, drinking-bouts, and unlawful idolatries,
in which they think it strange — your not running with them to the same excess of dissoluteness, speaking evil,
who shall give an account to Him who is ready to judge living and dead,
for for this also to dead men was good news proclaimed, that they may be judged, indeed, according to men in the flesh, and may live according to God in the spirit.
And of all things the end hath come nigh; be sober-minded, then, and watch unto the prayers,
and, before all things, to one another having the earnest love, because the love shall cover a multitude of sins;
hospitable to one another, without murmuring;
each, according as he received a gift, to one another ministering it, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God;
if any one doth speak — 'as oracles of God;' if any one doth minister — 'as of the ability which God doth supply;' that in all things God may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom is the glory and the power — to the ages of the ages. Amen.
Beloved, think it not strange at the fiery suffering among you that is coming to try you, as if a strange thing were happening to you,
but, according as ye have fellowship with the sufferings of the Christ, rejoice ye, that also in the revelation of his glory ye may rejoice — exulting;
if ye be reproached in the name of Christ — happy [are ye], because the Spirit of glory and of God upon you doth rest; in regard, indeed, to them, he is evil-spoken of, and in regard to you, he is glorified;
for let none of you suffer as a murderer, or thief, or evil-doer, or as an inspector into other men's matters;
and if as a Christian, let him not be ashamed; and let him glorify God in this respect;
because it is the time of the beginning of the judgment from the house of God, and if first from us, what the end of those disobedient to the good news of God?
And if the righteous man is scarcely saved, the ungodly and sinner — where shall he appear?
so that also those suffering according to the will of god, as to a stedfast Creator, let them commit their own souls in good doing.
Elders who [are] among you, I exhort, who [am] a fellow-elder, and a witness of the sufferings of the Christ, and of the glory about to be revealed a partaker,
feed the flock of God that [is] among you, overseeing not constrainedly, but willingly, neither for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind,
neither as exercising lordship over the heritages, but patterns becoming of the flock,
and at the manifestation of the chief Shepherd, ye shall receive the unfading crown of glory.
In like manner, ye younger, be subject to elders, and all to one another subjecting yourselves; with humble-mindedness clothe yourselves, because God the proud doth resist, but to the humble He doth give grace;
be humbled, then, under the powerful hand of God, that you He may exalt in good time,
all your care having cast upon Him, because He careth for you.
Be sober, vigilant, because your opponent the devil, as a roaring lion, doth walk about, seeking whom he may swallow up,
whom resist, stedfast in the faith, having known the same sufferings to your brotherhood in the world to be accomplished.
And the God of all grace, who did call you to His age-during glory in Christ Jesus, having suffered a little, Himself make you perfect, establish, strengthen, settle [you];
to Him [is] the glory, and the power — to the ages and the ages! Amen.
Through Silvanus, to you the faithful brother, as I reckon, through few [words] I did write, exhorting and testifying this to be the true grace of God in which ye have stood.
Salute you doth the [assembly] in Babylon jointly elected, and Markus my son.
Salute ye one another in a kiss of love; peace to you all who [are] in Christ Jesus! Amen.
Simeon Peter, a servant and an apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who did obtain a like precious faith with us in the righteousness of our God and Saviour Jesus Christ:
Grace to you, and peace be multiplied in the acknowledgement of God and of Jesus our Lord!
As all things to us His divine power (the things pertaining unto life and piety) hath given, through the acknowledgement of him who did call us through glory and worthiness,
through which to us the most great and precious promises have been given, that through these ye may become partakers of a divine nature, having escaped from the corruption in the world in desires.
And this same also — all diligence having brought in besides, superadd in your faith the worthiness, and in the worthiness the knowledge,
and in the knowledge the temperance, and in the temperance the endurance, and in the endurance the piety,
and in the piety the brotherly kindness, and in the brotherly kindness the love;
for these things being to you and abounding, do make [you] neither inert nor unfruitful in regard to the acknowledging of our Lord Jesus Christ,
for he with whom these things are not present is blind, dim-sighted, having become forgetful of the cleansing of his old sins;
wherefore, the rather, brethren, be diligent to make stedfast your calling and choice, for these things doing, ye may never stumble,
for so, richly shall be superadded to you the entrance into the age-during reign of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
Wherefore, I will not be careless always to remind you concerning these things, though, having known them, and having been established in the present truth,
and I think right, so long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up in reminding [you],
having known that soon is the laying aside of my tabernacle, even as also our Lord Jesus Christ did shew to me,
and I will be diligent that also at every time ye have, after my outgoing, power to make to yourselves the remembrance of these things.
For, skilfully devised fables not having followed out, we did make known to you the power and presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, but eye-witnesses having become of his majesty —
for having received from God the Father honour and glory, such a voice being borne to him by the excellent glory: 'This is My Son — the beloved, in whom I was well pleased;'
and this voice we — we did hear, out of heaven borne, being with him in the holy mount.
And we have more firm the prophetic word, to which we do well giving heed, as to a lamp shining in a dark place, till day may dawn, and a morning star may arise — in your hearts;
this first knowing, that no prophecy of the Writing doth come of private exposition,
for not by will of man did ever prophecy come, but by the Holy Spirit borne on holy men of God spake.
And there did come also false prophets among the people, as also among you there shall be false teachers, who shall bring in besides destructive sects, and the Master who bought them denying, bringing to themselves quick destruction,
and many shall follow out their destructive ways, because of whom the way of the truth shall be evil spoken of,
and in covetousness, with moulded words, of you they shall make merchandise, whose judgment of old is not idle, and their destruction doth not slumber.
For if God messengers who sinned did not spare, but with chains of thick gloom, having cast [them] down to Tartarus, did deliver [them] to judgment, having been reserved,
and the old world did not spare, but the eighth person, Noah, of righteousness a preacher, did keep, a flood on the world of the impious having brought,
and the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah having turned to ashes, with an overthrow did condemn, an example to those about to be impious having set [them];
and righteous Lot, worn down by the conduct in lasciviousness of the impious, He did rescue,
for in seeing and hearing, the righteous man, dwelling among them, day by day the righteous soul with unlawful works was harassing.
The Lord hath known to rescue pious ones out of temptation, and unrighteous ones to a day of judgment, being punished, to keep,
and chiefly those going behind the flesh in desire of uncleanness, and lordship despising; presumptuous, self-complacent, dignities they are not afraid to speak evil of,
whereas messengers, in strength and power being greater, do not bear against them before the Lord an evil speaking judgment;
and these, as irrational natural beasts, made to be caught and destroyed — in what things they are ignorant of, speaking evil — in their destruction shall be destroyed,
about to receive a reward of unrighteousness, pleasures counting the luxury in the day, spots and blemishes, luxuriating in their deceits, feasting with you,
having eyes full of adultery, and unable to cease from sin, enticing unstable souls, having an heart exercised in covetousnesses, children of a curse,
having forsaken a right way, they did go astray, having followed in the way of Balaam the [son] of Bosor, who a reward of unrighteousness did love,
and had a rebuke of his own iniquity — a dumb ass, in man's voice having spoken, did forbid the madness of the prophet.
These are wells without water, and clouds by a tempest driven, to whom the thick gloom of the darkness to the age hath been kept;
for overswellings of vanity speaking, they do entice in desires of the flesh — lasciviousnesses, those who had truly escaped from those conducting themselves in error,
liberty to them promising, themselves being servants of the corruption, for by whom any one hath been overcome, to this one also he hath been brought to servitude,
for, if having escaped from the pollutions of the world, in the acknowledging of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, and by these again being entangled, they have been overcome, become to them hath the last things worse than the first,
for it were better to them not to have acknowledged the way of the righteousness, than having acknowledged [it], to turn back from the holy command delivered to them,
and happened to them hath that of the true similitude; 'A dog did turn back upon his own vomit,' and, 'A sow having bathed herself — to rolling in mire.'
This, now, beloved, a second letter to you I write, in both which I stir up your pure mind in reminding [you],
to be mindful of the sayings said before by the holy prophets, and of the command of us the apostles of the Lord and Saviour,
this first knowing, that there shall come in the latter end of the days scoffers, according to their own desires going on,
and saying, 'Where is the promise of his presence? for since the fathers did fall asleep, all things so remain from the beginning of the creation;'
for this is unobserved by them willingly, that the heavens were of old, and the earth out of water and through water standing together by the word of God,
through which the then world, by water having been deluged, was destroyed;
and the present heavens and the earth, by the same word are treasured, for fire being kept to a day of judgment and destruction of the impious men.
And this one thing let not be unobserved by you, beloved, that one day with the Lord [is] as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day;
the Lord is not slow in regard to the promise, as certain count slowness, but is long-suffering to us, not counselling any to be lost but all to pass on to reformation,
and it will come — the day of the Lord — as a thief in the night, in which the heavens with a rushing noise will pass away, and the elements with burning heat be dissolved, and earth and the works in it shall be burnt up.
All these, then, being dissolved, what kind of persons doth it behove you to be in holy behaviours and pious acts?
waiting for and hasting to the presence of the day of God, by which the heavens, being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the elements with burning heat shall melt;
and for new heavens and a new earth according to His promise we do wait, in which righteousness doth dwell;
wherefore, beloved, these things waiting for, be diligent, spotless and unblameable, by Him to be found in peace,
and the long-suffering of our Lord count ye salvation, according as also our beloved brother Paul — according to the wisdom given to him — did write to you,
as also in all the epistles, speaking in them concerning these things, among which things are certain hard to be understood, which the untaught and unstable do wrest, as also the other Writings, unto their own destruction.
Ye, then, beloved, knowing before, take heed, lest, together with the error of the impious being led away, ye may fall from your own stedfastness,
and increase ye in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; to him [is] the glory both now, and to the day of the age! Amen.
That which was from the beginning, that which we have heard, that which we have seen with our eyes, that which we did behold, and our hands did handle, concerning the Word of the Life —
and the Life was manifested, and we have seen, and do testify, and declare to you the Life, the age-during, which was with the Father, and was manifested to us —
that which we have seen and heard declare we to you, that ye also may have fellowship with us, and our fellowship [is] with the Father, and with His Son Jesus Christ;
and these things we write to you, that your joy may be full.
And this is the message that we have heard from Him, and announce to you, that God is light, and darkness in Him is not at all;
if we may say — 'we have fellowship with Him,' and in the darkness may walk — we lie, and do not the truth;
and if in the light we may walk, as He is in the light — we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ His Son doth cleanse us from every sin;
if we may say — 'we have not sin,' ourselves we lead astray, and the truth is not in us;
if we may confess our sins, stedfast He is and righteous that He may forgive us the sins, and may cleanse us from every unrighteousness;
if we may say — 'we have not sinned,' a liar we make Him, and His word is not in us.
My little children, these things I write to you, that ye may not sin: and if any one may sin, an advocate we have with the Father, Jesus Christ, a righteous one,
and he — he is a propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the whole world,
and in this we know that we have known him, if his commands we may keep;
he who is saying, 'I have known him,' and his command is not keeping, a liar he is, and in him the truth is not;
and whoever may keep his word, truly in him the love of God hath been perfected; in this we know that in him we are.
He who is saying in him he doth remain, ought according as he walked also himself so to walk.
Brethren, a new command I write not to you, but an old command, that ye had from the beginning — the old command is the word that ye heard from the beginning;
again, a new command I write to you, which thing is true in him and in you, because the darkness doth pass away, and the true light doth now shine;
he who is saying, in the light he is, and his brother is hating, in the darkness he is till now;
he who is loving his brother, in the light he doth remain, and a stumbling-block in him there is not;
and he who is hating his brother, in the darkness he is, and in the darkness he doth walk, and he hath not known whither he doth go, because the darkness did blind his eyes.
I write to you, little children, because the sins have been forgiven you through his name;
I write to you, fathers, because ye have known him who [is] from the beginning; I write to you, young men, because ye have overcome the evil. I write to you, little youths, because ye have known the Father:
I did write to you, fathers, because ye have known him who [is] from the beginning; I did write to you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God in you doth remain, and ye have overcome the evil.
Love not ye the world, nor the things in the world; if any one doth love the world, the love of the Father is not in him,
because all that [is] in the world — the desire of the flesh, and the desire of the eyes, and the ostentation of the life — is not of the Father, but of the world,
and the world doth pass away, and the desire of it, and he who is doing the will of God, he doth remain — to the age.
Little youths, it is the last hour; and even as ye heard that the antichrist doth come, even now antichrists have become many — whence we know that it is the last hour;
out of us they went forth, but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would have remained with us; but — that they might be manifested that they are not all of us.
And ye have an anointing from the Holy One, and have known all things;
I did not write to you because ye have not known the truth, but because ye have known it, and because no lie is of the truth.
Who is the liar, except he who is denying that Jesus is the Christ? this one is the antichrist who is denying the Father and the Son;
every one who is denying the Son, neither hath he the Father, [he who is confessing the Son hath the Father also.]
Ye, then, that which ye heard from the beginning, in you let it remain; if in you may remain that which from the beginning ye did hear, ye also in the Son and in the Father shall remain,
and this is the promise that He did promise us — the life the age-during.
These things I did write to you concerning those leading you astray;
and you, the anointing that ye did receive from him, in you it doth remain, and ye have no need that any one may teach you, but as the same anointing doth teach you concerning all, and is true, and is not a lie, and even as was taught you, ye shall remain in him.
And now, little children, remain in him, that when he may be manifested, we may have boldness, and may not be ashamed before him, in his presence;
if ye know that he is righteous, know ye that every one doing the righteousness, of him hath been begotten.
See ye what love the Father hath given to us, that children of God we may be called; because of this the world doth not know us, because it did not know Him;
beloved, now, children of God are we, and it was not yet manifested what we shall be, and we have known that if he may be manifested, like him we shall be, because we shall see him as he is;
and every one who is having this hope on him, doth purify himself, even as he is pure.
Every one who is doing the sin, the lawlessness also he doth do, and the sin is the lawlessness,
and ye have known that he was manifested that our sins he may take away, and sin is not in him;
every one who is remaining in him doth not sin; every one who is sinning, hath not seen him, nor known him.
Little children, let no one lead you astray; he who is doing the righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous,
he who is doing the sin, of the devil he is, because from the beginning the devil doth sin; for this was the Son of God manifested, that he may break up the works of the devil;
every one who hath been begotten of God, sin he doth not, because his seed in him doth remain, and he is not able to sin, because of God he hath been begotten.
In this manifest are the children of God, and the children of the devil; every one who is not doing righteousness, is not of God, and he who is not loving his brother,
because this is the message that ye did hear from the beginning, that we may love one another,
not as Cain — of the evil one he was, and he did slay his brother, and wherefore did he slay him? because his works were evil, and those of his brother righteous.
Do not wonder, my brethren, if the world doth hate you;
we — we have known that we have passed out of the death to the life, because we love the brethren; he who is not loving the brother doth remain in the death.
Every one who is hating his brother — a man-killer he is, and ye have known that no man-killer hath life age-during in him remaining,
in this we have known the love, because he for us his life did lay down, and we ought for the brethren the lives to lay down;
and whoever may have the goods of the world, and may view his brother having need, and may shut up his bowels from him — how doth the love of God remain in him?
My little children, may we not love in word nor in tongue, but in word and in truth!
and in this we know that of the truth we are, and before Him we shall assure our hearts,
because if our heart may condemn — because greater is God than our heart, and He doth know all things.
Beloved, if our heart may not condemn us, we have boldness toward God,
and whatever we may ask, we receive from Him, because His commands we keep, and the things pleasing before Him we do,
and this is His command, that we may believe in the name of His Son Jesus Christ, and may love one another, even as He did give command to us,
and he who is keeping His commands, in Him he doth remain, and He in him; and in this we know that He doth remain in us, from the Spirit that He gave us.
Beloved, every spirit believe not, but prove the spirits, if of God they are, because many false prophets have gone forth to the world;
in this know ye the Spirit of God; every spirit that doth confess Jesus Christ in the flesh having come, of God it is,
and every spirit that doth not confess Jesus Christ in the flesh having come, of God it is not; and this is that of the antichrist, which ye heard that it doth come, and now in the world it is already.
Ye — of God ye are, little children, and ye have overcome them; because greater is He who [is] in you, than he who is in the world.
They — of the world they are; because of this from the world they speak, and the world doth hear them;
we — of God we are; he who is knowing God doth hear us; he who is not of God, doth not hear us; from this we know the spirit of the truth, and the spirit of the error.
Beloved, may we love one another, because the love is of God, and every one who is loving, of God he hath been begotten, and doth know God;
he who is not loving did not know God, because God is love.
In this was manifested the love of God in us, because His Son — the only begotten — hath God sent to the world, that we may live through him;
in this is the love, not that we loved God, but that He did love us, and did send His Son a propitiation for our sins.
Beloved, if thus did God love us, we also ought one another to love;
God no one hath ever seen; if we may love one another, God in us doth remain, and His love is having been perfected in us;
in this we know that in Him we do remain, and He in us, because of His Spirit He hath given us.
And we — we have seen and do testify, that the Father hath sent the Son — Saviour of the world;
whoever may confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God in him doth remain, and he in God;
and we — we have known and believed the love, that God hath in us; God is love, and he who is remaining in the love, in God he doth remain, and God in him.
In this made perfect hath been the love with us, that boldness we may have in the day of the judgment, because even as He is, we — we also are in this world;
fear is not in the love, but the perfect love doth cast out the fear, because the fear hath punishment, and he who is fearing hath not been made perfect in the love;
we — we love him, because He — He first loved us;
if any one may say — 'I love God,' and his brother he may hate, a liar he is; for he who is not loving his brother whom he hath seen, God — whom he hath not seen — how is he able to love?
and this [is] the command we have from Him, that he who is loving God, may also love his brother.
Every one who is believing that Jesus is the Christ, of God he hath been begotten, and every one who is loving Him who did beget, doth love also him who is begotten of Him:
in this we know that we love the children of God, when we may love God, and His commands may keep;
for this is the love of God, that His commands we may keep, and His commands are not burdensome;
because every one who is begotten of God doth overcome the world, and this is the victory that did overcome the world — our faith;
who is he who is overcoming the world, if not he who is believing that Jesus is the Son of God?
This one is he who did come through water and blood — Jesus the Christ, not in the water only, but in the water and the blood; and the Spirit it is that is testifying, because the Spirit is the truth,
because three are who are testifying [in the heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit, and these — the three — are one;
and three are who are testifying in the earth], the Spirit, and the water, and the blood, and the three are into the one.
If the testimony of men we receive, the testimony of God is greater, because this is the testimony of God that He hath testified concerning His Son.
He who is believing in the Son of God, hath the testimony in himself; he who is not believing God, a liar hath made Him, because he hath not believed in the testimony that God hath testified concerning His Son;
and this is the testimony, that life age-during did God give to us, and this — the life — is in His Son;
he who is having the Son, hath the life; he who is not having the Son of God — the life he hath not.
These things I did write to you who are believing in the name of the Son of God, that ye may know that life ye have age-during, and that ye may believe in the name of the Son of God.
And this is the boldness that we have toward Him, that if anything we may ask according to his will, He doth hear us,
and if we have known that He doth hear us, whatever we may ask, we have known that we have the requests that we have requested from Him.
If any one may see his brother sinning a sin not unto death, he shall ask, and He shall give to him life to those sinning not unto death; there is sin to death, not concerning it do I speak that he may beseech;
all unrighteousness is sin, and there is sin not unto death.
We have known that every one who hath been begotten of God doth not sin, but he who was begotten of God doth keep himself, and the evil one doth not touch him;
we have known that of God we are, and the whole world in the evil doth lie;
and we have known that the Son of God is come, and hath given us a mind, that we may know Him who is true, and we are in Him who is true, in His Son Jesus Christ; this one is the true God and the life age-during!
Little children, guard yourselves from the idols! Amen.
The Elder to the choice Kyria, and to her children, whom I love in truth, and not I only, but also all those having known the truth,
because of the truth that is remaining in us, and with us shall be to the age,
there shall be with you grace, kindness, peace, from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and love.
I rejoiced exceedingly that I have found of thy children walking in truth, even as a command we did receive from the Father;
and now I beseech thee, Kyria, not as writing to thee a new command, but which we had from the beginning, that we may love one another,
and this is the love, that we may walk according to His commands; this is the command, even as ye did hear from the beginning, that in it ye may walk,
because many leading astray did enter into the world, who are not confessing Jesus Christ coming in flesh; this one is he who is leading astray, and the antichrist.
See to yourselves that ye may not lose the things that we wrought, but a full reward may receive;
every one who is transgressing, and is not remaining in the teaching of the Christ, hath not God; he who is remaining in the teaching of the Christ, this one hath both the Father and the Son;
if any one doth come unto you, and this teaching doth not bear, receive him not into the house, and say not to him, 'Hail!'
for he who is saying to him, 'Hail,' hath fellowship with his evil works.
Many things having to write to you, I did not intend through paper and ink, but I hope to come unto you, and speak mouth to mouth, that our joy may be full;
salute thee do the children of thy choice sister. Amen.
The Elder to Gaius the beloved, whom I love in truth!
beloved, concerning all things I desire thee to prosper, and to be in health, even as thy soul doth prosper,
for I rejoiced exceedingly, brethren coming and testifying of the truth in thee, even as thou in truth dost walk;
greater than these things I have no joy, that I may hear of my children in truth walking.
Beloved, faithfully dost thou do whatever thou mayest work to the brethren and to the strangers,
who did testify of thy love before an assembly, whom thou wilt do well, having sent forward worthily of God,
because for [His] name they went forth, nothing receiving from the nations;
we, then, ought to receive such, that fellow-workers we may become to the truth.
I did write to the assembly, but he who is loving the first place among them — Diotrephes — doth not receive us;
because of this, if I may come, I will cause him to remember his works that he doth, with evil words prating against us; and not content with these, neither doth he himself receive the brethren, and those intending he doth forbid, and out of the assembly he doth cast.
Beloved, be not thou following that which is evil, but that which is good; he who is doing good, of God he is, and he who is doing evil hath not seen God;
to Demetrius testimony hath been given by all, and by the truth itself, and we also — we do testify, and ye have known that our testimony is true.
Many things I had to write, but I do not wish through ink and pen to write to thee,
and I hope straightway to see thee, and mouth to mouth we shall speak. Peace to thee! salute thee do the friends; be saluting the friends by name.

Judas, of Jesus Christ a servant, and brother of James, to those sanctified in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ kept — called,
kindness to you, and peace, and love, be multiplied!
Beloved, all diligence using to write to you concerning the common salvation, I had necessity to write to you, exhorting to agonize for the faith once delivered to the saints,
for there did come in unobserved certain men, long ago having been written beforehand to this judgment, impious, the grace of our God perverting to lasciviousness, and our only Master, God, and Lord — Jesus Christ — denying,
and to remind you I intend, you knowing once this, that the Lord, a people out of the land of Egypt having saved, again those who did not believe did destroy;
messengers also, those who did not keep their own principality, but did leave their proper dwelling, to a judgment of a great day, in bonds everlasting, under darkness He hath kept,
as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities around them, in like manner to these, having given themselves to whoredom, and gone after other flesh, have been set before — an example, of fire age-during, justice suffering.
In like manner, nevertheless, those dreaming also the flesh indeed do defile, and lordship they put away, and dignities they speak evil of,
yet Michael, the chief messenger, when, with the devil contending, he was disputing about the body of Moses, did not dare to bring up an evil-speaking judgment, but said, 'The Lord rebuke thee!'
and these, as many things indeed as they have not known, they speak evil of; and as many things as naturally (as the irrational beasts) they understand, in these they are corrupted;
woe to them! because in the way of Cain they did go on, and to the deceit of Balaam for reward they did rush, and in the gainsaying of Korah they did perish.
These are in your love-feasts craggy rocks; feasting together with you, without fear shepherding themselves; clouds without water, by winds carried about; trees autumnal, without fruit, twice dead, rooted up;
wild waves of a sea, foaming out their own shames; stars going astray, to whom the gloom of the darkness to the age hath been kept.
And prophesy also to these did the seventh from Adam — Enoch — saying, 'Lo, the Lord did come in His saintly myriads,
to do judgment against all, and to convict all their impious ones, concerning all their works of impiety that they did impiously, and concerning all the stiff things that speak against Him did impious sinners.'
These are murmurers, repiners; according to their desires walking, and their mouth doth speak great swellings, giving admiration to persons for the sake of profit;
and ye, beloved, remember ye the sayings spoken before by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ:
that they said to you, that in the last time there shall be scoffers, after their own desires of impieties going on,
these are those setting themselves apart, natural men, the Spirit not having.
And ye, beloved, on your most holy faith building yourselves up, in the Holy Spirit praying,
yourselves in the love of God keep ye, waiting for the kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ — to life age-during;
and to some be kind, judging thoroughly,
and some in fear save ye, out of the fire snatching, hating even the coat from the flesh spotted.
And to Him who is able to guard you not stumbling, and to set [you] in the presence of His glory unblemished, in gladness,
to the only wise God our Saviour, [is] glory and greatness, power and authority, both now and to all the ages! Amen.
A revelation of Jesus Christ, that God gave to him, to shew to his servants what things it behoveth to come to pass quickly; and he did signify [it], having sent through his messenger to his servant John,
who did testify the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ, as many things also as he did see.
Happy is he who is reading, and those hearing, the words of the prophecy, and keeping the things written in it — for the time is nigh!
John to the seven assemblies that [are] in Asia: Grace to you, and peace, from Him who is, and who was, and who is coming, and from the Seven Spirits that are before His throne,
and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the first-born out of the dead, and the ruler of the kings of the earth; to him who did love us, and did bathe us from our sins in his blood,
and did make us kings and priests to his God and Father, to him [is] the glory and the power to the ages of the ages! Amen.
Lo, he doth come with the clouds, and see him shall every eye, even those who did pierce him, and wail because of him shall all the tribes of the land. Yes! Amen!
'I am the Alpha and the Omega, beginning and end, saith the Lord, who is, and who was, and who is coming — the Almighty.'
I, John, who also [am] your brother, and fellow-partner in the tribulation, and in the reign and endurance, of Jesus Christ, was in the isle that is called Patmos, because of the word of God, and because of the testimony of Jesus Christ;
I was in the Spirit on the Lord's-day, and I heard behind me a great voice, as of a trumpet, saying,
'I am the Alpha and the Omega, the First and the Last;' and, 'What thou dost see, write in a scroll, and send to the seven assemblies that [are] in Asia; to Ephesus, and to Smyrna, and to Pergamos, and to Thyatira, and to Sardis, and to Philadelphia, and to Laodicea.'
And I did turn to see the voice that did speak with me, and having turned, I saw seven golden lamp-stands,
and in the midst of the seven lamp-stands, [one] like to a son of man, clothed to the foot, and girt round at the breast with a golden girdle,
and his head and hairs white, as if white wool — as snow, and his eyes as a flame of fire;
and his feet like to fine brass, as in a furnace having been fired, and his voice as a sound of many waters,
and having in his right hand seven stars, and out of his mouth a sharp two-edged sword is proceeding, and his countenance [is] as the sun shining in its might.
And when I saw him, I did fall at his feet as dead, and he placed his right hand upon me, saying to me, 'Be not afraid; I am the First and the Last,
and he who is living, and I did become dead, and, lo, I am living to the ages of the ages. Amen! and I have the keys of the hades and of the death.
'Write the things that thou hast seen, and the things that are, and the things that are about to come after these things;
the secret of the seven stars that thou hast seen upon my right hand, and the seven golden lamp-stands: the seven stars are messengers of the seven assemblies, and the seven lamp-stands that thou hast seen are seven assemblies.
'To the messenger of the Ephesian assembly write: These things saith he who is holding the seven stars in his right hand, who is walking in the midst of the seven lamp-stands — the golden:
I have known thy works, and thy labour, and thy endurance, and that thou art not able to bear evil ones, and that thou hast tried those saying themselves to be apostles and are not, and hast found them liars,
and thou didst bear, and hast endurance, and because of my name hast toiled, and hast not been weary.
'But I have against thee: That thy first love thou didst leave!
remember, then, whence thou hast fallen, and reform, and the first works do; and if not, I come to thee quickly, and will remove thy lamp-stand from its place — if thou mayest not reform;
but this thou hast, that thou dost hate the works of the Nicolaitans, that I also hate.
He who is having an ear — let him hear what the Spirit saith to the assemblies: To him who is overcoming — I will give to him to eat of the tree of life that is in the midst of the paradise of God.
'And to the messenger of the assembly of the Smyrneans write: These things saith the First and the Last, who did become dead and did live;
I have known thy works, and tribulation, and poverty — yet thou art rich — and the evil-speaking of those saying themselves to be Jews, and are not, but [are] a synagogue of the Adversary.
'Be not afraid of the things that thou art about to suffer; lo, the devil is about to cast of you to prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten days; become thou faithful unto death, and I will give to thee the crown of the life.
He who is having an ear — let him hear what the Spirit saith to the assemblies: He who is overcoming may not be injured of the second death.
'And to the messenger of the assembly in Pergamos write: These things saith he who is having the sharp two-edged sword:
I have known thy works, and where thou dost dwell — where the throne of the Adversary [is] — and thou dost hold fast my name, and thou didst not deny my faith, even in the days in which Antipas [was] my faithful witness, who was put to death beside you, where the Adversary doth dwell.
'But I have against thee a few things: That thou hast there those holding the teaching of Balaam, who did teach Balak to cast a stumbling-block before the sons of Israel, to eat idol-sacrifices, and to commit whoredom;
so hast thou, even thou, those holding the teaching of the Nicolaitans — which thing I hate.
'Reform! and if not, I come to thee quickly, and will fight against them with the sword of my mouth.
He who is having an ear — let him hear what the Spirit saith to the assemblies: To him who is overcoming, I will give to him to eat from the hidden manna, and will give to him a white stone, and upon the stone a new name written, that no one knew except him who is receiving [it].
'And to the messenger of the assembly of Thyatira write: These things saith the Son of God, who is having his eyes as a flame of fire, and his feet like to fine brass;
I have known thy works, and love, and ministration, and faith, and thy endurance, and thy works — and the last [are] more than the first.
'But I have against thee a few things: That thou dost suffer the woman Jezebel, who is calling herself a prophetess, to teach, and to lead astray, my servants to commit whoredom, and idol-sacrifices to eat;
and I did give to her a time that she might reform from her whoredom, and she did not reform;
lo, I will cast her into a couch, and those committing adultery with her into great tribulation — if they may not repent of their works,
and her children I will kill in death, and know shall all the assemblies that I am he who is searching reins and hearts; and I will give to you — to each — according to your works.
'And to you I say, and to the rest who are in Thyatira, as many as have not this teaching, and who did not know the depths of the Adversary, as they say; I will not put upon you other burden;
but that which ye have — hold ye, till I may come;
and he who is overcoming, and who is keeping unto the end my works, I will give to him authority over the nations,
and he shall rule them with a rod of iron — as the vessels of the potter they shall be broken — as I also have received from my Father;
and I will give to him the morning star.
He who is having an ear — let him hear what the Spirit saith to the assemblies.
And to the messenger of the assembly in Sardis write: These things saith he who is having the Seven Spirits of God, and the seven stars: I have known thy works, and that thou hast the name that thou dost live, and thou art dead;
become watching, and strengthen the rest of the things that are about to die, for I have not found thy works fulfilled before God.
'Remember, then, how thou hast received, and heard, and be keeping, and reform: if, then, thou mayest not watch, I will come upon thee as a thief, and thou mayest not know what hour I will come upon thee.
Thou hast a few names even in Sardis who did not defile their garments, and they shall walk with me in white, because they are worthy.
He who is overcoming — this one — shall be arrayed in white garments, and I will not blot out his name from the scroll of the life, and I will confess his name before my Father, and before His messengers.
He who is having an ear — let him hear what the Spirit saith to the assemblies.
'And to the messenger of the assembly in Philadelphia write: These things saith he who is holy, he who is true, he who is having the key of David, he who is opening and no one doth shut, and he shutteth and no one doth open!
I have known thy works; lo, I have set before thee a door — opened, and no one is able to shut it, because thou hast a little power, and didst keep my word, and didst not deny my name;
lo, I make of the synagogue of the Adversary those saying themselves to be Jews, and are not, but do lie; lo, I will make them that they may come and bow before thy feet, and may know that I loved thee.
'Because thou didst keep the word of my endurance, I also will keep thee from the hour of the trial that is about to come upon all the world, to try those dwelling upon the earth.
Lo, I come quickly, be holding fast that which thou hast, that no one may receive thy crown.
He who is overcoming — I will make him a pillar in the sanctuary of my God, and without he may not go any more, and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, that doth come down out of the heaven from my God — also my new name.
He who is having an ear — let him hear what the Spirit saith to the assemblies.
'And to the messenger of the assembly of the Laodiceans write: These things saith the Amen, the witness — the faithful and true — the chief of the creation of God;
I have known thy works, that neither cold art thou nor hot; I would thou wert cold or hot.
So — because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I am about to vomit thee out of my mouth;
because thou sayest — I am rich, and have grown rich, and have need of nothing, and hast not known that thou art the wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked,
I counsel thee to buy from me gold fired by fire, that thou mayest be rich, and white garments that thou mayest be arrayed, and the shame of thy nakedness may not be manifest, and with eye-salve anoint thine eyes, that thou mayest see.
'As many as I love, I do convict and chasten; be zealous, then, and reform;
lo, I have stood at the door, and I knock; if any one may hear my voice, and may open the door, I will come in unto him, and will sup with him, and he with me.
He who is overcoming — I will give to him to sit with me in my throne, as I also did overcome and did sit down with my Father in His throne.
He who is having an ear — let him hear what the Spirit saith to the assemblies.'
After these things I saw, and lo, a door opened in the heaven, and the first voice that I heard [is] as of a trumpet speaking with me, saying, 'Come up hither, and I will shew thee what it behoveth to come to pass after these things;'
and immediately I was in the Spirit, and lo, a throne was set in the heaven, and upon the throne is [one] sitting,
and He who is sitting was in sight like a stone, jasper and sardine: and a rainbow was round the throne in sight like an emerald.
And around the throne [are] thrones twenty and four, and upon the thrones I saw the twenty and four elders sitting, clothed in white garments, and they had upon their heads crowns of gold;
and out of the throne proceed do lightnings, and thunders, and voices; and seven lamps of fire are burning before the throne, which are the Seven Spirits of God,
and before the throne [is] a sea of glass like to crystal, and in the midst of the throne, and round the throne, [are] four living creatures, full of eyes before and behind;
and the first living creature [is] like a lion, and the second living creature [is] like a calf, and the third living creature hath the face as a man, and the fourth living creature [is] like an eagle flying.
And the four living creatures, each by itself severally, had six wings, around and within [are] full of eyes, and rest they have not day and night, saying, 'Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, who was, and who is, and who is coming;'
and when the living creatures do give glory, and honour, and thanks, to Him who is sitting upon the throne, who is living to the ages of the ages,
fall down do the twenty and four elders before Him who is sitting upon the throne, and bow before Him who is living to the ages of the ages, and they cast their crowns before the throne, saying,
'Worthy art Thou, O Lord, to receive the glory, and the honour, and the power, because Thou — Thou didst create the all things, and because of Thy will are they, and they were created.'
And I saw upon the right hand of Him who is sitting upon the throne a scroll, written within and on the back, sealed with seven seals;
and I saw a strong messenger crying with a great voice, 'Who is worthy to open the scroll and to loose the seals of it?'
and no one was able in the heaven, nor upon the earth, nor under the earth, to open the scroll, nor to behold it.
And I was weeping much, because no one was found worthy to open and to read the scroll, nor to behold it,
and one of the elders saith to me, 'Weep not; lo, overcome did the Lion, who is of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, to open the scroll, and to loose the seven seals of it;
and I saw, and lo, in the midst of the throne, and of the four living creatures, and in the midst of the elders, a Lamb hath stood as it had been slain, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the Seven Spirits of God, which are sent to all the earth,
and he came and took the scroll out of the right hand of Him who is sitting upon the throne.
And when he took the scroll, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell before the Lamb, having each one harps and golden vials full of perfumes, which are the prayers of the saints,
and they sing a new song, saying, 'Worthy art thou to take the scroll, and to open the seals of it, because thou wast slain, and didst redeem us to God in thy blood, out of every tribe, and tongue, and people, and nation,
and didst make us to our God kings and priests, and we shall reign upon the earth.'
And I saw, and I heard the voice of many messengers round the throne, and the living creatures, and the elders — and the number of them was myriads of myriads, and thousands of thousands —
saying with a great voice, 'Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive the power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing!'
and every creature that is in the heaven, and in the earth, and under the earth, and the things that are upon the sea, and the all things in them, heard I saying, 'To Him who is sitting upon the throne, and to the Lamb, [is] the blessing, and the honour, and the glory, and the might — to the ages of the ages!'
and the four living creatures said, 'Amen!' and the twenty-four elders fell down and they bow before Him who is living to the ages of the ages.
And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures saying, as it were a voice of thunder, 'Come and behold!'
and I saw, and lo, a white horse, and he who is sitting upon it is having a bow, and there was given to him a crown, and he went forth overcoming, and that he may overcome.
And when he opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature saying, 'Come and behold!'
and there went forth another horse — red, and to him who is sitting upon it, there was given to him to take the peace from the land, and that one another they may slay, and there was given to him a great sword.
And when he opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature saying, 'Come and behold!' and I saw, and lo, a black horse, and he who is sitting upon it is having a balance in his hand,
and I heard a voice in the midst of the four living creatures saying, 'A measure of wheat for a denary, and three measures of barley for a denary,' and 'The oil and the wine thou mayest not injure.'
And when he opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth living creature saying, 'Come and behold!'
and I saw, and lo, a pale horse, and he who is sitting upon him — his name is Death, and Hades doth follow with him, and there was given to them authority to kill, (over the fourth part of the land,) with sword, and with hunger, and with death, and by the beasts of the land.
And when he opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of those slain because of the word of God, and because of the testimony that they held,
and they were crying with a great voice, saying, 'Till when, O Master, the Holy and the True, dost Thou not judge and take vengeance of our blood from those dwelling upon the land?'
and there was given to each one white robes, and it was said to them that they may rest themselves yet a little time, till may be fulfilled also their fellow-servants and their brethren, who are about to be killed — even as they.
And I saw when he opened the sixth seal, and lo, a great earthquake came, and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon became as blood,
and the stars of the heaven fell to the earth — as a fig-tree doth cast her winter figs, by a great wind being shaken —
and heaven departed as a scroll rolled up, and every mountain and island — out of their places they were moved;
and the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich, and the chiefs of thousands, and the mighty, and every servant, and every freeman, hid themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the mountains,
and they say to the mountains and to the rocks, 'Fall upon us, and hide us from the face of Him who is sitting upon the throne, and from the anger of the Lamb,'
because come did the great day of His anger, and who is able to stand?
And after these things I saw four messengers, standing upon the four corners of the land, holding the four winds of the land, that the wind may not blow upon the land, nor upon the sea, nor upon any tree;
and I saw another messenger going up from the rising of the sun, having a seal of the living God, and he did cry with a great voice to the four messengers, to whom it was given to injure the land and the sea, saying,
'Do not injure the land, nor the sea, nor the trees, till we may seal the servants of our God upon their foreheads.'
And I heard the number of those sealed, (one hundred and forty four thousands were sealed out of all the tribes of the sons of Israel):
of the tribe of Judah twelve thousand were sealed; of the tribe of Reuben twelve thousand were sealed; of the tribe of Gad twelve thousand were sealed;
of the tribe of Asher twelve thousand were sealed; of the tribe of Naphtali twelve thousand were sealed; of the tribe of Manasseh twelve thousand were sealed;
of the tribe of Simeon twelve thousand were sealed; of the tribe of Levi twelve thousand were sealed; of the tribe of Issachar twelve thousand were sealed;
of the tribe of Zebulun twelve thousand were sealed; of the tribe of Joseph twelve thousand were sealed; of the tribe of Benjamin twelve thousand were sealed.
After these things I saw, and lo, a great multitude, which to number no one was able, out of all nations, and tribes, and peoples, and tongues, standing before the throne, and before the Lamb, arrayed in white robes, and palms in their hands,
and crying with a great voice, saying, 'The salvation [is] to Him who is sitting upon the throne — to our God, and to the Lamb!'
And all the messengers stood around the throne, and the elders and the four living creatures, and they fell upon their face, and bowed before God,
saying, 'Amen! the blessing, and the glory, and the wisdom, and the thanksgiving, and the honour, and the power, and the strength, [are] to our God — to the ages of the ages! Amen!'
And answer did one of the elders, saying to me, 'These, who have been arrayed with the white robes — who are they, and whence came they?'
and I have said to him, 'Sir, thou hast known;' and he said to me, 'These are those who are coming out of the great tribulation, and they did wash their robes, and they made their robes white in the blood of the Lamb;
because of this are they before the throne of God, and they do service to Him day and night in His sanctuary, and He who is sitting upon the throne shall tabernacle over them;
they shall not hunger any more, nor may the sun fall upon them, nor any heat,
because the Lamb that [is] in the midst of the throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters, and wipe away shall God every tear from their eyes.'
And when he openeth the seventh seal, there came silence in the heaven about half-an-hour,
and I saw the seven messengers who before God have stood, and there were given to them seven trumpets,
and another messenger did come, and he stood at the altar, having a golden censer, and there was given to him much perfume, that he may give [it] to the prayers of all the saints upon the golden altar that [is] before the throne,
and go up did the smoke of the perfumes to the prayers of the saints out of the hand of the messenger, before God;
and the messenger took the censer, and did fill it out of the fire of the altar, and did cast [it] to the earth, and there came voices, and thunders, and lightnings, and an earthquake.
And the seven messengers who are having the seven trumpets did prepare themselves that they may sound;
and the first messenger did sound, and there came hail and fire, mingled with blood, and it was cast to the land, and the third of the trees was burnt up, and all the green grass was burnt up.
And the second messenger did sound, and as it were a great mountain with fire burning was cast into the sea, and the third of the sea became blood,
and die did the third of the creatures that [are] in the sea, those having life, and the third of the ships were destroyed.
And the third messenger did sound, and there fell out of the heaven a great star, burning as a lamp, and it did fall upon the third of the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters,
and the name of the star is called Wormwood, and the third of the waters doth become wormwood, and many of the men did die of the waters, because they were made bitter.
And the fourth messenger did sound, and smitten was the third of the sun, and the third of the moon, and the third of the stars, that darkened may be the third of them, and that the day may not shine — the third of it, and the night in like manner.
And I saw, and I heard one messenger, flying in the mid-heaven, saying with a great voice, 'Woe, woe, woe, to those dwelling upon the land from the rest of the voices of the trumpet of the three messengers who are about to sound.'
And the fifth messenger did sound, and I saw a star out of the heaven having fallen to the earth, and there was given to it the key of the pit of the abyss,
and he did open the pit of the abyss, and there came up a smoke out of the pit as smoke of a great furnace, and darkened was the sun and the air, from the smoke of the pit.
And out of the smoke came forth locusts to the earth, and there was given to them authority, as scorpions of the earth have authority,
and it was said to them that they may not injure the grass of the earth, nor any green thing, nor any tree, but — the men only who have not the seal of God upon their foreheads,
and it was given to them that they may not kill them, but that they may be tormented five months, and their torment [is] as the torment of a scorpion, when it may strike a man;
and in those days shall men seek the death, and they shall not find it, and they shall desire to die, and the death shall flee from them.
And the likenesses of the locusts [are] like to horses made ready to battle, and upon their heads as crowns like gold, and their faces as faces of men,
and they had hair as hair of women, and their teeth were as [those] of lions,
and they had breastplates as breastplates of iron, and the noise of their wings [is] as the noise of chariots of many horses running to battle;
and they have tails like to scorpions, and stings were in their tails; and their authority [is] to injure men five months;
and they have over them a king — the messenger of the abyss — a name [is] to him in Hebrew, Abaddon, and in the Greek he hath a name, Apollyon.
The first woe did go forth, lo, there come yet two woes after these things.
And the sixth messenger did sound, and I heard a voice out of the four horns of the altar of gold that is before God,
saying to the sixth messenger who had the trumpet, 'Loose the four messengers who are bound at the great river Euphrates;'
and loosed were the four messengers, who have been made ready for the hour, and day, and month, and year, that they may kill the third of men;
and the number of the forces of the horsemen [is] two myriads of myriads, and I heard the number of them.
And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and those sitting upon them, having breastplates of fire, and jacinth, and brimstone; and the heads of the horses [are] as heads of lions, and out of their mouths proceedeth fire, and smoke, and brimstone;
by these three were the third of men killed, from the fire, and from the smoke, and from the brimstone, that is proceeding out of their mouth,
for their authorities are in their mouth, and in their tails, for their tails [are] like serpents, having heads, and with them they do injure;
and the rest of men, who were not killed in these plagues, neither did reform from the works of their hands, that they may not bow before the demons, and idols, those of gold, and those of silver, and those of brass, and those of stone, and those of wood, that are neither able to see, nor to hear, nor to walk,
yea they did not reform from their murders, nor from their sorceries, nor from their whoredoms, nor from their thefts.
And I saw another strong messenger coming down out of the heaven, arrayed with a cloud, and a rainbow upon the head, and his face as the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire,
and he had in his hand a little scroll opened, and he did place his right foot upon the sea, and the left upon the land,
and he cried with a great voice, as a lion doth roar, and when he cried, speak out did the seven thunders their voices;
and when the seven thunders spake their voices, I was about to write, and I heard a voice out of the heaven saying to me, 'Seal the things that the seven thunders spake,' and, 'Thou mayest not write these things.'
And the messenger whom I saw standing upon the sea, and upon the land, did lift up his hand to the heaven,
and did swear in Him who doth live to the ages of the ages, who did create the heaven and the things in it, and the land and the things in it, and the sea and the things in it — that time shall not be yet,
but in the days of the voice of the seventh messenger, when he may be about to sound, and the secret of God may be finished, as He did declare to His own servants, to the prophets.
And the voice that I heard out of the heaven is again speaking with me, and saying, 'Go, take the little scroll that is open in the hand of the messenger who hath been standing upon the sea, and upon the land:'
and I went away unto the messenger, saying to him, 'Give me the little scroll;' and he saith to me, 'Take, and eat it up, and it shall make thy belly bitter, but in thy mouth it shall be sweet — as honey.'
And I took the little scroll out of the hand of the messenger, and did eat it up, and it was in my mouth as honey — sweet, and when I did eat it — my belly was made bitter;
and he saith to me, 'It behoveth thee again to prophesy about peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings — many.'
And there was given to me a reed like to a rod, and the messenger stood, saying, 'Rise, and measure the sanctuary of God, and the altar, and those worshipping in it;
and the court that is without the sanctuary leave out, and thou mayest not measure it, because it was given to the nations, and the holy city they shall tread down forty-two months;
and I will give to My two witnesses, and they shall prophesy days, a thousand, two hundred, sixty, arrayed with sackcloth;
these are the two olive [trees], and the two lamp-stands that before the God of the earth do stand;
and if any one may will to injure them, fire doth proceed out of their mouth, and doth devour their enemies, and if any one may will to injure them, thus it behoveth him to be killed.
These have authority to shut the heaven, that it may not rain rain in the days of their prophecy, and authority they have over the waters to turn them to blood, and to smite the land with every plague, as often as they may will.
'And when they may finish their testimony, the beast that is coming up out of the abyss shall make war with them, and overcome them, and kill them,
and their dead bodies [are] upon the broad-place of the great city (that is called spiritually Sodom, and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified,)
and they shall behold — they of the peoples, and tribes, and tongues, and nations — their dead bodies three days and a half, and their dead bodies they shall not suffer to be put into tombs,
and those dwelling upon the land shall rejoice over them, and shall make merry, and gifts they shall send to one another, because these — the two prophets — did torment those dwelling upon the land.'
And after the three days and a half, a spirit of life from God did enter into them, and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon those beholding them,
and they heard a great voice out of the heaven saying to them, 'Come up hither;' and they went up to the heaven in the cloud, and their enemies beheld them;
and in that hour came a great earthquake, and the tenth of the city did fall, and killed in the earthquake were names of men — seven thousands, and the rest became affrighted, and they gave glory to the God of the heaven.
The second woe did go forth, lo, the third woe doth come quickly.
And the seventh messenger did sound, and there came great voices in the heaven, saying, 'The kingdoms of the world did become [those] of our Lord and of His Christ, and he shall reign to the ages of the ages!'
and the twenty and four elders, who before God are sitting upon their thrones, did fall upon their faces, and did bow before God,
saying, 'We give thanks to Thee, O Lord God, the Almighty, who art, and who wast, and who art coming, because Thou hast taken Thy great power and didst reign;
and the nations were angry, and Thine anger did come, and the time of the dead, to be judged, and to give the reward to Thy servants, to the prophets, and to the saints, and to those fearing Thy name, to the small and to the great, and to destroy those who are destroying the land.'
And opened was the sanctuary of God in the heaven, and there was seen the ark of His covenant in His sanctuary, and there did come lightnings, and voices, and thunders, and an earthquake, and great hail.
And a great sign was seen in the heaven, a woman arrayed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars,
and being with child she doth cry out, travailing and pained to bring forth.
And there was seen another sign in the heaven, and, lo, a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his head seven diadems,
and his tail doth draw the third of the stars of the heaven, and he did cast them to the earth; and the dragon did stand before the woman who is about to bring forth, that when she may bring forth, her child he may devour;
and she brought forth a male child, who is about to rule all the nations with a rod of iron, and caught away was her child unto God and His throne,
and the woman did flee to the wilderness, where she hath a place made ready from God, that there they may nourish her — days a thousand, two hundred, sixty.
And there came war in the heaven; Michael and his messengers did war against the dragon, and the dragon did war, and his messengers,
and they did not prevail, nor was their place found any more in the heaven;
and the great dragon was cast forth — the old serpent, who is called 'Devil,' and 'the Adversary,' who is leading astray the whole world — he was cast forth to the earth, and his messengers were cast forth with him.
And I heard a great voice saying in the heaven, 'Now did come the salvation, and the power, and the reign, of our God, and the authority of His Christ, because cast down was the accuser of our brethren, who is accusing them before our God day and night;
and they did overcome him because of the blood of the Lamb, and because of the word of their testimony, and they did not love their life — unto death;
because of this be glad, ye heavens, and those in them who do tabernacle; woe to those inhabiting the land and the sea, because the Devil did go down unto you, having great wrath, having known that he hath little time.'
And when the dragon saw that he was cast forth to the earth, he pursued the woman who did bring forth the male,
and there were given to the woman two wings of the great eagle, that she may fly to the wilderness, to her place, where she is nourished a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent;
and the serpent did cast forth after the woman, out of his mouth, water as a river, that he may cause her to be carried away by the river,
and the land did help the woman, and the land did open its mouth and did swallow up the river, that the dragon did cast forth out of his mouth;
and the dragon was angry against the woman, and went away to make war with the rest of her seed, those keeping the commands of God, and having the testimony of Jesus Christ.

And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and I saw out of the sea a beast coming up, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon its horns ten diadems, and upon its heads a name of evil speaking,
and the beast that I saw was like to a leopard, and its feet as of a bear, and its mouth as the mouth of a lion, and the dragon did give to it his power, and his throne, and great authority.
And I saw one of its heads as slain to death, and its deadly stroke was healed, and all the earth did wonder after the beast,
and they did bow before the dragon who did give authority to the beast, and they did bow before the beast, saying, 'Who [is] like to the beast? who is able to war with it?'
And there was given to it a mouth speaking great things, and evil-speakings, and there was given to it authority to make war forty-two months,
and it did open its mouth for evil-speaking toward God, to speak evil of His name, and of His tabernacle, and of those who in the heaven tabernacle,
and there was given to it to make war with the saints, and to overcome them, and there was given to it authority over every tribe, and tongue, and nation.
And bow before it shall all who are dwelling upon the land, whose names have not been written in the scroll of the life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world;
if any one hath an ear — let him hear:
if any one a captivity doth gather, into captivity he doth go away; if any one by sword doth kill, it behoveth him by sword to be killed; here is the endurance and the faith of the saints.
And I saw another beast coming up out of the land, and it had two horns, like a lamb, and it was speaking as a dragon,
and all the authority of the first beast doth it do before it, and it maketh the land and those dwelling in it that they shall bow before the first beast, whose deadly stroke was healed,
and it doth great signs, that fire also it may make to come down from the heaven to the earth before men,
and it leadeth astray those dwelling on the land, because of the signs that were given it to do before the beast, saying to those dwelling upon the land to make an image to the beast that hath the stroke of the sword and did live,
and there was given to it to give a spirit to the image of the beast, that also the image of the beast may speak, and [that] it may cause as many as shall not bow before the image of the beast, that they may be killed.
And it maketh all, the small, and the great, and the rich, and the poor, and the freemen, and the servants, that it may give to them a mark upon their right hand or upon their foreheads,
and that no one may be able to buy, or to sell, except he who is having the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name.
Here is the wisdom! He who is having the understanding, let him count the number of the beast, for the number of a man it is, and its number [is] six hundred and sixty six.
And I saw, and lo, a Lamb having stood upon the mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty-four thousands, having the name of his Father written upon their foreheads;
and I heard a voice out of the heaven, as a voice of many waters, and as a voice of great thunder, and a voice I heard of harpers harping with their harps,
and they sing, as it were, a new song before the throne, and before the four living creatures, and the elders, and no one was able to learn the song except the hundred forty-four thousands, who have been bought from the earth;
these are they who with women were not defiled, for they are virgin; these are they who are following the Lamb whithersoever he may go; these were bought from among men — a first-fruit to God and to the Lamb —
and in their mouth there was not found guile, for unblemished are they before the throne of God.
And I saw another messenger flying in mid-heaven, having good news age-during to proclaim to those dwelling upon the earth, and to every nation, and tribe, and tongue, and people,
saying in a great voice, 'Fear ye God, and give to Him glory, because come did the hour of His judgment, and bow ye before Him who did make the heaven, and the land, and sea, and fountains of waters.'
And another messenger did follow, saying, 'Fall, fall, did Babylon, the great city, because of the wine of the wrath of her whoredom she hath given to all nations to drink.'
And a third messenger did follow them, saying in a great voice, 'If any one the beast doth bow before, and his image, and doth receive a mark upon his forehead, or upon his hand,
he also shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, that hath been mingled unmixed in the cup of His anger, and he shall be tormented in fire and brimstone before the holy messengers, and before the Lamb,
and the smoke of their torment doth go up to ages of ages; and they have no rest day and night, who are bowing before the beast and his image, also if any doth receive the mark of his name.
Here is endurance of the saints: here [are] those keeping the commands of God, and the faith of Jesus.'
And I heard a voice out of the heaven saying to me, 'Write: Happy are the dead who in the Lord are dying from this time!' 'Yes, (saith the Spirit,) That they may rest from their labours — and their works do follow them!'
And I saw, and lo, a white cloud, and upon the cloud [one] sitting like to a son of man, having upon his head a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle;
and another messenger did come forth out of the sanctuary crying in a great voice to him who is sitting upon the cloud, 'Send forth thy sickle and reap, because come to thee hath the hour of reaping, because ripe hath been the harvest of the earth;'
and he who is sitting upon the cloud did put forth his sickle upon the earth, and the earth was reaped.
And another messenger did come forth out of the sanctuary that [is] in the heaven, having — he also — a sharp sickle,
and another messenger did come forth out from the altar, having authority over the fire, and he called with a great cry to him having the sharp sickle, saying, 'Send forth thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth, because come to perfection have her grapes;'
and the messenger did put forth his sickle to the earth, and did gather the vine of the earth, and did cast [it] to the great wine-press of the wrath of God;
and trodden was the wine-press outside of the city, and blood did come forth out of the wine-press — unto the bridles of the horses, a thousand, six hundred furlongs.
And I saw another sign in the heaven, great and wonderful, seven messengers having the seven last plagues, because in these was completed the wrath of God,
and I saw as a sea of glass mingled with fire, and those who do gain the victory over the beast, and his image, and his mark, [and] the number of his name, standing by the sea of the glass, having harps of God,
and they sing the song of Moses, servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, 'Great and wonderful [are] Thy works, O Lord God, the Almighty, righteous and true [are] Thy ways, O King of saints,
who may not fear Thee, O Lord, and glorify Thy name? because Thou alone [art] kind, because all the nations shall come and bow before Thee, because Thy righteous acts were manifested.'
And after these things I saw, and lo, opened was the sanctuary of the tabernacle of the testimony in the heaven;
and come forth did the seven messengers having the seven plagues, out of the sanctuary, clothed in linen, pure and shining, and girded round the breasts with golden girdles:
and one of the four living creatures did give to the seven messengers seven golden vials, full of the wrath of God, who is living to the ages of the ages;
and filled was the sanctuary with smoke from the glory of God, and from His power, and no one was able to enter into the sanctuary till the seven plagues of the seven messengers may be finished.
And I heard a great voice out of the sanctuary saying to the seven messengers, 'Go away, and pour out the vials of the wrath of God to the earth;'
and the first did go away, and did pour out his vial upon the land, and there came a sore — bad and grievous — to men, those having the mark of the beast, and those bowing to his image.
And the second messenger did pour out his vial to the sea, and there came blood as of [one] dead, and every living soul died in the sea.
And the third messenger did pour out his vial to the rivers, and to the fountains of the waters, and there came blood,
and I heard the messenger of the waters, saying, 'righteous, O Lord, art Thou, who art, and who wast, and who shalt be, because these things Thou didst judge,
because blood of saints and prophets they did pour out, and blood to them Thou didst give to drink, for they are worthy;'
and I heard another out of the altar, saying, 'Yes, Lord God, the Almighty, true and righteous [are] Thy judgments.'
And the fourth messenger did pour out his vial upon the sun, and there was given to him to scorch men with fire,
and men were scorched with great heat, and they did speak evil of the name of God, who hath authority over these plagues, and they did not reform — to give to Him glory.
And the fifth messenger did pour out his vial upon the throne of the beast, and his kingdom did become darkened, and they were gnawing their tongues from the pain,
and they did speak evil of the God of the heaven, from their pains, and from their sores, and they did not reform from their works.
And the sixth messenger did pour out his vial upon the great river, the Euphrates, and dried up was its water, that the way of the kings who are from the rising of the sun may be made ready;
and I saw [come] out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet, three unclean spirits like frogs —
for they are spirits of demons, doing signs — which go forth unto the kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to bring them together to the battle of that great day of God the Almighty; —
'lo, I do come as a thief; happy [is] he who is watching, and keeping his garments, that he may not walk naked, and they may see his unseemliness,' —
and they did bring them together to the place that is called in Hebrew Armageddon.
And the seventh messenger did pour out his vial to the air, and there came forth a great voice from the sanctuary of the heaven, from the throne, saying, 'It hath come!'
and there came voices, and thunders, and lightnings; and a great earthquake came, such as came not since men came upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake — so great!
And it came — the great city — into three parts, and the cities of the nations did fall, and Babylon the great was remembered before God, to give to her the cup of the wine of the wrath of His anger,
and every island did flee away, and mountains were not found,
and great hail (as of talent weight) doth come down out of the heaven upon men, and men did speak evil of God because of the plague of the hail, because its plague is very great.
And there came one of the seven messengers, who were having the seven vials, and he spake with me, saying to me, 'Come, I will shew to thee the judgment of the great whore, who is sitting upon the many waters,
with whom the kings of the earth did commit whoredom; and made drunk from the wine of her whoredom were those inhabiting the earth;'
and he carried me away to a wilderness in the Spirit, and I saw a woman sitting upon a scarlet-coloured beast, full of names of evil-speaking, having seven heads and ten horns,
and the woman was arrayed with purple and scarlet-colour, and gilded with gold, and precious stone, and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and uncleanness of her whoredom,
and upon her forehead was a name written: 'Secret, Babylon the Great, the Mother of the Whores, and the Abominations of the earth.'
And I saw the woman drunken from the blood of the saints, and from the blood of the witnesses of Jesus, and I did wonder — having seen her — with great wonder;
and the messenger said to me, 'Wherefore didst thou wonder? I — I will tell thee the secret of the woman and of the beast that [is] carrying her, which hath the seven heads and the ten horns.
'The beast that thou didst see: it was, and it is not; and it is about to come up out of the abyss, and to go away to destruction, and wonder shall those dwelling upon the earth, whose names have not been written upon the scroll of the life from the foundation of the world, beholding the beast that was, and is not, although it is.
'Here [is] the mind that is having wisdom; the seven heads are seven mountains, upon which the woman doth sit,
and there are seven kings, the five did fall, and the one is, the other did not yet come, and when he may come, it behoveth him to remain a little time;
and the beast that was, and is not, he also is eighth, and out of the seven he is, and to destruction he doth go away.
'And the ten horns that thou sawest, are ten kings, who a kingdom did not yet receive, but authority as kings the same hour do receive with the beast,
these have one mind, and their own power and authority to the beast they shall give over;
these with the Lamb shall make war, and the Lamb shall overcome them, because Lord of lords he is, and King of kings, and those with him are called, and choice, and stedfast.'
And he saith to me, 'The waters that thou didst see, where the whore doth sit, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues;'
and the ten horns that thou didst see upon the beast, these shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and shall burn her in fire,
for God did give into their hearts to do its mind, and to make one mind, and to give their kingdom to the beast till the sayings of God may be complete,
and the woman that thou didst see is the great city that is having reign over the kings of the land.'
And after these things I saw another messenger coming down out of the heaven, having great authority, and the earth was lightened from his glory,
and he did cry in might — a great voice, saying, 'Fall, fall did Babylon the great, and she became a habitation of demons, and a hold of every unclean spirit, and a hold of every unclean and hateful bird,
because of the wine of the wrath of her whoredom have all the nations drunk, and the kings of the earth with her did commit whoredom, and merchants of the earth from the power of her revel were made rich.
And I heard another voice out of the heaven, saying, 'Come forth out of her, My people, that ye may not partake with her sins, and that ye may not receive of her plagues,
because her sins did follow — unto the heaven, and God did remember her unrighteousness.
Render to her as also she did render to you, and double to her doubles according to her works; in the cup that she did mingle mingle to her double.
'As much as she did glorify herself and did revel, so much torment and sorrow give to her, because in her heart she saith, I sit a queen, and a widow I am not, and sorrow I shall not see;
because of this, in one day, shall come her plagues, death, and sorrow, and famine; and in fire she shall be utterly burned, because strong [is] the Lord God who is judging her;
and weep over her, and smite themselves for her, shall the kings of the earth, who with her did commit whoredom and did revel, when they may see the smoke of her burning,
from afar having stood because of the fear of her torment, saying, Woe, woe, the great city! Babylon, the strong city! because in one hour did come thy judgment.
'And the merchants of the earth shall weep and sorrow over her, because their lading no one doth buy any more;
lading of gold, and silver, and precious stone, and pearl, and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet, and all thyine wood, and every vessel of ivory, and every vessel of most precious wood, and brass, and iron, and marble,
and cinnamon, and odours, and ointment, and frankincense, and wine, and oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and cattle, and sheep, and of horses, and of chariots, and of bodies and souls of men.
'And the fruits of the desire of thy soul did go away from thee, and all things — the dainty and the bright — did go away from thee, and no more at all mayest thou find them.
The merchants of these things, who were made rich by her, far off shall stand because of the fear of her torment, weeping, and sorrowing,
and saying, Woe, woe, the great city, that was arrayed with fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, and gilded in gold, and precious stone, and pearls — because in one hour so much riches were made waste!
'And every shipmaster, and all the company upon the ships, and sailors, and as many as work the sea, far off stood,
and were crying, seeing the smoke of her burning, saying, What [city is] like to the great city?
and they did cast dust upon their heads, and were crying out, weeping and sorrowing, saying, Woe, woe, the great city! in which were made rich all having ships in the sea, out of her costliness — for in one hour was she made waste.
'Be glad over her, O heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets, because God did judge your judgment of her!'
And one strong messenger did take up a stone as a great millstone, and did cast [it] to the sea, saying, 'Thus with violence shall Babylon be cast, the great city, and may not be found any more at all;
and voice of harpers, and musicians, and pipers, and trumpeters, may not be heard at all in thee any more; and any artisan of any art may not be found at all in thee any more; and noise of a millstone may not be heard at all in thee any more;
and light of a lamp may not shine at all in thee any more; and voice of bridegroom and of bride may not be heard at all in thee any more; because thy merchants were the great ones of the earth, because in thy sorcery were all the nations led astray,
and in her blood of prophets and of saints was found, and of all those who have been slain on the earth.'
And after these things I heard a great voice of a great multitude in the heaven, saying, 'Alleluia! the salvation, and the glory, and the honour, and the power, [is] to the Lord our God;
because true and righteous [are] His judgments, because He did judge the great whore who did corrupt the earth in her whoredom, and He did avenge the blood of His servants at her hand;'
and a second time they said, 'Alleluia;' and her smoke doth come up — to the ages of the ages!
And fall down did the elders — the twenty and four — and the four living creatures, and they did bow before God who is sitting upon the throne, saying, 'Amen, Alleluia.'
And a voice out of the throne did come forth, saying, 'Praise our God, all ye His servants, and those fearing Him, both the small and the great;'
and I heard as the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, 'Alleluia! because reign did the Lord God — the Almighty!
may we rejoice and exult, and give the glory to Him, because come did the marriage of the Lamb, and his wife did make herself ready;
and there was given to her that she may be arrayed with fine linen, pure and shining, for the fine linen is the righteous acts of the saints.'
And he saith to me, 'Write: Happy [are] they who to the supper of the marriage of the Lamb have been called;' and he saith to me, 'These [are] the true words of God;'
and I fell before his feet, to bow before him, and he saith to me, 'See — not! fellow servant of thee am I, and of thy brethren, those having the testimony of Jesus; bow before God, for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of the prophecy.'
And I saw the heaven having been opened, and lo, a white horse, and he who is sitting upon it is called Faithful and True, and in righteousness doth he judge and war,
and his eyes [are] as a flame of fire, and upon his head [are] many diadems — having a name written that no one hath known, except himself,
and he is arrayed with a garment covered with blood, and his name is called, The Word of God.
And the armies in the heaven were following him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen — white and pure;
and out of his mouth doth proceed a sharp sword, that with it he may smite the nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of iron, and he doth tread the press of the wine of the wrath and the anger of God the Almighty,
and he hath upon the garment and upon his thigh the name written, 'King of kings, and Lord of lords.'
And I saw one messenger standing in the sun, and he cried, a great voice, saying to all the birds that are flying in mid-heaven, 'Come and be gathered together to the supper of the great God,
that ye may eat flesh of kings, and flesh of chiefs of thousands, and flesh of strong men, and flesh of horses, and of those sitting on them, and the flesh of all — freemen and servants — both small and great.'
And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies, having been gathered together to make war with him who is sitting upon the horse, and with his army;
and the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet who did the signs before him, in which he led astray those who did receive the mark of the beast, and those who did bow before his image; living they were cast — the two — to the lake of the fire, that is burning with brimstone;
and the rest were killed with the sword of him who is sitting on the horse, which [sword] is proceeding out of his mouth, and all the birds were filled out of their flesh.
And I saw a messenger coming down out of the heaven, having the key of the abyss, and a great chain over his hand,
and he laid hold on the dragon, the old serpent, who is Devil and Adversary, and did bind him a thousand years,
and he cast him to the abyss, and did shut him up, and put a seal upon him, that he may not lead astray the nations any more, till the thousand years may be finished; and after these it behoveth him to be loosed a little time.
And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given to them, and the souls of those who have been beheaded because of the testimony of Jesus, and because of the word of God, and who did not bow before the beast, nor his image, and did not receive the mark upon their forehead and upon their hand, and they did live and reign with Christ the thousand years;
and the rest of the dead did not live again till the thousand years may be finished; this [is] the first rising again.
Happy and holy [is] he who is having part in the first rising again; over these the second death hath not authority, but they shall be priests of God and of the Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.
And when the thousand years may be finished, the Adversary shall be loosed out of his prison,
and he shall go forth to lead the nations astray, that are in the four corners of the earth — Gog and Magog — to gather them together to war, of whom the number [is] as the sand of the sea;
and they did go up over the breadth of the land, and did surround the camp of the saints, and the beloved city, and there came down fire from God out of the heaven, and devoured them;
and the Devil, who is leading them astray, was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where [are] the beast and the false prophet, and they shall be tormented day and night — to the ages of the ages.
And I saw a great white throne, and Him who is sitting upon it, from whose face the earth and the heaven did flee away, and place was not found for them;
and I saw the dead, small and great, standing before God, and scrolls were opened, and another scroll was opened, which is that of the life, and the dead were judged out of the things written in the scrolls — according to their works;
and the sea did give up those dead in it, and the death and the hades did give up the dead in them, and they were judged, each one according to their works;
and the death and the hades were cast to the lake of the fire — this [is] the second death;
and if any one was not found written in the scroll of the life, he was cast to the lake of the fire.
And I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth did pass away, and the sea is not any more;
and I, John, saw the holy city — new Jerusalem — coming down from God out of the heaven, made ready as a bride adorned for her husband;
and I heard a great voice out of the heaven, saying, 'Lo, the tabernacle of God [is] with men, and He will tabernacle with them, and they shall be His peoples, and God Himself shall be with them — their God,
and God shall wipe away every tear from their eyes, and the death shall not be any more, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor shall there be any more pain, because the first things did go away.'
And He who is sitting upon the throne said, 'Lo, new I make all things; and He saith to me, 'Write, because these words are true and stedfast;'
and He said to me, 'It hath been done! I am the Alpha and the Omega, the Beginning and the End; I, to him who is thirsting, will give of the fountain of the water of the life freely;
he who is overcoming shall inherit all things, and I will be to him — a God, and he shall be to me — the son,
and to fearful, and unstedfast, and abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all the liars, their part [is] in the lake that is burning with fire and brimstone, which is a second death.'
And there came unto me one of the seven messengers, who have the seven vials that are full of the seven last plagues, and he spake with me, saying, 'Come, I will shew thee the bride of the Lamb — the wife,'
and he carried me away in the Spirit to a mountain great and high, and did shew to me the great city, the holy Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God,
having the glory of God, and her light [is] like a stone most precious, as a jasper stone clear as crystal,
having also a wall great and high, having twelve gates, and at the gates twelve messengers, and names written thereon, which are [those] of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel,
at the east three gates, at the north three gates, at the south three gates, at the west three gates;
and the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in them names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.
And he who is speaking with me had a golden reed, that he may measure the city, and its gates, and its wall;
and the city lieth square, and the length of it is as great as the breadth; and he did measure the city with the reed — furlongs twelve thousand; the length, and the breadth, and the height, of it are equal;
and he measured its wall, an hundred forty-four cubits, the measure of a man, that is, of the messenger;
and the building of its wall was jasper, and the city [is] pure gold — like to pure glass;
and the foundations of the wall of the city with every precious stone have been adorned; the first foundation jasper; the second, sapphire; the third, chalcedony; the fourth, emerald;
the fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh, chrysolite; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, topaz; the tenth, chrysoprasus; the eleventh, jacinth; the twelfth, amethyst.
And the twelve gates [are] twelve pearls, each several one of the gates was of one pearl; and the broad-place of the city [is] pure gold — as transparent glass.
And a sanctuary I did not see in it, for the Lord God, the Almighty, is its sanctuary, and the Lamb,
and the city hath no need of the sun, nor of the moon, that they may shine in it; for the glory of God did lighten it, and the lamp of it [is] the Lamb;
and the nations of the saved in its light shall walk, and the kings of the earth do bring their glory and honour into it,
and its gates shall not at all be shut by day, for night shall not be there;
and they shall bring the glory and the honour of the nations into it;
and there may not at all enter into it any thing defiling and doing abomination, and a lie, but — those written in the scroll of the life of the Lamb.
And he shewed me a pure river of water of life, bright as crystal, going forth out of the throne of God and of the Lamb:
in the midst of its broad place, and of the river on this side and on that, [is] a tree of life, yielding twelve fruits, in each several month rendering its fruits, and the leaves of the tree [are] for the service of the nations;
and any curse there shall not be any more, and the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it, and His servants shall serve Him,
and they shall see His face, and His name [is] upon their foreheads,
and night shall not be there, and they have no need of a lamp and light of a sun, because the Lord God doth give them light, and they shall reign — to the ages of the ages.
And he said to me, 'These words [are] stedfast and true, and the Lord God of the holy prophets did send His messenger to shew to His servants the things that it behoveth to come quickly:
Lo, I come quickly; happy [is] he who is keeping the words of the prophecy of this scroll.'
And I, John, am he who is seeing these things and hearing, and when I heard and beheld, I fell down to bow before the feet of the messenger who is shewing me these things;
and he saith to me, 'See — not; for fellow-servant of thee am I, and of thy brethren the prophets, and of those keeping the words of this scroll; before God bow.'
And he saith to me, 'Thou mayest not seal the words of the prophecy of this scroll, because the time is nigh;
he who is unrighteous — let him be unrighteous still, and he who is filthy — let him be filthy still, and he who is righteous — let him be declared righteous still, and he who is sanctified — let him be sanctified still:
And lo, I come quickly, and my reward [is] with me, to render to each as his work shall be;
I am the Alpha and the Omega — the Beginning and End — the First and the Last.
'Happy are those doing His commands that the authority shall be theirs unto the tree of the life, and by the gates they may enter into the city;
and without [are] the dogs, and the sorcerers, and the whoremongers, and the murderers, and the idolaters, and every one who is loving and is doing a lie.
'I, Jesus did send my messenger to testify to you these things concerning the assemblies; I am the root and the offspring of David, the bright and morning star!
And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come; and he who is hearing — let him say, Come; and he who is thirsting — let him come; and he who is willing — let him take the water of life freely.
'For I testify to every one hearing the words of the prophecy of this scroll, if any one may add unto these, God shall add to him the plagues that have been written in this scroll,
and if any one may take away from the words of the scroll of this prophecy, God shall take away his part from the scroll of the life, and out of the holy city, and the things that have been written in this scroll;'
he saith — who is testifying these things — 'Yes, I come quickly!' Amen! Yes, be coming, Lord Jesus!
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ [is] with you all. Amen.









































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































