








































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































In the land of Uz lived a man whose name was Job. He was an upright and good man, fearing God and departing from evil.
He had seven sons and three daughters.
His substance was seven thousand sheep, three thousand camels, five hundred yoke of oxen, five hundred she-asses, and a great number of servants; so that he was the greatest of all the inhabitants of the East.
Now it was the custom of his sons to make a feast in their houses, each on his day, and to send and invite their three sisters to eat and to drink with them.
And when the days of their feasting had gone round, Job used to send for them and sanctify them, and to rise up early in the morning and offer burnt-offerings according to the number of them all; for Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned, and have renounced God in their hearts. Thus did Job continually.
Now on a certain day the sons of God came to present themselves before Jehovah, and Satan also came among them.
And Jehovah said to Satan, Whence comest thou? Then Satan answered Jehovah, and said, From wandering over the earth, and walking up and down in it.
And Jehovah said to Satan, Hast thou observed my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, an upright and good man, fearing God and departing from evil?
Then Satan answered Jehovah, Is it for nought that Job feareth God?
Hast thou not placed a hedge around him, and around his house, and around all his possessions? Thou hast prospered the work of his hands, and his herds are greatly increased in the land.
But only put forth thy hand, and touch whatever he possesseth, and to thy face will he renounce thee.
And Jehovah said to Satan, Behold, all that he hath is in thy power; but upon him lay not thy hand. So Satan went forth from the presence of Jehovah.
Now on a certain day the sons and daughters of Job were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother's house,
when a messenger came to Job, and said, The oxen were ploughing, and the asses feeding beside them,
and the Sabaeans fell upon them, and took them away; the servants also they slew with the edge of the sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.
While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The fire of God hath fallen from heaven, and hath burned up the sheep and the servants, and consumed them; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.
While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The Chaldaeans made out three bands, and fell upon the camels, and carried them away; the servants also they slew with the edge of the sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.
While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, Thy sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother's house;
and, lo! there came a great wind from the desert, and smote the four corners of the house, and it fell upon the young men, and they are dead; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.
Then Job arose, and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell down upon the ground, and worshipped;
and said, Naked came I forth from my mother's womb, and naked shall I return thither. Jehovah gave, and Jehovah hath taken away; blessed be the name of Jehovah!
In all this Job sinned not, nor uttered vain words against God.
Again there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before Jehovah; and Satan came also among them to present himself before Jehovah.
And Jehovah said to Satan, Whence comest thou? And Satan answered Jehovah, and said, From wandering over the earth, and walking up and down in it.
Then said Jehovah to Satan, Hast thou observed my servant Job, that there is none like him upon the earth, an upright and good man, fearing God and departing from evil? And still he holdeth fast his integrity, although thou didst excite me against him to destroy him without a cause.
And Satan answered Jehovah, and said, Skin for skin, yea, all that a man hath will he give for his life.
But put forth now thy hand, and touch his bone and his flesh, and to thy face will he renounce thee.
And Jehovah said to Satan, Behold, he is in thy hand; but spare his life.
Then Satan went forth from the presence of Jehovah, and smote Job with sore boils from the sole of his foot to his crown.
And he took a potsherd to scrape himself withal, and sat down among the ashes.
Then said his wife to him, Dost thou still retain thine integrity? Renounce God, and die.
But he said to her, Thou talkest like one of the foolish women. What! shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? In all this, Job sinned not with his lips.
Now three friends of Job heard of all this evil that had come upon him, and came each one from his home; Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite; for they had agreed to come to mourn with him, and to comfort him.
And they lifted up their eyes at a distance, and knew him not; then they raised their voices and wept, and rent each one his mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven.
And they sat down with him upon the ground seven days and seven nights, and none spake a word to him; for they saw that his grief was very great.
At length Job opened his mouth, and cursed the day of his birth.
And Job spake and said:
Perish the day in which I was born, and the night which said, “A man-child is conceived!”
Let that day be darkness; Let not God seek it from above; Yea, let not the light shine upon it!
Let darkness and the shadow of death redeem it; Let a cloud dwell upon it; Let whatever darkeneth the day terrify it!
As for that night, let darkness seize upon it; Let it not rejoice among the days of the year; Let it not come into the number of the months!
O let that night be unfruitful! Let there be in it no voice of joy;
Let them that curse the day curse it, Who are skilful to stir up the leviathan!
Let the stars of its twilight be darkened; Let it long for light, and have none; Neither let it see the eyelashes of the morning!
Because it shut not up the doors of my mother's womb, And hid not trouble from mine eyes.
Why died I not at my birth? Why did I not expire when I came forth from the womb?
Why did the knees receive me, And why the breasts, that I might suck?
For now should I lie down and be quiet; I should sleep; then should I be at rest,
With kings and counsellors of the earth, Who built up for themselves—ruins!
Or with princes that had gold, And filled their houses with silver;
Or, as a hidden untimely birth, I had perished; As infants which never saw the light.
There the wicked cease from troubling; There the weary are at rest.
There the prisoners rest together; They hear not the voice of the oppressor.
The small and the great are there, And the servant is free from his master.
Why giveth He light to him that is in misery, And life to the bitter in soul,
Who long for death, and it cometh not, And dig for it more than for hid treasures;
Who rejoice exceedingly, Yea, exult, when they can find a grave?
Why is light given to a man from whom the way is hid, And whom God hath hedged in?
For my sighing cometh before I eat, And my groans are poured out like water.
For that which I dread overtaketh me; That at which I shudder cometh upon me.
I have no peace, nor quiet, nor respite: Misery cometh upon me continually.
Then spake Eliphaz the Temanite, and said:
If one attempt a word with thee, wilt thou be offended? But who can refrain from speaking?
Behold, thou hast admonished many; Thou hast strengthened feeble hands;
Thy words have upheld him that was falling, And thou hast given strength to feeble knees.
But now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest; It toucheth thee, and thou art confounded!
Is not thy fear of God thy hope, And the uprightness of thy ways thy confidence?
Remember, I pray thee, who ever perished being innocent? Or where have the righteous been cut off?
According to what I have seen, they who plough iniquity, And sow mischief, reap the same.
By the blast of God they perish, And by the breath of his nostrils they are consumed.
The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the fierce lion, And the teeth of the young lions are broken.
The fierce lion perisheth for lack of prey, And the whelps of the lioness are scattered abroad.
A word was once secretly brought to me, And mine ear caught a whisper thereof.
Amid thoughts from visions of the night, When deep sleep falleth upon men,
A fear and a horror came upon me, Which made all my bones to shake.
Then a spirit passed before my face, The hair of my flesh rose on end;
It stood still, but its form I could not discern; An image was before mine eyes; There was silence, and I heard a voice:
“Shall mortal man be more just than God? Shall man be more pure than his Maker?
Behold, he putteth no trust in his ministering spirits, And his angels he chargeth with frailty.
What then are they who dwell in houses of clay, Whose foundation is in the dust, Who crumble to pieces, as if moth-eaten!
Between morning and evening are they destroyed; They perish for ever, and none regardeth it.
The excellency that is in them is torn away; They die before they have become wise.”
Call now, see if any will answer thee! And to which of the holy ones wilt thou look?
Verily grief destroyeth the fool, And wrath consumeth the weak man.
I have seen an impious man taking root, But soon I cursed his habitation.
His children are far from safety; They are oppressed at the gate, and there is none to deliver them.
His harvest the hungry devour, Carrying it even through the thorns; And a snare gapeth after his substance.
For affliction cometh not from the dust, Nor doth trouble spring up from the ground;
Behold, man is born to trouble, As the sparks fly upward.
I would look to God, And to God would I commit my cause,
Who doeth great things and unsearchable; Yea, marvellous things without number;
Who giveth rain upon the earth, And sendeth water upon the fields;
Who placeth the lowly in high places, And restoreth the afflicted to prosperity;
Who disappointeth the devices of the crafty, So that their hands cannot perform their enterprises;
Who taketh the wise in their own craftiness, And bringeth to nought the counsel of the artful.
They meet with darkness in the daytime; They grope at noon as if it were night.
So he saveth the persecuted from their mouth; The oppressed from the hand of the mighty.
So the poor hath hope, And iniquity stoppeth her mouth.
Behold, happy is the man whom God correcteth; Therefore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty.
For he bruiseth, and bindeth up; He woundeth, and his hands make whole.
In six troubles will he deliver thee; Yea, in seven shall no evil touch thee.
In famine he will redeem thee from death, And in war from the power of the sword.
Thou shalt be safe from the scourge of the tongue, And shalt not be afraid of destruction, when it cometh.
At destruction and famine thou shalt laugh, And of the wild beasts of the land shalt thou not be afraid.
For thou shalt be in league with the stones of the field; Yea, the beasts of the forest shall be at peace with thee.
Thou shalt find that thy tent is in peace; Thou shalt visit thy dwelling, and not be disappointed.
Thou shalt see thy descendants numerous, And thine offspring as the grass of the earth.
Thou shalt come to thy grave in full age, As a shock of corn gathered in its season.
Lo! this we have searched out; so it is: Hear it, and lay it up in thy mind!
Then Job answered and said:
O that my grief were weighed thoroughly! That my calamities were put together in the balance!
Surely they would be heavier than the sand of the sea; On this account were my words rash.
For the arrows of the Almighty have pierced me; Their poison drinketh up my spirit; The terrors of God set themselves in array against me.
Doth the wild ass bray in the midst of grass? Or loweth the ox over his fodder?
Can that which is unsavory be eaten without salt? Is there any taste in the white of an egg?
That which my soul abhorreth to touch Hath become my loathsome food.
O that I might have my request, And that God would grant me that which I long for!
That it would please God to destroy me; That he would let loose his hand, and make an end of me!
Yet it should still be my consolation, Yea, in unsparing anguish I would exult, That I have not denied the commands of the Holy One.
What is my strength, that I should hope? And what mine end, that I should be patient?
Is my strength the strength of stones? Or is my flesh brass?
Alas, there is no help within me! Deliverance is driven from me!
To the afflicted, kindness should be shown by a friend; Else he casteth off the fear of the Almighty.
But my brethren are faithless like a brook; Like streams of the valley that pass away;
Which are turbid by reason of the ice, And the snow, which hideth itself in them.
As soon as they flow forth, they vanish; When the heat cometh, they are dried up from their place.
The caravans turn aside to them on their way; They go up into the desert, and perish.
The caravans of Tema look for them; The companies of Sheba expect to see them;
They are ashamed that they have relied on them; They come to their place, and are confounded.
So ye also are nothing; Ye see a terror, and shrink back.
Have I said, Bring me gifts? Or, Give a present for me out of your substance?
Or, Deliver me from the enemy's hand? Or, Rescue me from the hand of the violent?
Convince me, and I will hold my peace; Cause me to understand wherein I have erred.
How powerful are the words of truth! But what do your reproaches prove?
Do ye mean to censure words? The words of a man in despair are but wind.
Truly ye spread a net for the fatherless; Ye dig a pit for your friend.
Look now upon me, I pray you; For to your very face can I speak falsehood?
Return, I pray, and let there be no unfairness; Yea, return;—still is my cause righteous.
Is there iniquity on my tongue? Cannot my taste discern what is sinful?
Is there not a war-service for man on the earth? Are not his days as the days of a hireling?
As a servant panteth for the shade, And as a hireling looketh for his wages,
So am I made to possess months of affliction, And wearisome nights are appointed for me.
If I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and the night be gone? And I am full of restlessness until the dawning of the day.
My flesh is clothed with worms, and clods of dust; My skin is broken and become loathsome.
My days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle; They pass away without hope.
O remember that my life is a breath; That mine eye shall no more see good!
The eye of him that hath seen me shall see me no more; Thine eyes shall look for me, but I shall not be.
As the cloud dissolveth and wasteth away, So he that goeth down to the grave shall arise no more;
No more shall he return to his house, And his dwelling-place shall know him no more.
Therefore I will not restrain my mouth; I will speak in the anguish of my spirit; I will complain in the bitterness of my soul.
Am I a sea, or a sea-monster, That thou settest a watch over me?
When I say, My bed shall relieve me, My couch shall ease my complaint,
Then thou scarest me with dreams, And terrifiest me with visions;
So that my soul chooseth strangling, Yea, death, rather than these my bones.
I am wasting away; I shall not live alway: Let me alone, for my days are a vapor!
What is man, that thou shouldst make great account him, And fix thy mind upon him?—
That thou shouldst visit him every morning, And prove him every moment?
How long ere thou wilt look away from me, And let me alone, till I have time to breathe?
If I have sinned, what have I done to thee, O thou watcher of men! Why hast thou set me up as thy mark, So that I have become a burden to myself?
And why dost thou not pardon my transgression, And take away mine iniquity? ((7:22)) For soon shall I sleep in the dust; And, though thou seek me diligently, I shall not be.
Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said:
How long wilt thou speak such things? How long shall the words of thy mouth be like a strong wind?
Will God pervert judgment? Or will the Almighty pervert justice?
As thy children sinned against him, He hath given them up to their transgression.
But if thou wilt seek early to God, And make thy supplication to the Almighty,—
If thou wilt be pure and upright, Surely he will yet arise for thee, And prosper thy righteous habitation;
So that thy beginning shall be small, And thy latter end very great.
For inquire, I pray thee, of the former age, And mark what hath been searched out by their fathers;
(For we are of yesterday and know nothing, Since our days upon the earth are but a shadow;)
Will not they instruct thee, and tell thee, And utter words from their understanding?
“Can the paper-reed grow up without mire? Can the bulrush grow without water?
While it is yet in its greenness, and is not cut down, It withereth before any other herb.
Such is the fate of all who forget God; So perisheth the hope of the ungodly.
His confidence shall come to nought, And his trust shall prove a spider's web.
He shall lean upon his house, and it shall not stand; He shall lay fast hold on it, but it shall not endure.
He is in full green before the sun, And his branches shoot forth over his garden;
His roots are entwined about the heap, And he seeth the place of stones;
When he shall be destroyed from his place, It shall deny him, saying, 'I never saw thee.'
Lo! such is the joy of his course! And others shall spring up from his place”
Behold, God will not cast away an upright man; Nor will he help the evil-doers.
While he filleth thy mouth with laughter, And thy lips with gladness,
They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame, And the dwelling-place of the wicked shall come to nought.
Then Job answered and said:
Of a truth, I know that it is so: For how can man be just before God?
If he choose to contend with him, He cannot answer him to one charge of a thousand.
He is excellent in wisdom, mighty in strength: Who hath hardened himself against him, and prospered?
He removeth the mountains, and they know it not; He overturneth them in his anger.
He shaketh the earth out of her place, And the pillars thereof tremble.
He commandeth the sun, and it riseth not, And he sealeth up the stars.
He alone spreadeth out the heavens, And walketh upon the high waves of the sea.
He made the Bear, Orion, and the Pleiades, And the secret chambers of the South.
He doeth great things past finding out, Yea, wonderful things without number.
Lo! he goeth by me, but I see him not; He passeth along, but I do not perceive him.
Lo! he seizeth, and who can hinder him? Who will say to him, What doest thou?
God will not turn away his anger; The proud helpers are brought low before him.
How much less shall I answer him, And choose out words to contend with him?
Though I were innocent, I would not answer him; I would cast myself on the mercy of my judge.
Should I call, and he make answer to me, I could not believe that he listened to my voice,—
He who falleth upon me with a tempest, And multiplieth my wounds without cause!
Who will not suffer me to take my breath, But filleth me with bitterness!
If I look to strength, “Lo! here am I!” [[saith he,]] If to justice, “Who shall summon me to trial?”
Though I were upright, yet must my own mouth condemn me; Though I were innocent, He would prove me perverse.
Though I were innocent, I would not care for myself; I would despise my life.
It is all one; therefore I will affirm, He destroyeth the righteous and the wicked alike.
When the scourge bringeth sudden destruction, He laugheth at the sufferings of the innocent.
The earth is given into the hands of the wicked; He covereth the face of the judges thereof; If it be not He, who is it?
My days have been swifter than a courier; They have fled away; they have seen no good.
They have gone by like the reed-skiffs; Like the eagle, darting upon his prey.
If I say, I will forget my lamentation, I will change my countenance, and take courage,
Still am I in dread of the multitude of my sorrows; For I know that thou wilt not hold me innocent.
I shall be found guilty; Why then should I labor in vain?
If I wash myself in snow, And cleanse my hands with lye,
Still wilt thou plunge me into the pit, So that my own clothes will abhor me.
For He is not a man, as I am, that I may contend with him, And that we may go together into judgment;
There is no umpire between us, Who may lay his hand upon us both.
Let him take from me his rod, And not dismay me with his terrors,
Then I will speak, and not be afraid of him: For I am not so at heart.
I am weary of my life; I will let loose within me my complaint; I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.
I will say unto God, Do not condemn me! Show me wherefore thou contendest with me!
Is it a pleasure to thee to oppress, And to despise the work of thy hands, And to shine upon the plans of the wicked?
Hast thou eyes of flesh, Or seest thou as man seeth?
Are thy days as the days of a man, Are thy years as the days of a mortal,
That thou seekest after my iniquity, And searchest after my sin,
Though thou knowest that I am not guilty, And that none can deliver from thy hand?
Have thy hands completely fashioned and made me In every part, that thou mightst destroy me?
O remember that thou hast moulded me as clay! And wilt thou bring me again to dust?
Thou didst pour me out as milk, And curdle me as cheese;
With skin and flesh didst thou clothe me, And strengthen me with bones and sinews;
Thou didst grant me life and favor, And thy protection preserved my breath:
Yet these things thou didst lay up in thy heart! I know that this was in thy mind.
If I sin, then thou markest me, And wilt not acquit me of mine iniquity.
If I am wicked,—then woe unto me! Yet if righteous, I dare not lift up my head; I am full of confusion, beholding my affliction.
If I lift it up, like a lion thou huntest me, And again showest thyself terrible unto me.
Thou renewest thy witnesses against me, And increasest thine anger toward me; New hosts continually rise up against me.
Why then didst thou bring me forth from the womb? I should have perished, and no eye had seen me;
I should be as though I had not been; I should have been borne from the womb to the grave.
Are not my days few? O spare then, And let me alone, that I may be at ease a little while,
Before I go— whence I shall not return—To the land of darkness and death-shade,
The land of darkness like the blackness of death-shade, Where is no order, and where the light is as darkness.
Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and said:
Shall not the multitude of words receive an answer? Shall the man of words be justified?
Shall thy boastings make men hold their peace? Shalt thou mock, and none put thee to shame?
Thou sayest, My speech is pure; I am clean in thine eyes, [[O God!]]
But O that God would speak, And open his lips against thee;
That he would show thee the secrets of his wisdom,—His wisdom, which is unsearchable! Then shouldst thou know that God forgiveth thee many of thine iniquities.
Canst thou search out the deep things of God? Canst thou find out the Almighty to perfection?
'Tis high as heaven, what canst thou do? Deeper than hell, what canst thou know?
The measure thereof is longer than the earth, And broader than the sea.
If he apprehend, and bind, and bring to trial, Who shall oppose him?
For he knoweth the unrighteous; He seeth iniquity, when they do not observe it.
But vain man is without understanding; Yea, man is born a wild ass's colt.
If thou direct thy heart, And stretch out thy hands, toward him;
If thou put away iniquity from thy hand, And let not wickedness dwell in thy habitation,—
Then shalt thou lift up thy face without spot; Yea, thou shalt be steadfast, and have no fear.
For thou shalt forget thy misery, Or remember it as waters that have passed away.
Thy life shall be brighter than the noon-day; Now thou art in darkness, thou shalt then be as morning.
Thou shalt be secure, because there is hope; Now thou art disappointed, thou shalt then rest in safety.
Thou shalt lie down, and none shall make thee afraid; And many shall make suit unto thee.
But the eyes of the wicked shall be wearied out; They shall find no refuge; Their hope is—the breathing forth of life.
Then Job answered and said:
No doubt ye are the whole people! And wisdom will die with you!
But I have understanding as well as you; I am not inferior to you: Yea, who knoweth not such things as these?
I am become a laughing-stock to my friend,—I who call upon God, that he would answer me! The innocent and upright man is held in derision.
To calamity belongeth contempt in the mind of one at ease; It is ready for them that slip with the feet.
The tents of robbers are in prosperity, And they who provoke God are secure, Who carry their God in their hand.
For ask now the beasts, and they will teach thee; Or the fowls of the air, and they will tell thee;
Or speak to the earth, and it will instruct thee; And the fishes of the sea will declare unto thee.
Who among all these doth not know That the hand of Jehovah doeth these things?
In whose hand is the soul of every living thing, And the breath of all mankind.
Doth not the ear prove words, As the mouth tasteth meat?
With the aged is wisdom, And with length of days is understanding.
With Him are wisdom and strength; With Him counsel and understanding.
Lo! he pulleth down, and it shall not be rebuilt; He bindeth a man, and he shall not be set loose.
Lo! he withholdeth the waters, and they are dried up; He sendeth them forth, and they lay waste the earth.
With him are strength and wisdom; The deceived and the deceiver are his.
He leadeth counsellors away captive, And judges he maketh fools.
He looseth the authority of kings, And bindeth their loins with a cord.
He leadeth priests away captive, And overthroweth the mighty.
He removeth speech from the trusty, And taketh away judgment from the elders.
He poureth contempt upon princes, And looseth the girdle of the mighty.
He revealeth deep things out of darkness, And bringeth the shadow of death to light.
He exalteth nations, and destroyeth them; He enlargeth nations, and leadeth them captive.
He taketh away the understanding of the great men of the land, And causeth them to wander in a wilderness, where is no path;
They grope in the dark without light; He maketh them stagger like a drunken man.
Lo! all this mine eye hath seen; Mine ear hath heard and understood it.
What ye know, I know also; I am not inferior to you.
But O that I might speak with the Almighty! O that I might reason with God!
For ye are forgers of lies; Physicians of no value, all of you!
O that ye would altogether hold your peace! This, truly, would be wisdom in you.
Hear, I pray you, my arguments; Attend to the pleadings of my lips!
Will ye speak falsehood for God? Will ye utter deceit for him?
Will ye be partial to his person? Will ye contend earnestly for God?
Will it be well for you, if he search you thoroughly? Can ye deceive him, as one may deceive a man?
Surely he will rebuke you, If ye secretly have respect to persons.
Doth not his majesty make you afraid, And his dread fall upon you?
Your maxims are words of dust; Your fortresses are fortresses of clay.
Hold your peace, and let me speak: And then come upon me what will!
Why do I take my flesh in my teeth, And put my life in my hand?
Lo! he slayeth me, and I have no hope! Yet will I justify my ways before him.
This also shall be my deliverance; For no unrighteous man will come before him.
Hear attentively my words, And give ear to my declaration!
Behold, I have now set in order my cause; I know that I am innocent.
Who is he that can contend with me? For then would I hold my peace, and die!
Only do not unto me two things, Then will I not hide myself from thy presence;
Let not thy hand be heavy upon me, And let not thy terrors make me afraid:
Then call upon me, and I will answer; Or I will speak, and answer thou me.
How many are my iniquities and sins? Make me to know my faults and transgressions.
Wherefore dost thou hide thy face, And account me as thine enemy?
Wilt thou put in fear the driven leaf? Wilt thou pursue the dry stubble?
For thou writest bitter things against me, And makest me inherit the sins of my youth.
Yea, thou puttest my feet in the stocks, And waterest all my paths; Thou hemmest in the soles of my feet.
And I, like an abandoned thing, shall waste away; Like a garment which is moth-eaten.
Man, that is born of woman, Is of few days, and full of trouble.
He cometh forth as a flower, and is cut down; He fleeth also as a shadow, and continueth not.
And dost thou fix thine eyes upon such a one? And dost thou bring me into judgment with thee?
Who can produce a clean thing from an unclean? Not one.
Seeing that his days are determined, And the number of his months, with thee, And that thou hast appointed him bounds which he cannot pass,
O turn thine eyes from him, and let him rest, That he may enjoy, as a hireling, his day!
For there is hope for a tree, If it be cut down, that it will sprout again, And that its tender branches will not fail;
Though its root may have grown old in the earth, And though its trunk be dead upon the ground,
Through the scent of water it will bud, And put forth boughs, like a young plant.
But man dieth, and he is gone! Man expireth, and where is he?
The waters fail from the lake; And the stream wasteth and drieth up;
So man lieth down, and riseth not; Till the heavens be no more, he shall not awake, Nor be roused from his sleep.
O that thou wouldst hide me in the under-world! That thou wouldst conceal me till thy wrath be past! That thou wouldst appoint me a time, and then remember me!
If a man die, can he live again? All the days of my war-service would I wait, Till my change should come.
Thou wilt call, and I will answer thee; Thou wilt have compassion upon the work of thy hands!
But now thou numberest my steps; Thou watchest over my sins.
My transgression is sealed up in a bag; Yea, thou addest unto my iniquity.
As the mountain falling cometh to nought, And the rock is removed from its place;
As the waters wear away the stones, And the floods wash away the dust of the earth, So thou destroyest the hope of man.
Thou prevailest against him continually, and he perisheth; Thou changest his countenance, and sendest him away.
His sons come to honor, but he knoweth it not; Or they are brought low, but he perceiveth it not.
But his flesh shall have pain for itself alone; For itself alone shall his soul mourn.
Then answered Eliphaz the Temanite, and said:
Should a wise man answer with arguments of wind, Or fill his bosom with the east wind?
Should he argue with speech that helpeth him not, And with words which do not profit him?
Behold, thou makest the fear of God a vain thing, And discouragest prayer before him.
Yea, thy own mouth proclaimeth thy iniquity, Though thou choosest the tongue of the crafty.
Thy own mouth condemneth thee, and not I; Thy own lips testify against thee.
Art thou the first man that was born? Wast thou formed before the hills?
Hast thou listened in the council of God, And drawn all wisdom to thyself?
What dost thou know, that we know not also? What dost thou understand, that is a secret to us?
With us are the aged and hoary-headed; Much older than thy father.
Dost thou despise the consolations of God, And words so full of kindness to thee?
Why hath thy passion taken possession of thee? And why this winking of thine eyes?
For against God hast thou turned thy spirit, And uttered such words from thy mouth.
What is man, that he should be pure, And he that is born of woman, that he should be innocent?
Behold, He putteth no trust in his ministering spirits, And the heavens are not pure in his sight;
Much less, abominable and polluted man, Who drinketh iniquity as water.
Hear me, and I will show thee, And that which I have seen will I declare;
Which the wise men have told, And not kept concealed, as received from their fathers;
To whom alone the land was given, And among whom not a stranger wandered.
“All his days the wicked man is in pain; Yea, all the years, that are laid up for the oppressor.
A fearful sound is in his ears; In peace the destroyer cometh upon him.
He hath no hope that he shall escape from darkness; He is set apart for the sword.
He wandereth about, seeking bread; He knoweth that a day of darkness is at hand.
Distress and anguish fill him with dread; They prevail against him like a king ready for the battle.
Because he stretched forth his hand against God, And bade defiance to the Almighty,
And ran against him with outstretched neck, With the thick bosses of his bucklers;
Because he covered his face with fatness, And gathered fat upon his loins,
And dwelt in desolated cities, In houses which no man inhabiteth, That are ready to become heaps.
He shall not be rich; his substance shall not endure, And his possessions shall not be extended upon the earth.
He shall not escape from darkness, And the flame shall dry up his branches; Yea, by the breath of His mouth shall he be taken away.
“Let not man trust in vanity! he will be deceived; For vanity shall be his recompense.
He shall come to his end before his time, And his branch shall not be green.
He shall shake off his unripe fruit like the vine, And shed his blossoms like the olive-tree.
The house of the unrighteous shall be famished, And fire shall consume the tents of bribery.
They conceive mischief, and bring forth misery, And their breast deviseth deceit.”
But Job answered and said:
Of such things as these I have heard enough! Miserable comforters are ye all!
Will there ever be an end to words of wind? What stirreth thee up, that thou answerest?
I also might speak like you, If ye were now in my place; I might string together words against you, And shake my head at you.
I would strengthen you with my mouth, And the consolation of my lips should sustain you.
If I speak, my grief is not assuaged; And if I forbear, it doth not leave me.
For now He hath quite exhausted me; Thou hast desolated all my house!
Thou hast seized hold of me, and this is a witness against me; My leanness riseth up and testifieth against me to my face.
His anger teareth my flesh, and pursueth me; He gnasheth upon me with his teeth; My adversary sharpeneth his eyes upon me.
They gape for me with their mouths; In scorn they smite me on the cheek; With one consent they assemble against me.
God hath given me a prey to the unrighteous, And delivered me into the hands of the wicked.
I was at ease, but he hath crushed me; He hath seized me by the neck, and dashed me in pieces; He hath set me up for his mark.
His archers encompass me around; He pierceth my reins, and doth not spare; He poureth out my gall upon the ground.
He breaketh me with breach upon breach; He rusheth upon me like a warrior.
I have sewed sackcloth upon my skin, And thrust my horn into the dust.
My face is red with weeping, And upon my eyelids is deathlike darkness.
Yet is there no injustice in my bands. And my prayer hath been pure.
O earth! cover not thou my blood, And let there be no hiding-place for my cry!
Yet even now, behold, my witness is in heaven, And he who knoweth me is on high.
My friends have me in derision, But my eye poureth out tears unto God.
O that one might contend for a man with God, As a man contendeth with his neighbor!
For when a few years shall have passed, I shall go the way whence I shall not return.
My breath is exhausted; My days are at an end; The grave is ready for me.
Are not revilers before me? And doth not my eye dwell upon their provocations?
Give a pledge, I pray thee; be thou a surety for me with thee; Who is he that will strike hands with me?
Behold, thou hast blinded their understanding; Therefore thou wilt not suffer them to prevail.
He who delivereth up his friends as a prey,—The eyes of his children shall fail.
He made me the by-word of the people; Yea, I have become their abhorrence.
My eye therefore is dim with sorrow, And all my limbs are as a shadow.
Upright men will be astonished at this, And the innocent will rouse themselves against the wicked.
The righteous will also hold on his way, And he that hath clean hands will gather strength.
But as for you all, return, I pray! I find not yet among you one wise man.
My days are at an end; My plans are broken off; Even the treasures of my heart.
Night hath become day to me; The light bordereth on darkness.
Yea, I look to the grave as my home; I have made my bed in darkness.
I say to the pit, Thou art my father! And to the worm, My mother! and, My sister!
Where then is my hope? Yea, my hope, who shall see it?
It must go down to the bars of the under-world, As soon as there is rest for me in the dust.
Bildad the Shuhite answered and said:
How long ere ye make an end of words? Understand, and then we will speak!
Why are we accounted as brutes, And reputed vile in your sight?
Thou that tearest thyself in thine anger! Must the earth be deserted for thee, And the rock removed from its place?
Behold, the light of the wicked shall be put out, And the flame of his fire shall not shine.
Light shall become darkness in his tent, And his lamp over him shall go out.
His strong steps shall be straitened, And his own plans shall cast him down.
He is brought into the net by his own feet, And he walketh upon snares.
The trap layeth hold of him by the heel, And the snare holdeth him fast.
A net is secretly laid for him on the ground, And a trap for him in the pathway.
Terrors affright him on every side, And harass him at his heels.
His strength is wasted by hunger, And destruction is ready at his side.
His limbs are consumed, Yea, his limbs are devoured by the first-born of death.
He is torn from his tent, which was his confidence, And is borne away to the king of terrors.
They who are none of his shall dwell in his tent; Brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation.
His roots below shall be dried up, And his branches above shall be withered.
His memory perisheth from the earth, And no name hath he in the land.
He shall be thrust from light into darkness, And driven out of the world.
He hath no son, nor kinsman among his people, Nor any survivor in his dwelling-place.
They that come after him shall be amazed at his fate, As they that were before them were struck with horror.
Yea, such is the dwelling of the unrighteous man; Such is the place of him who knoweth not God!
But Job answered and said:
How long will ye vex my soul, And break me in pieces with words?
These ten times have ye reviled me; Without shame do ye stun me!
And be it, indeed, that I have erred, My error abideth with myself.
Since, indeed, ye magnify yourselves against me, And plead against me my reproach,
Know then that it is God who hath brought me low; He hath encompassed me with his net.
Behold, I complain of wrong, but receive no answer; I cry aloud, but obtain no justice.
He hath fenced up my way, so that I cannot pass, And hath set darkness in my paths.
He hath stripped me of my glory, And taken the crown from my head.
He hath destroyed me on every side, and I am gone! He hath torn up my hope like a tree.
He kindleth his anger against me, And counteth me as his enemy.
His troops advance together against me; They throw up for themselves a way to me, And encamp around my dwelling.
My brethren he hath put far from me, And my acquaintance are wholly estranged from me.
My kinsfolk have forsaken me, And my bosom friends have forgotten me.
The foreigners of my house, yea, my own maid-servants, regard me as a stranger; I am an alien in their eyes.
I call my servant, and he maketh no answer; With my own mouth do I entreat him.
My breath is become strange to my wife, And my prayers also to my own mother's sons.
Even young children despise me; When I rise up, they speak against me.
All my bosom friends abhor me, And they whom I loved are turned against me.
My bones cleave to my flesh and my skin, And I have scarcely escaped with the skin of my teeth.
Have pity upon me, O ye my friends! have pity upon me; For the hand of God hath smitten me!
Why do ye persecute me like God, And are not satisfied with my flesh?
O that my words were now written! O that they were marked down in a scroll!
That with an iron pen, and with lead, They were engraven upon the rock for ever!
Yet I know that my Vindicator liveth, And will hereafter stand up on the earth;
And though with my skin this body be wasted away, Yet without my flesh shall I see God.
Yea, I shall see him my friend; My eyes shall behold him, and not another: For this, my soul panteth within me.
Since ye say, “How may we persecute him, And find grounds of accusation against him?”
Be ye afraid of the sword! For malice is a crime for the sword; That ye may know that judgment cometh.
Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and said:
For this do my thoughts lead me to reply, And for this is my ardor within me.
I have heard my shameful rebuke; And the spirit, from my understanding, answereth for me.
Knowest thou not, that from the days of old, From the time when man was placed upon the earth,
The triumphing of the wicked hath been short, And the joy of the impious but for a moment?
Though his greatness mount up to the heavens, And his head reach to the clouds,
Yet shall he perish for ever, and be mingled with dust; They who saw him shall say, Where is he?
He shall flee away like a dream, and shall not be found; Yea, he shall disappear like a vision of the nigh.
The eye also which saw him shall see him no more, And his dwelling-place shall never more behold him.
His sons shall seek the favor of the poor, And their hands shall give back his wealth.
His bones are full of his youth, But they shall lie down with him in the dust.
Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, Though he hide it under his tongue,
Though he cherish it, and will not part with it, And keep it fast in his mouth,
Yet his meat shall be changed within him, And become to him the poison of asps.
He hath glutted himself with riches, And he shall throw them up again; Yea, God shall cast them out of his body.
He shall suck the poison of asps; The tongue of the viper shall destroy him.
He shall never see the flowing streams, And the rivers of honey and milk.
The fruits of his toil he shall give back, and shall not enjoy them: It is substance to be restored, and he shall not rejoice therein.
Because he hath oppressed and abandoned the poor, And seized upon the house which he did not build;
Because he knew no rest in his bosom, He shall not save that in which he delighteth.
Because nothing escaped his greediness, His prosperity shall not endure.
In the fulness of his abundance he shall be brought low; Every hand of the wretched shall come upon him.
He shall, indeed, have wherewith to fill himself: God shall send upon him the fury of his anger, And rain it down upon him for his food.
If he fleeth from the iron weapon, The bow of brass shall pierce him through.
He draweth the arrow, and it cometh forth from his body; Yea, the glittering steel cometh out of his gall. Terrors are upon him;
Calamity of every kind is treasured up for him. A fire not blown shall consume him; It shall consume whatever is left in his tent.
The heavens shall reveal his iniquity, And the earth shall rise up against him.
The substance of his house shall disappear; It shall flow away in the day of His wrath.
Such is the portion of the wicked man from God, And the inheritance appointed for him by the Almighty.
But Job answered and said:
Hear attentively my words, And let this be your consolation.
Bear with me, that I may speak; And after I have spoken, mock on!
Is my complaint concerning man? Why then should I not be angry?
Look upon me, and be astonished, And lay your hand upon your mouth!
When I think of it, I am confounded; Trembling taketh hold of my flesh.
Why is it that the wicked live, Grow old, yea, become mighty in substance?
Their children are established in their sight with them, And their offspring before their eyes.
Their houses are in peace, without fear, And the rod of God cometh not upon them.
Their bull gendereth, and faileth not; Their cow calveth, and casteth not her calf.
They send forth their little ones like a flock, And their children dance.
They sing to the timbrel and harp, And rejoice at the sound of the pipe.
They spend their days in prosperity, And in a moment go down to the under-world.
And yet they say unto God, “Depart from us! We desire not the knowledge of thy ways!
Who is the Almighty, that we should serve him? And what will it profit us, if we pray to him?”
[[Ye say,]] “Lo! their prosperity is not secure in their hands! Far from me be the conduct of the wicked!”
How often is it, that the lamp of the wicked is put out? And that destruction cometh upon them, And that He dispenseth to them tribulations in his anger?
How often are they as stubble before the wind, Or as chaff, which the whirlwind carrieth away?
“But” [[say ye]] “God layeth up his iniquity for his children.” Let him requite the offender, and let him feel it!
Let his own eyes see his destruction, And let him drink of the wrath of the Almighty!
For what concern hath he for his household after him, When the number of his own months is completed?
Who then shall impart knowledge to God,—To him that judgeth the highest?
One dieth in the fulness of his prosperity, Being wholly at ease and quiet;
His sides are full of fat, And his bones moist with marrow.
Another dieth in bitterness of soul, And hath not tasted pleasure.
Alike they lie down in the dust, And the worms cover them.
Behold, I know your thoughts, And the devices by which ye wrong me.
For ye say, “Where is the house of the oppressor, And where the dwelling-places of the wicked?”
Have ye never inquired of travellers, And do ye not know their tokens,
That the wicked is spared in the day of destruction, And that he is borne to his grave in the day of wrath?
Who will charge him with his conduct to his face, And who will requite him for the evil he hath done?
Even this man is borne with honor to the grave; Yea, he watcheth over his tomb.
Sweet to him are the sods of the valley: And all men move after him, As multitudes without number before him.
Why then do ye offer your vain consolations? Your answers continue false.
Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said:
Can a man, then, profit God? Behold, the wise man profiteth himself.
Is it a pleasure to the Almighty, that thou art righteous; Or a gain to him, that thou walkest uprightly?
Will he contend with thee because he feareth thee? Will he enter with thee into judgment?
Hath not thy wickedness been great? Have not thine iniquities been numberless?
For thou hast taken a pledge from thy brother unjustly, And stripped the poor of their clothing.
Thou hast given the weary no water to drink, And withholden bread from the hungry.
But the man of power, his was the land, And the honorable man dwelt in it.
Thou hast sent widows away empty, And broken the arms of the fatherless.
Therefore snares are round about thee, And sudden fear confoundeth thee;
Or darkness, through which thou canst not see, And floods of water cover thee.
Is not God in the height of heaven? And behold the stars, how high they are!
Hence thou sayest, “What doth God know? Can he govern behind the thick darkness?
Dark clouds are a veil to him, and he cannot see; And he walketh upon the arch of heaven.”
Wilt thou take the old way Which wicked men have trodden,
Who were cut down before their time, And whose foundations were swept away by a flood?
Who said unto God, “Depart from us!” And, “What can the Almighty do to us?”
And yet he filled their houses with good things!—Far from me be the counsel of the wicked!
The righteous see their fate, and rejoice; And the innocent hold them in derision.
“Truly our adversary is destroyed, And fire hath consumed his abundance!”
Acquaint now thyself with him, and be at peace: Thus shall prosperity return to thee.
Receive, I pray thee, instruction from his mouth, And lay up his words in thy heart.
If thou return to the Almighty, thou shalt be built up; If thou put away iniquity from thy tent.
Cast to the dust thy gold, And the gold of Ophir to the stones of the brook:
Then shall the Almighty be thy gold, Yea, treasures of silver unto thee;
For then shalt thou have delight in the Almighty, And shalt lift up thy face unto God.
Thou shalt pray to him, and he shall hear thee, And thou shalt perform thy vows.
The purpose which thou formest shall prosper with thee, And light shall shine upon thy ways.
When men are cast down, thou shalt say, “There lifting up!” And the humble person he will save.
He will deliver even him that is not innocent. The purity of thy hands shall save him.
Then Job answered and said:
Still is my complaint bitter; But my wound is deeper than my groaning.
O that I knew where I might find him! That I might go before his throne!
I would order my cause before him, And fill my mouth with arguments;
I should know what he would answer me, And understand what he would say to me.
Would he contend with me with his mighty power? No! he would have regard to me.
Then would an upright man contend with him, And I should be fully acquitted by my judge.
But, behold, I go eastward, and he is not there; And westward, but I cannot perceive him;
To the north, where he worketh, but I cannot behold him; He hideth himself on the south, and I cannot see him.
But he knoweth the way which is in my heart; When he trieth me, I shall come forth as gold.
My feet have trodden in his steps; His way I have kept, and have not turned aside from it.
I have not neglected the precepts of his lips; Above my own law have I esteemed the words of his mouth.
But he is of one mind, and who can turn him? And what he desireth, that he doeth.
He performeth that which is appointed for me; And many such things are in his mind!
Therefore I am in terror on account of him; When I consider, I am afraid of him.
For God maketh my heart faint; Yea, the Almighty terrifieth me;
Because I was not taken away before darkness came, And he hath not hidden darkness from mine eyes.
Why are not times treasured up by the Almighty? And why do not they who know him see his days?
They remove landmarks; They take away flocks by violence, and pasture them.
They drive away the ass of the fatherless, And take the widow's ox for a pledge.
They push the needy from the way; All the poor of the land are forced to hide themselves.
Behold, like wild asses of the desert, they go forth to their work; They search for prey; The wilderness supplieth them food for their children.
In the fields they reap the harvest, And gather the vintage of the oppressor.
They lodge naked, without clothing, And without covering from the cold.
They are drenched with the mountain showers, And embrace the rock for want of shelter.
The fatherless are torn from the breast, And the garment of the needy is taken for a pledge.
They go naked, without clothing, And carry the sheaf hungry.
They make oil within their walls, And tread the wine-vat, yet suffer thirst.
From anguish the dying groan, And the wounded cry aloud; And God regardeth not their prayer!
Others hate the light; They know not its ways, And abide not in its paths.
With the light ariseth the murderer; He killeth the poor and needy; In the night he is as a thief.
The eye of the adulterer watcheth for the twilight; He saith, “No eye will see me,” And putteth a mask upon his face.
In the dark they break into houses; In the daytime they shut themselves up; They are strangers to the light.
The morning is to them the very shadow of death; They are familiar with the terrors of the shadow of death.
Light are they on the face of the waters; They have an accursed portion in the earth; They come not near the vineyards.
As drought and heat consume the snow waters, So doth the grave the wicked.
His own mother forgetteth him; The worm feedeth sweetly on him; He is no more remembered, And iniquity is broken like a tree.
He oppresseth the barren, that hath not borne, And doeth not good to the widow.
He taketh away the mighty by his power; He riseth up, and no one is sure of life.
God giveth them security, so that they are confident; His eyes are upon their ways.
They are exalted;—in a little while they are gone! They are brought low, and die, like all others; And like the topmost ears of corn are they cut off.
If it be not so, who will confute me, And show my discourse to be worthless?
Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said:
Dominion and fear are with Him; He maintaineth peace in his high places.
Is there any numbering of his hosts? And upon whom doth not his light arise?
How then can man be righteous before? Or how can he be pure that is born of woman?
Behold, even the moon, it shineth not; And the stars are not pure in his sight,
How much less, man, a worm; And the son of man, a reptile!
Then Job answered and said:
How hast thou helped the weak, And strengthened the feeble arm!
How hast thou counselled the ignorant, And revealed wisdom in fulness!
For whom hast thou uttered these words? And whose spirit spake through thee?
Before Him the shades tremble Beneath the waters and their inhabitants.
The under-world is naked before him, And destruction is without covering.
He stretcheth out the north over empty space, And hangeth the earth upon nothing.
He bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds, And the cloud is not rent under them.
He covereth the face of his throne, And spreadeth his clouds upon it.
He hath drawn a circular bound upon the waters, To the confines of light and darkness.
The pillars of heaven tremble And are confounded at his rebuke.
By his power he stilleth the sea, Yea, by his wisdom he smiteth its pride.
By his spirit he hath garnished the heavens; His hand hath formed the fleeing Serpent.
Lo! these are but the borders of his works; How faint the whisper we have heard of him! But the thunder of his power who can understand?
Moreover Job continued his discourse, and said:
As God liveth, who hath rejected my cause, And the Almighty, who hath afflicted my soul;
As long as my breath is in me, And the spirit of God is in my nostrils,
Never shall my lips speak falsehood, Nor my tongue utter deceit.
God forbid that I should acknowledge you to be just: To my last breath will I assert my integrity.
I will hold fast my innocence, and not let it go; My heart reproacheth me for no part of my life.
May mine enemy be as the wicked, And he that riseth up against me as the unrighteous!
For what is the hope of the wicked, when God cutteth off his web, And taketh away his life?
Will he listen to his cry, When trouble cometh upon him?
Can he delight himself in the Almighty, And call at all times upon God?
I will teach you concerning the hand of God; That which is with the Almighty I will not conceal.
Behold, ye yourselves have all seen it; Why then do ye cherish such vain thoughts?
This is the portion of the wicked man from God,—The inheritance which oppressors receive from the Almighty.
If his children be multiplied, it is for the sword; And his offspring shall not be satisfied with bread.
Those of them that escape shall be buried by Death, And their widows shall not bewail them.
Though he heap up silver as dust, And procure raiment as clay,—
He may procure, but the righteous shall wear it, And the innocent shall share the silver.
He buildeth his house like the moth, Or like the shed which the watchman maketh.
The rich man lieth down, and is not buried; In the twinkling of an eye he is no more.
Terrors pursue him like a flood; A tempest stealeth him away in the night.
The east wind carrieth him away, and he perisheth; Yea, it sweepeth him away from his place.
God sendeth his arrows at him, and doth not spare; He would fain escape from His hand.
Men clap their hands at him, And hiss him away from his place.
Truly there is a vein for silver, And a place for gold, which men refine.
Iron is obtained from earth, And stone is melted into copper.
Man putteth an end to darkness; He searcheth to the lowest depths For the stone of darkness and the shadow of death.
From the place where they dwell they open a shaft; Forgotten by the feet, They hang down, they swing away from men.
The earth, out of which cometh bread, Is torn up underneath, as it were by fire.
Her stones are the place of sapphires, And she hath clods of gold for man.
The path thereto no bird knoweth, And the vulture's eye hath not seen it;
The fierce wild beast hath not trodden it; The lion hath not passed over it.
Man layeth his hand upon the rock; He upturneth mountains from their roots;
He cleaveth out streams in the rocks, And his eye seeth every precious thing;
He bindeth up the streams, that they trickle not, And bringeth hidden things to light.
But where shall wisdom be found? And where is the place of understanding?
Man knoweth not the price thereof, Nor can it be found in the land of the living.
The deep saith, It is not in me; And the sea saith, It is not with me.
It cannot be gotten for gold, Nor shall silver be weighed out as the price thereof.
It cannot be bought with the gold of Ophir, With the precious onyx or the sapphire.
Gold and crystal are not to be compared with it; Nor can it be purchased with jewels of fine gold.
No mention shall be made of coral or of crystal; For wisdom is more precious than pearls.
The topaz of Ethiopia cannot equal it, Nor can it be purchased with pure gold.
Whence then cometh wisdom? And where is the place of understanding?
Since it is hidden from the eyes of all living, And kept close from the fowls of the air.
Destruction and Death say, We have heard a rumor of it with our ears.
God knoweth the way to it; He knoweth its dwelling-place.
For he seeth to the ends of the earth, And surveyeth all things under the whole heaven.
When he gave the winds their weight, And meted out the waters by measure;
When he prescribed a law to the rain, And a path to the thunder-flash,—
Then did he see it, and make it known; He established it, and searched it out.
But he said unto man, Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, And to depart from evil is understanding.
Moreover Job continued his discourse, and said:
O that I were as in months past, In the days when God was my guardian;
When his lamp shined over my head, And when by his light I walked through darkness!
As I was in the autumn of my days, When the friendship of God was over my tent;
When the Almighty was yet with me, And my children were around me;
When I bathed my steps in milk, And the rock poured me out rivers of oil!
When I went forth to the gate by the city, And took my seat in the market-place,
The young men saw me and hid themselves, And the aged arose and stood.
The princes refrained from speaking, And laid their hand upon their mouth.
The nobles held their peace, And their tongue cleaved to the roof of their mouth.
When the ear heard me, then it blessed me; And when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me.
For I delivered the poor, when they cried; And the fatherless, who had none to help him.
The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, And I caused the heart of the widow to sing for joy.
I clothed myself with righteousness, and it clothed itself with me; And justice was my robe and diadem.
I was eyes to the blind, And feet was I to the lame;
I was a father to the poor, And the cause of him I knew not I searched out;
And I broke the teeth of the wicked, And plucked the spoil from his jaws.
Then said I, “I shall die in my nest; I shall multiply my days as the sand.
My root is spread abroad to the waters, And the dew abideth on my branches.
My glory is fresh with me, And my bow gathereth strength in my hand.”
To me men gave ear, and waited, And kept silence for my counsel.
To my words they made no reply, When my speech dropped down upon them.
Yea, they waited for me as for the rain; They opened their mouths wide as for the latter rain.
If I smiled upon them, they believed it not; Nor did they cause the light of my countenance to fall.
When I came among them, I sat as chief; I dwelt as a king in the midst of an army, As a comforter among mourners.
But now they that are younger than I hold me in derision, Whose fathers I would have disdained to set with the dogs of my flock.
Of what use to me would be even the strength of their hands, To whom old age is lost?
By want and hunger they are famished; They gnaw the dry desert, The darkness of desolate wastes.
They gather purslain among the bushes, And the root of the broom is their bread.
They are driven from the society of men; There is a cry after them as after a thief.
They dwell in gloomy valleys, In caves of the earth and in rocks.
They bray among the bushes; Under the brambles are they stretched out.
An impious and low-born race, They are beaten out of the land.
And now I am become their song; Yea, I am their by-word!
They abhor me, they stand aloof from me; They forbear not to spit before my face.
Yea, they let loose the reins, and humble me; They cast off the bridle before me.
On my right hand riseth up the brood; They thrust away my feet; They cast up against me their destructive ways.
They break up my path; They hasten my fall,—They who have no helper!
They come upon me as through a wide breach; Through the ruins they rush in upon me.
Terrors are turned against me; They pursue my prosperity like the wind, And my welfare passeth away like a cloud.
And now my soul poureth itself out upon me; Days of affliction have taken hold of me.
By night my bones are pierced; they are torn from me, And my gnawers take no rest.
Through the violence of my disease is my garment changed; It bindeth me about like the collar of my tunic.
He hath cast me into the mire, And I am become like dust and ashes.
I call upon Thee, but thou dost not hear me; I stand up before thee, but thou regardest me not.
Thou art become cruel to me; With thy strong hand dost thou lie in wait for me.
Thou liftest me up, and causest me to ride upon the wind; Thou meltest me away in the storm.
I know that thou wilt bring me to death, To the place of assembly for all the living.
When He stretcheth out his hand, prayer availeth nothing; When He bringeth destruction, vain is the cry for help.
Did not I weep for him that was in trouble? Was not my soul grieved for the poor?
But when I looked for good, then evil came; When I looked for light, then came darkness.
My bowels boil, and have no rest; Days of anguish have come upon me.
I am black, but not by the sun; I stand up, and utter my cries in the congregation.
I am become a brother to jackals, And a companion to ostriches.
My skin is black, and falleth from me, And my bones burn with heat.
My harp also is turned to mourning, And my pipe to notes of grief.
I made a covenant with mine eyes; How then could I gaze upon a maid?
For what is the portion appointed by God from above, And the inheritance allotted by the Almighty from on high?
Is not destruction for the wicked, And ruin for the workers of iniquity?
Doth He not see my ways, And number all my steps?
If I have walked with falsehood, And if my foot hath hasted to deceit,
Let him weigh me in an even balance; Yea, let God know my integrity!
If my steps have turned aside from the way, And my heart gone after mine eyes, Or if any stain hath cleaved to my hand,
Then I may sow, and another eat; And what I plant, may it be rooted up!
If my heart hath been enticed by a woman, Or if I have watched at my neighbor's door,
Then let my wife grind for another, And let other men lie with her!
For this were a heinous crime, Even a transgression to be punished by the judges;
Yea, it were a fire that would consume to destruction, And root out all my increase.
If I have refused justice to my man-servant or maid-servant, When they had a controversy with me,
Then what shall I do when God riseth up? And when he visiteth, what shall I answer him?
Did not He that made me in the womb make him? Did not one fashion us in the womb?
If I have refused the poor their desire, And caused the eyes of the widow to fail;
If I have eaten my morsel alone, And the fatherless hath not partaken of it;
(Nay, from my youth he grew up with me as with a father, And I have helped the widow from my mother's womb;)
If I have seen any one perishing for want of clothing, Or any poor man without covering;
If his loins have not blessed me, And he hath not been warmed with the fleece of my sheep;
If I have shaken my hand against the fatherless, Because I saw my help in the gate,—
Then may my shoulder fill from its blade, And my fore-arm be broken from its bone!
For destruction from God was a terror to me, And before his majesty I could do nothing.
If I have made gold my trust, Or said to the fine gold, Thou art my confidence;
If I have rejoiced, because my wealth was great, And my hand had found abundance;
If I have beheld the sun in his splendor, Or the moon advancing in brightness,
And my heart hath been secretly enticed, And my mouth hath kissed my hand,
This also were a crime to be punished by the judge; For I should have denied the God who is above.
If I have rejoiced at the destruction of him that hated me, And exulted when evil came upon him;
(Nay, I have not suffered my mouth to sin, By asking with curses his life;)
If the men of my tent have not exclaimed, “Who is there that hath not been satisfied with his meat?”
The stranger did not lodge in the street; I opened my doors to the traveller.
Have I, after the manner of men, hidden my transgression, Concealing my iniquity in my bosom,
Then let me be confounded before the great multitude! Let the contempt of families cover me with shame! Yea, let me keep silence! let me never appear abroad!
O that there were one who would hear me! Behold my signature! let the Almighty answer me. And let mine adversary write down his charge!
Truly I would wear it upon my shoulder; I would bind it upon me as a crown.
I would disclose to him all my steps; I would approach him like a prince.
If my land cry out against me, And its furrows bewail together;
If I have eaten of its fruits without payment, And wrung out the life of its owners,
Let thorns grow up instead of wheat, And noxious weeds instead of barley. The words of Job are ended.
So these three men ceased to answer Job, because he was righteous in his own eyes.
Then was kindled the wrath of Elihu, the son of Barachel, the Buzite, of the family of Ram; against Job was his wrath kindled, because he accounted himself righteous rather than God.
Against his three friends also was his wrath kindled, because they had not found an answer, and yet had condemned Job.
Now Elihu had delayed to reply to Job, because they were older than himself.
But when Elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouth of these three men, his wrath was kindled.
Then spake Elihu, the son of Barachel, the Buzite, and said: I am young, and ye are very old; Therefore I was afraid, And durst not make known to you my opinion.
I said, “Days should speak, And the multitude of years should teach wisdom.”
But it is the spirit in man, Even the inspiration of the Almighty, that giveth him understanding.
Great men are not always wise, Nor do the aged always understand what is right.
Therefore, I pray, listen to me: I also will declare my opinion.
Behold, I have waited for your words, I have listened to your arguments, Whilst ye searched out what to say;
Yea, I have attended to you; And behold, none of you hath refuted Job, Nor answered his words.
Say not, then, “We have found out wisdom; God must conquer him, not man.”
He hath not directed his discourse against me, And with speeches like yours will I not answer him.
They were confounded! they answered no more! They could say nothing!
I waited, but they spake not; They stood still; they answered no more!
Therefore will I answer, on my part; I also will show my opinion.
For I am full of matter; The spirit within me constraineth me.
Behold, my bosom is as wine that hath no vent; Like bottles of new wine, which are bursting.
I will speak, that I may be relieved; I will open my lips and answer.
I will not be partial to any man's person, Nor will I flatter any man.
For I know not how to flatter; Soon would my Maker take me away.
Hear, therefore, my discourse, I pray thee, O Job! And attend unto all my words!
Behold, I am opening my mouth; My tongue is now speaking in my palate.
My words shall be in the uprightness of my heart; My lips shall utter knowledge purely.
The spirit of God made me, And the breath of the Almighty gave me life.
If thou art able, answer me; Set thyself in array against me; stand up!
Behold, I, like thee, am a creature of God; I also was formed of clay.
Behold, my terror cannot dismay thee, Nor can my greatness be heavy upon thee.
Surely thou hast said in my hearing, I have heard the sound of thy words:
“I am pure, and without transgression; I am clean, and there is no iniquity in me.
Behold, He seeketh causes of hostility against me; He regardeth me as his enemy.
He putteth my feet in the stocks; He watcheth all my paths.”
Behold, in this thou art not right; I will answer thee; For God is greater than man.
Why dost thou contend with Him? For he giveth no account of any of his doings.
For God speaketh once, Yea, twice, when man regardeth it not.
In a dream, in a vision of the night, When deep sleep falleth upon men, In slumber upon the bed;
Then openeth he the ears of men, And sealeth up for them admonition;
That he may turn man from his purpose, And hide pride from man.
Thus he saveth him from the pit, Yea, his life from perishing by the sword.
He is chastened also with pain upon his bed, And with a continual agitation of his bones,
So that his mouth abhorreth bread, And his taste the choicest food;
His flesh is consumed, that it cannot be seen, And his bones, that were invisible, are naked;
Yea, his soul draweth near to the pit, And his life to the destroyers.
But if there be with him a messenger, An interpreter, one of a thousand, Who may show unto man his duty,
Then will God be gracious to him, and say, “Save him from going down to the pit: I have found a ransom.”
His flesh shall became fresher than a child's; He shall return to the days of his youth.
He shall pray to God, and he will be favorable to him, And permit him to see his face with joy, And restore unto man his righteousness.
He shall sing among men, and say, “I sinned; I acted perversely; Yet hath he not requited me for it:
He hath delivered me from going down to the pit, And my life beholdeth the light.”
Lo! all these things doeth God Time after time with man,
That he may bring him back from the pit, That he may enjoy the light of the living.
Mark well, O Job! hearken to me! Keep silence, and I will speak.
Yet if thou hast any thing to say, answer me! Speak! for I desire to pronounce thee innocent.
But if not, do thou listen to me! Keep silence, and I will teach thee wisdom!
And Elihu proceeded, and said:
Hear my words, ye wise men! Give ear to me, ye that have knowledge!
For the ear trieth words, As the mouth tasteth meat.
Let us examine for ourselves what is right; Let us know among ourselves what is true.
Job hath said, “I am righteous, And God refuseth me justice.
Though I am innocent, I am made a liar; My wound is incurable, though I am free from transgression.”
Where is the man like Job, Who drinketh impiety like water;
Who goeth in company with evil-doers, And walketh with wicked men?
For he hath said, “A man hath no advantage, When he delighteth himself in God.”
Wherefore hearken to me, ye men of understanding! Far be iniquity from God; Yea, far be injustice from the Almighty!
For what a man hath done he will requite him, And render to every one according to his deeds.
Surely God will not do iniquity, Nor will the Almighty pervert justice.
Who hath given him the charge of the earth? Or who hath created the whole world?
Should he set his heart against man, Should he take back his spirit and his breath,
Then would all flesh expire together; Yea, man would return to the dust.
If thou hast understanding, hear this! Give ear to the voice of my words!
Shall he, that hateth justice, govern? Wilt thou then condemn the just and mighty One?
Is it fit to say to a king, Thou art wicked; Or to princes, Ye are unrighteous?
How much less to him that is not partial to princes, Nor regardeth the rich more than the poor? For they are all the work of his hands.
In a moment they die; yea, at midnight Do the people stagger and pass away, And the mighty are destroyed without hand.
For his eyes are upon the ways of man; He seeth all his steps.
There is no darkness, nor shadow of death, Where evil-doers may hide themselves.
He needeth not attend long to a man, That he may go into judgment before God;
He dasheth in pieces the mighty without inquiry, And setteth up others in their stead.
Therefore he knoweth their works, And in a night he overthroweth them, so that they are destroyed.
On account of their wickedness he smiteth them, In the presence of many beholders;
Because they turned away from him, And had no regard to his ways,
And caused the cry of the poor to come before him; For he heareth the cry of the oppressed.
When he giveth rest, who can cause trouble? And when he hideth his face, Who can behold him?
So is it with nations and individuals alike! That the wicked may no more rule, And may not be snares to the people.
Surely thou shouldst say unto God, “I have received chastisement; I will no more offend;
What I see not, teach thou me! If I have done iniquity, I will do it no more.”
Shall he recompense according to thy mind, Because thou refusest, or because thou choosest, and not he? Speak, if thou hast knowledge!
Men of understanding, Wise men, who hear me, will say,
“Job hath spoken without knowledge, And his words are without wisdom.”
I desire that Job may be tried to the last, For answering like wicked men.
For he addeth impiety to his sin; He clappeth his hands among us, And multiplieth words against God.
Moreover Elihu proceeded, and said:
Dost thou then think this to be right? Thou hast said, “I am more righteous than God.”
For thou askest, “What advantage have I? What have I gained, more than if I had sinned?”
I will answer thee, And thy companions with thee.
Look up to the heavens, and see! And behold the clouds, which are high above thee!
If thou sinnest, what doest thou against Him? If thy transgressions be multiplied, what doest thou to him?
If thou art righteous, what dost thou give him? Or what receiveth he at thy hand?
Thy wickedness injureth only a man like thyself, And thy righteousness profiteth only a son of man.
The oppressed cry out on account of the multitude of wrongs; They cry aloud on account of the arm of the mighty.
But none saith, “Where is God, my Maker, Who giveth songs in the night;
Who teacheth us more than the beasts of the earth, And maketh us wiser than the birds of heaven?”
There they cry aloud on account of the pride of the wicked; But he giveth no answer.
For God will not hear the vain supplication, Nor will the Almighty regard it;
Much less when thou sayest thou canst not see him: Justice is with him,—only wait thou for him!
But now, because he hath not visited in his anger, Nor taken strict note of transgression,
Therefore hath Job opened his mouth rashly, And multiplied words without knowledge.
Elihu also proceeded, and said:
Bear with me a little while, that I may show thee! For I have yet words in behalf of God.
I will bring my knowledge from afar, And assert the justice of my Maker.
Truly my words shall not be false: A man of sound knowledge is before thee.
Behold, God is great, but despiseth not any; Great is he in strength of understanding.
He suffereth not the wicked to prosper, But rendereth justice to the oppressed.
He withdraweth not his eyes from the righteous; But establisheth them for ever with kings on the throne, That they may be exalted.
And if they be bound in fetters, And holden in the cords of affliction,
Then showeth he them their deeds, And how they have set him at defiance by their transgressions;
He also openeth their ears to admonition, And commandeth them to return from iniquity.
If they obey and serve him, They spend their days in prosperity, And their years in pleasures.
But if they obey not, they perish by the sword; They die in their own folly.
The corrupt in heart treasure up wrath; They cry not to God, when he bindeth them.
They die in their youth; They close their lives with the unclean.
But he delivereth the poor in their distress; He openeth their ears in affliction.
He will bring thee also from the jaws of distress To a broad place, where is no straitness; And the provision of thy table shall be full of fatness.
But if thou art full of the judgment of the wicked, Judgment and justice shall take hold of thee.
For if wrath be with him, beware lest he take thee away by his stroke, So that a great ransom shall not save thee!
Will he esteem thy riches? No! neither thy gold, nor all the abundance of thy wealth.
Long not thou for that night To which nations are taken away from their place.
Take heed, turn not thine eyes to iniquity! For this hast thou chosen rather than affliction.
Behold, God is exalted in his power: Who is a teacher like him?
Who hath prescribed to him his way? Or who can say to him, “Thou hast done wrong”?
Forget not to magnify his work, Which men celebrate with songs.
All mankind gaze upon it; Mortals behold it from afar.
Behold, God is great; we cannot know him, Nor search out the number of his years.
Lo! he draweth up the drops of water, Which distil rain from his vapor;
The clouds pour it down, And drop it upon man in abundance.
Who can understand the spreading of his clouds, And the rattling of his pavilion?
Behold, he spreadeth around himself his light, And he clotheth himself with the depths of the sea.
By these he punisheth nations, And by these he giveth food in abundance.
His hands he covereth with lightning; He giveth it commandment against an enemy.
His thunder maketh him known; Yea, to the herds, as he ascendeth on high.
At this my heart trembleth, And leapeth out of its place.
Hear, O hear, the thunder of his voice, And the noise which goeth forth from his mouth!
He directeth it under the whole heaven, And his lightning to the ends of the earth.
After it the thunder roareth; He thundereth with his voice of majesty, And restraineth it not, when his voice is heard.
God thundereth with his voice marvellously; Great things doeth he, which we cannot comprehend.
For he saith to the snow, “Be thou on the earth!” To the shower also, even the showers of his might.
He sealeth up the hand of every man, That all men whom he hath made may acknowledge him.
Then the beasts go into dens, And abide in their caverns.
Out of the south cometh the whirlwind, And cold out of the north.
By the breath of God ice is formed, And the broad waters become narrow,
Yea, with moisture he burdeneth the clouds; He spreadeth abroad his lightning-clouds.
They move about by his direction, To execute all his commands throughout the world;
Whether he cause them to come for punishment, Or for the land, or for mercy.
Give ear to this, O Job! Stand still, and consider the wondrous works of God!
Dost thou know when God gave commandment to them, And caused the lightning of his cloud to flash?
Dost thou understand the balancing of the clouds, The wondrous works of Him that is perfect in knowledge?
How thy garments become warm, When he maketh the earth still by the south wind?
Canst thou like him spread out the sky, Which is firm like a molten mirror?
Teach us what we shall say to him! For we cannot set in order our words by reason of darkness.
Shall it be told him that I would speak? Shall a man speak, that he may be consumed?
For now men do not look upon the light, When it is bright in the skies, When the wind hath passed over them, and made them clear.
From the north cometh gold; But with God is terrible majesty!
The Almighty, we cannot find him out; Great is he in power and justice, Abundant in righteousness; he doth not oppress.
Therefore let men fear him! Upon none of the wise in heart will he look.
Then spake Jehovah to Job out of the whirlwind, and said:
Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?
Gird up thy loins like a man! I will ask thee, and answer thou me!
Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? Declare, if thou hast understanding!
Who fixed its dimensions, that thou shouldst know it! Or who stretched out the line upon it?
Upon what were its foundations fixed? And who laid its corner-stone,
When the morning stars sang together, And all the sons of God shouted for joy?
And who shut up the sea with doors, When it burst forth as from the womb?
When I made the clouds its mantle, And thick darkness its swaddling-band;
When I appointed for it my bound, And fixed for it bars and doors;
And said, Thus far shalt thou come, and no farther, And here shall thy proud waves be stayed!
Hast thou, in thy life, given charge to the morning, Or caused the day-spring to know its place,
That it should lay hold of the ends of the earth, And shake the wicked out of it?
It is changed as clay by the seal; And all things stand forth as in rich apparel.
But from the wicked their light is withheld, And the high-raised arm is broken.
Hast thou visited the springs of the sea, And walked through the recesses of the deep?
Have the gates of death been disclosed to thee, And hast thou seen the gates of the shadow of death?
Hast thou surveyed the breadth of the earth? Declare, if thou knowest it all!
Where is the way to the abode of light? And darkness—where is its dwelling-place?
That thou shouldst lead it to its boundary, And that thou shouldst know the paths to its mansion!
Surely thou knowest; for thou wast then born! And the number of thy years is great!
Hast thou visited the storehouses of the snow, Or seen the treasuries of the hail,
Which I have reserved against the time of trouble,—Against the day of battle and war?
What is the way to where light is distributed, And the east wind spread abroad upon the earth?
Who hath prepared channels for the rain, And a path for the thunder-flash,
To give rain to the land without an inhabitant, To the wilderness wherein is no man;
To satisfy the desolate and waste ground, And cause the tender herb to spring forth?
Hath the rain a father? Or who hath begotten the drops of the dew?
Out of whose womb came the ice? And who hath gendered the hoar-frost of heaven?
The waters are hid as under stone, And the face of the deep becometh solid.
Canst thou fasten the bands of the Pleiades, Or loosen the chains of Orion?
Canst thou lead forth the Signs in their season, Or guide the Bear with her sons?
Knowest thou the ordinances of the heavens? Hast thou appointed their dominion over the earth?
Canst thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, So that abundance of waters will cover thee?
Canst thou send forth lightnings, so that they will go, And say to thee, “Here we are”?
Who hath put understanding in the reins, And given intelligence to the mind?
Who numbereth the clouds in wisdom? And who poureth out the bottles of heaven,
When the dust floweth into a molten mass, And the clods cleave fast together?
Canst thou hunt prey for the lioness, Or satisfy the hunger of the young lions,
When they couch in their dens, And lie in wait in the thicket?
Who provideth for the raven his food, When his young ones cry unto God, While they wander about without food?
Knowest thou the time when the wild goats of the rock bring forth? Or canst thou observe when the hinds are in labor?
Canst thou number the months they fulfill, And know the season when they bring forth?
They bow themselves; they bring forth their young; They cast forth their pains.
Their young ones are strong; they grow up in the fields; They go away, and return not to them.
Who hath sent forth the wild ass free? Who hath loosed the bands of the wild ass,
To whom I have given the wilderness for his house, And the barren land for his dwelling-place?
He scorneth the tumult of the city, And heedeth not the shouting of the driver;
The range of the mountains is his pasture; He seeketh after every green thing,
Will the wild-ox consent to serve thee? Will he pass the night at thy crib?
Canst thou bind the wild-ox with the harness to the furrow? Or will he harrow the valleys after thee?
Wilt thou rely upon him because his strength is great, And commit to him thy labor?
Wilt thou trust him to bring home thy grain, And gather in thy harvest?
The wing of the ostrich moveth joyfully; But is it with loving pinion and feathers?
Nay, she layeth her eggs on the ground; She warmeth them in the dust,
And forgetteth that the foot may crush them, And that the wild beast may break them.
She is cruel to her young, as if they were not hers; Her labor is in vain, yet she feareth not;
Because God hath denied her wisdom, And hath not given her understanding.
Yet when she lasheth herself up on high, She laugheth at the horse and his rider.
Hast thou given the horse strength? Hast thou clothed his neck with his trembling mane?
Hast thou taught him to bound like the locust? How majestic his snorting! how terrible!
He paweth in the valley; he exulteth in his strength, And rusheth into the midst of arms.
He laugheth at fear; he trembleth not, And turneth not back from the sword.
Against him rattle the quiver, The flaming spear, and the lance.
With rage and fury he devoureth the ground; He will not believe that the trumpet soundeth.
At every blast of the trumpet, he saith, Aha! And snuffeth the battle afar off,—The thunder of the captains, and the war-shout.
Is it by thy wisdom that the hawk flieth, And spreadeth his wings toward the south?
Doth the eagle soar at thy command, And build his nest on high?
He dwelleth and lodgeth upon the rock, Upon the peak of the rock, and the stronghold.
From thence he spieth out prey; His eyes discern it from afar.
His young ones suck up blood; And where the slain are, there is he.
Moreover Jehovah spake to Job, and said:
Will the censurer of the Almighty contend with him? Will the reprover of God answer?
Then Job answered Jehovah, and said:
Behold, I am vile! what can I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth.
Once have I spoken, but I will not speak again; Yea, twice, but I will say no more.
Then spake Jehovah to Job out of the whirlwind, and said:
Gird up now thy loins like a man! I will ask thee, and do thou instruct me!
Wilt thou even disannul my right? Wilt thou condemn me, that thou mayst be righteous?
Hast thou an arm like God's? Or canst thou thunder with thy voice like him?
Deck thyself with grandeur and majesty, And array thyself in splendor and glory!
Send forth the fury of thy wrath! Look upon every proud one, and abase him!
Look upon every proud one, and bring him low; Yea, tread down the wicked in their place!
Hide them in the dust together; Shut up their faces in darkness!
Then, indeed, will I give thee the praise, That thine own right hand can save thee.
Behold the river-horse, which I have made as well as thyself; He feedeth on grass like the ox.
Behold, what strength is in his loins! And what force in the muscles of his belly!
He bendeth his tail, like the cedar, And the sinews of his thighs are twisted together.
His bones are pipes of brass, And his limbs are bars of iron.
He is chief among the works of God; He that made him gave him his sword.
For the mountains supply him with food, Where all the beasts of the field play.
He lieth down under the lote-plants, In the covert of reeds, and in the fens.
The lote-plants cover him with their shadow, And the willows of the brook compass him about.
Lo! the stream overfloweth, but he starteth not; He is unmoved though Jordan rush forth even to his mouth.
Can one take him before his eyes, Or pierce his nose with hooks?
Canst thou draw forth the crocodile with a hook, Or press down his tongue with a cord?
Canst thou put a rope into his nose, Or pierce his cheek with a hook?
Will he make many entreaties to thee? Will he speak soft words to thee?
Will he make a covenant with thee? Canst thou take him for a servant for ever?
Canst thou play with him, as with a bird? Or canst thou bind him for thy maidens?
Do men in company lay snares for him? Do they divide him among the merchants?
Canst thou fill his skirt with barbed irons, Or his head with fish-spears?
Do but lay thy hand upon him,—Thou wilt no more think of battle!
Behold, his hope is vain! Is he not cast down at the very sight of him?
None is so fierce that he dare stir him up; Who then is he that can stand before me?
Who hath done me a favor, that I must repay him? Whatever is under the whole heaven is mine.
I will not be silent concerning his limbs, And his strength, and the beauty of his armor.
Who can uncover the surface of his garment? Who will approach his jaws?
Who will open the doors of his face? The rows of his teeth are terrible!
His glory is his strong shields, United with each other, as with a close seal.
They are joined one to another, So that no air can come between them.
They cleave fast to each other, They hold together, and cannot be separated.
His sneezing sendeth forth light, And his eyes are like the eyelashes of the morning.
Out of his mouth go flames, And sparks of fire leap forth.
From his nostrils issueth smoke, as from a heated pot, or caldron.
His breath kindleth coals, And flames issue from his mouth.
In his neck dwelleth strength, And terror danceth before him.
The flakes of his flesh cleave fast together; They are firm upon him, and cannot be moved.
His heart is solid like a stone; Yea, solid like the nether millstone.
When he riseth up, the mighty are afraid; Yea, they lose themselves for terror.
The sword of him that assaileth him doth not stand, The spear, the dart, nor the habergeon.
He regardeth iron as straw, And brass as rotten wood.
The arrow cannot make him flee; Sling-stones to him become stubble;
Clubs are accounted by him as straw; He laugheth at the shaking of the spear.
Under him are sharp potsherds; He spreadeth out a thrashing-sledge upon the mire.
He maketh the deep to boil like a caldron; He maketh the sea like a pot of ointment.
Behind him he leaveth a shining path; One would think the deep to be hoary.
Upon the earth there is not his master; He is made without fear.
He looketh down upon all that is high; He is king over all the sons of pride.
Then Job answered Jehovah, and said:
I know that thou canst do every thing, And that no purpose of thine can be hindered.
Who is he that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge? Thus have I uttered what I understood not; Things too wonderful for me, which I knew not:
Hear thou, then, I beseech thee, and I will speak! I will ask thee, and do thou instruct me!
I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear; But now hath mine eye seen thee.
Wherefore I abhor myself, And repent in dust and ashes.
And when Jehovah had spoken these words unto Job, he said to Eliphaz the Temanite: “My wrath is kindled against thee, and against thy two friends; for ye have not spoken concerning me that which is right, as hath my servant Job.
Take ye, therefore, seven bullocks and seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer for yourselves a burnt-offering, and my servant Job shall pray for you; for to him alone will I have regard; that I deal not with you according to your folly. For ye have not spoken concerning me that which is right, as hath my servant Job.”
So Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite, went and did as Jehovah commanded them; and Jehovah had regard to Job.
And Jehovah turned the captivity of Job, when he prayed for his friends, and Jehovah gave him twice as much as he had before.
Then came to him all his brethren, and all his sisters, and all his former acquaintances, and ate bread with him in his house; and condoled with him, and comforted him over all the evil which Jehovah had brought upon him; and every one gave him a piece of money [[a kesita]], and every one a ring of gold.
Thus Jehovah blessed the latter end of Job more than the beginning; for he had fourteen thousand sheep, six thousand camels, a thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand she-asses.
He had also seven sons, and three daughters.
And he called the name of the first Jemima, of the second Kezia, and of the third Kerenhappuch.
And in all the land were no women found so fair as the daughters of Job; and their father gave them an inheritance among their brethren.
And Job lived after this a hundred and forty years, and saw his sons, and his sons' sons, even four generations.
Then Job died, being old and satisfied with days.
“BOOK I” Happy the man who walketh not in the counsel of the unrighteous, Nor standeth in the way of sinners, Nor sitteth in the seat of scoffers;
But whose delight is in the law of the LORD, And who meditateth on his precepts day and night.
He is like a tree planted by streams of water, That bringeth forth its fruit in its season, Whose leaves also do not wither: All that he doeth shall prosper.
Not so the unrighteous; They are like chaff, which the wind driveth away.
Therefore the wicked shall not stand in judgment, Nor sinners in the assembly of the just.
For the LORD knoweth the way of the righteous, But the way of the wicked leadeth to ruin.
Why do the heathen rage, And the nations meditate a vain thing?
Why do the kings of the earth rise up, And the princes combine together, Against Jehovah, and against his anointed king?
“Let us break their bonds asunder; Let us cast away from us their fetters!”
He that sitteth in heaven will laugh; The Lord will have them in derision.
Then shall he speak to them in his wrath, And confound them in his hot displeasure.
“I myself have anointed my king, Upon Zion, my holy hill!”
I will declare the decree of Jehovah: He hath said to me, “Thou art my son; This day I have begotten thee.
Ask of me, and I will give thee the nations for thine inheritance, And the ends of the earth for thy possession.
Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; Thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel.”
Be wise, therefore, O ye kings! Be admonished, ye rulers of the earth!
Be subject to Jehovah with awe, And fear with trembling!
Kiss the son, lest He be angry, and ye perish in your way; For soon shall his wrath be kindled. Happy are all they who seek refuge in him.

“A Psalm of David, when he fled from his son Absalom.” How many, O LORD, are mine enemies! How many are they who rise up against me!
How many are they who say of me, “There is no help for him with God”! [[Pause.]]
But thou, O LORD! art my shield, My glory, and the lifter-up of my head.
I call upon the LORD with my voice, And he heareth me from his holy hill. [[Pause.]]
I lay me down and sleep; I awake, for the LORD sustaineth me.
I will not fear the ten thousands of people Who on every side set themselves against me.
Arise, O LORD! Save me, O my God! For thou smitest the cheek of all my enemies; Thou breakest the teeth of the wicked.
Deliverance cometh from the LORD: May thy blessing be with thy people! [[Pause.]]

“For the leader of the music; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. A psalm of David.” Hear me, when I call, O God of my righteousness! Thou hast helped me, when I was in trouble,—Have pity upon me, and hear my prayer!
How long, O men! will ye dishonor my dignity? How long will ye love vanity, and seek disappointment? [[Pause.]]
Know ye that the LORD hath exalted one that is devoted to him; The LORD will hear, when I call upon him.
Stand in awe, and sin no more; Commune with your hearts upon your beds, and desist! [[Pause.]]
Offer sacrifices of righteousness, And put your trust in the LORD!
There are many who say, Who will show us any good? LORD, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us!
Thou puttest gladness into my heart, Greater than theirs, when their corn and wine are abundant.
I will lay me down in peace, and sleep: For thou alone, O LORD! makest me dwell in safety.

“For the leader of the music; to be accompanied with wind instruments. A psalm of David.” Give ear to my words, O LORD; Have regard to my cry!
Listen to the voice of my supplication, my King and my God! For to thee do I address my prayer.
In the morning shalt thou hear my voice, O LORD! In the morning will I address my prayer to thee, and look for help.
For thou art not a God that hath pleasure in wickedness; The unrighteous man dwelleth not with thee.
The haughty shall not stand in thy sight; Thou hatest all that do iniquity.
Thou destroyest them that speak falsehood; The man of blood and deceit the LORD abhorreth.
But I, through thy great goodness, will come to thy house; In thy fear will I worship at thy holy temple.
Lead me, O LORD! in thy righteousness, because of mine enemies; Make thy path straight before my face!
For in their mouth there is no truth; Their heart is malignity; Their throat is an open sepulchre; They flatter with their tongue.
Requite them, O God! Let them be confounded in their devices; Cast them out for the multitude of their transgressions; For against thee have they rebelled!
But let all, that put their trust in thee, rejoice; Let them ever shout for joy, because thou defendest them; Let them, that love thy name, be joyful in thee!
For thou, O LORD! dost bless the righteous; With favor dost thou encompass him, as with a shield.

“For the leader of the music; to be accompanied with stringed instruments; to the octave. A psalm of David.” O LORD! rebuke me not in thine anger; Chasten me not in thy hot displeasure!
Have pity upon me, O LORD! for I am weak; Heal me, O LORD! for my bones tremble!
My soul, also, is sore troubled; And thou, O LORD! how long—?
Return, O LORD! and deliver me; Oh, save me according to thy mercy!
For in death no praise is given to thee; In the underworld who can give thee thanks?
I am weary with my groaning; All the night I make my bed to swim, And drench my couch with my tears.
Mine eye is wasted with grief; It hath become old because of all my enemies.
Depart from me, all ye that do iniquity; For the LORD heareth the voice of my weeping.
The LORD heareth my supplication; The LORD accepteth my prayer.
All my enemies shall be ashamed and utterly confounded; They shall be turned back, and put to shame suddenly.

“A psalm of David, which he sang to Jehovah, on account of the reproaches of Cush the Benjamite.” O Jehovah, my God! to thee do I look for help; Save me from them that persecute me, and deliver me!
Lest mine enemy tear me like a lion; Lest he rend me in pieces, while there is none to help.
O Jehovah, my God! if I have done this,—If there be iniquity upon my hands,
If I have rendered evil to my friend, Or have despoiled him that without cause is mine enemy,—
Let my adversary pursue and take me; Let him trample me to the ground, And lay me prostrate in the dust! [[Pause.]]
Arise, O LORD! in thine anger; Lift thyself up against the rage of mine enemies; Awake for me, ordain judgment!
Let the assembly of the nations compass thee about, And on their account return to the height!
The LORD judgeth the nations; Judge me, O LORD! according to my righteousness, And requite me according to my integrity!
Oh, let the wickedness of the wicked be at an end; But establish the righteous! For the righteous God trieth the heart and the reins.
My shield is with God, Who saveth the upright in heart.
God is a righteous judge, And a God who is angry every day.
If he do not desist, He sharpeneth his sword; He bendeth his bow, and maketh it ready;
He prepareth for him the instruments of death; He shooteth his burning arrows.
Behold, he travailed with iniquity, And conceived mischief, But hath brought forth disappointment!
He made a pit and digged it. And is fallen into the ditch which he made.
His mischief returneth upon his own head, And his violence cometh down upon his own skull.
I will praise the LORD according to his righteousness; I will sing praise to the name of the LORD most high.

“For the leader of the music; to be accompanied with the gittith. A psalm of David.” O Jehovah, our Lord! How excellent is thy name in all the earth! Thou hast set thy glory above the heavens.
Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained praise, To put thine adversaries to shame, And to silence the enemy and avenger.
When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, The moon and the stars which thou hast ordained:
What is man, that thou art mindful of him, And the son of man, that thou carest for him?
Yet thou hast made him little lower than God; Thou hast crowned him with glory and honor.
Thou hast given him dominion over the works of thy hands; Thou hast put all things under his feet,—
All sheep and oxen, Yea, and the beasts of the forest;
The birds of the air, and the fishes of the sea, And whatever passeth through the paths of the deep.
O Jehovah, our Lord, How excellent is thy name in all the earth!

“For the leader of the music; to be sung in the manner or with the voice of maidens. To the Benites, or to Ben. A psalm of David.” I will praise thee, O LORD! with my whole heart; I will show forth all thy marvellous works.
I will be glad and rejoice in thee: I will sing praise to thy name, O thou Most High!
All my enemies are turned back; They fall and perish at thy presence.
For thou dost defend my right and my cause; Thou sittest upon the throne, a righteous judge.
Thou rebukest the nations; Thou destroyest the wicked; Thou blottest out their name for evermore!
The enemy is fallen,—a desolation for ever! Thou, O LORD! hast destroyed their cities; Their memory itself hath perished!
The LORD reigneth for ever; He hath prepared his throne for judgment.
He judgeth the world in righteousness; He administereth judgment to the nations with uprightness.
Yea, the LORD is a refuge for the oppressed; A refuge in times of trouble.
They who know thy name put their trust in thee; For thou, O LORD! forsakest not them that seek thee!
Sing praises to the LORD, who reigneth in Zion; Declare his doings among the people!
As the avenger of blood, he remembereth the distressed; He forgetteth not their complaint.
“Have pity upon me, [[said I,]] O LORD! Look upon my affliction through them that hate me; Lift me up from the gates of death:
That I may show forth all thy praise in the gates of the daughter of Zion; That I may rejoice in salvation by thee.”
The nations have sunk into the pit which they made; In the net, which they hid, is their own foot taken.
Thus it is known that the LORD executeth judgment; The wicked are ensnared in the work of their own hands. [[Stringed instruments. Pause.]]
The wicked shall be driven into the underworld; Yea, all the nations that forger God.
For the poor shall not always be forgotten; The hopes of the afflicted shall not perish for ever.
Arise, O LORD! Let not man prevail; Let the nations be judged by thee!
Strike terror into them, O LORD! Let the nations know that they are but men! [[Pause.]]
Why standest thou afar off, O LORD? Why hidest thou thyself in times of trouble?
Through the haughtiness of the wicked the poor are in distress; They are caught in the wiles which are contrived for them.
The wicked boasteth of his heart's desire; The rapacious renounceth and contemneth Jehovah.
The wicked [[saith]] in his haughtiness, “He careth not!” All his thoughts are, “There is no God.”
His course is always prosperous; Far in the heights are thy judgments from him; As for all his enemies, he puffeth at them.
He saith in his heart, “I shall never fall; I shall never be in adversity.”
His mouth is full of perjury, deceit, and oppression; Mischief and injustice are upon his tongue.
He sitteth in the lurking-places of the villages; In secret places doth he murder the innocent; His eyes are secretly fixed upon the poor.
He secretly lieth in wait, like a lion in a thicket; He lieth in wait to seize upon the helpless; He catcheth the poor, drawing him into his net.
He croucheth, and lowereth himself, And the wretched fall into his paws.
He saith in his heart, “God doth forget; He hideth his face; he doth never see it.”
Arise, O LORD! O God, lift up thine hand: Forget not the distressed!
Wherefore doth the wicked contemn God, And say in his heart, “He careth not for it”?
Thou dost see it; yea, thou beholdest malice and oppression, And markest it upon thy hand! The poor committeth himself to thee; Thou art the helper of the fatherless.
Break thou the arm of the unjust and wicked man; Seek out his wickedness, till thou canst find none!
Jehovah is king for ever and ever; The gentiles shall perish out of his land.
Thou, O LORD! wilt hear the desires of the distressed; Thou wilt strengthen their hearts; Thou wilt lend a listening ear!
Thou wilt maintain the cause of the fatherless and the oppressed, That henceforth none may be driven from the land.
“For the leader of the music. A psalm of David.” In the LORD do I put my trust. Why say ye to me, “Flee, like a bird, to your mountain?
For, lo! the wicked bend their bow; They make ready their arrows on the string, To shoot in secret at the upright in heart.
If the pillars be broken down, What can the righteous do?”
The LORD is in his holy palace; The LORD'S throne is in heaven; His eyes behold, his eyelids prove the children of men.
The LORD trieth the righteous; But the wicked, and the lover of violence, his soul hateth.
Upon the wicked he will rain lightning; Fire and brimstone and a burning wind shall be the portion of their cup.
For the LORD is righteous; he loveth righteousness; The upright shall see his face.

“For the leader of the music; to the octave. A psalm of David.” Help, LORD; for the godly man ceaseth; The faithful are failing among men.
They speak falsehood one to another; With flattering lips, with a double heart, do they speak.
May the LORD destroy all flattering lips, And the tongue which speaketh proud things!
Who say, “With our tongues will we prevail; Our lips are our reliance; Who is lord over us?”
For the oppression of the poor and the sighing of the wretched, Now will I stand up, saith the LORD; I will set in safety him whom they puff at.
The words of the LORD are pure; Like silver purified in a furnace on the earth, Seven times refined.
Thou, O LORD! will watch over them; Thou wilt preserve them from this generation for ever.
The wicked walk on every side, When the vilest of men are exalted.

“For the leader of the music. A psalm of David.” How long, O LORD! wilt thou forget me for ever? How long wilt thou hide thy face from me?
How long shall I have anxiety in my soul for ever, And sorrow in my heart all the day? How long shall my enemy be exalted over me?
Look down and hear me, O LORD, my God! Enlighten my eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death;
Lest my enemy say, “I have prevailed against him!” Lest my adversaries rejoice, when I am fallen.
Yet will I trust in thy goodness; My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation; I will sing to the LORD, that he hath dealt kindly with me.
“For the leader of the music. A psalm of David.” The fool saith in his heart, “There is no God.” They are corrupt; abominable are their doings; There is none that doeth good.
Jehovah looketh down from heaven upon the children of men, To see if there are any that have understanding, That have regard to God.
They are all gone out of the way; together are they corrupt; There is none that doeth good—no, not one.
Shall not the evil-doers be requited, Who devour my people like bread, And call not upon Jehovah?
Yea, then shall they be in great fear; For Jehovah is with the race of the righteous.
Ye would put to shame the counsel of the poor; But Jehovah is their refuge.
Oh that salvation for Israel would come out of Zion! When Jehovah bringeth back the captives of his people, Then shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel be glad.
“A psalm of David.” LORD, who shall abide at thy tabernacle? Who shall dwell upon thy holy hill?
He that walketh uprightly, and doeth righteousness, And speaketh the truth from his heart;
He that slandereth not with his tongue, That doeth no injury to his neighbor, And uttereth no reproach against his neighbor;
In whose eyes a vile person is contemned; But who honoreth them that fear the LORD; Who sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth not;
He that lendeth not his money for interest, And taketh not a bribe against the innocent: He that doeth these things shall never be moved.
“A psalm off David.” Preserve me, O God! for to thee do I look for help.
I have said to Jehovah, Thou art my Lord; I have no happiness beyond thee!
The holy that are in the land, and the excellent,—in them is all my delight.
They who hasten after other gods shall have multiplied sorrows; Their drink-offerings of blood I will not offer, Nor will I take their names upon my lips.
Jehovah is my portion and my cup; Thou wilt maintain my lot!
My portion hath fallen to me in pleasant places; Yea, I have a goodly inheritance.
I will bless the LORD, who careth for me; Yea, in the night my heart admonisheth me.
I set the LORD before me at all times; Since he is at my right hand, I shall not fall.
Therefore my heart is glad, and my spirit rejoiceth; Yea, my flesh dwelleth in security.
For thou wilt not give me up to the underworld; Nor wilt thou suffer thy holy one to see the pit.
Thou wilt show me the path of life; In thy presence is fulness of joy; At thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.
“A psalm of David.” Hear the righteous cause, O LORD! Attend to my cry; Give ear to my prayer from lips without deceit!
May my sentence come forth from thy presence; May thine eyes behold uprightness!
Provest thou my heart, visitest thou me in the night, Triest thou me like gold, thou shalt find nothing!
My thoughts do not vary from my lips. As to the deeds of men, Through the word of thy lips I have kept me from the paths of the destroyer.
Support my steps in thy paths, That my feet may not slip!
I call upon thee, O God! for thou wilt hear me; Incline thine ear to me, and listen to my prayer!
Show forth thy loving-kindness, O thou that savest by thy right hand Them that seek refuge in thee from their adversaries!
Guard me as the apple of the eye; Hide me under the shadow of thy wings
From the wicked who assault me, From my deadly enemies who compass me about!
They shut up their hard heart; With their mouth they speak haughtily.
They encompass us in all our steps; They fix their eyes upon us, that they may cast us on the ground.
They are like a lion, eager for his prey; Like a young lion, lurking in secret places.
Arise, O LORD! disappoint them, cast them down! Deliver me from the wicked by thy sword,
From men, by thy hand, O LORD! from men of the world, Whose portion is in life; whom thou loadest with thy treasure; Whose children have enough, and leave their superfluity to their children.
But I through righteousness shall see thy face; I shall be satisfied with the revival of thy countenance.

I love thee, O LORD, my strength!
Jehovah is my rock, my fortress, and my deliverer; My God, my strength, in whom I trust; My shield, my strong defence, and my high tower.
I called upon the LORD, who is worthy to be praised, And was delivered from my enemies.
The snares of death encompassed me; The floods of destruction filled me with dismay;
The snares of the underworld surrounded me, And the nets of death seized upon me.
In my distress I called upon the LORD, And cried unto my God; He heard my voice from his palace, And my cry came before him into his ears.
Then the earth quaked and trembled; The foundations of the mountains rocked and were shaken, Because his wrath was kindled.
A smoke went up from his nostrils, And fire from his mouth devoured; Burning coals shot forth from him.
He bowed the heavens, and came down; And darkness was under his feet;
And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly; Yea, he did fly upon the wings of the wind.
And he made darkness his covering; His pavilion round about him was dark waters and thick clouds of the skies.
At the brightness before him, his thick clouds passed away; Then came hailstones and coals of fire.
The LORD also thundered from heaven, And the Most High uttered his voice, Amid hailstones and coals of fire.
He sent forth his arrows, and scattered them; Continual lightnings, and discomfited them.
Then the channels of the deep were seen, And the foundations of the earth were laid bare At thy rebuke, O LORD! At the blast of the breath of thy nostrils.
He stretched forth his hand from above; he took me, And drew me out of deep waters.
He delivered me from my strong enemy; From my adversaries, who were too powerful for me.
They fell upon me in the day of my calamity; But the LORD was my stay.
He brought me forth into a large place; He delivered me, because he delighted in me.
The LORD hath rewarded me according to my righteous; According to the cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me.
For I have kept the ways of the LORD, And have not wickedly departed from my God.
For all his laws were in my sight; I did not put away his statutes from me.
I was upright before him, And kept myself from iniquity.
Therefore hath the LORD rewarded me according to my righteousness, According to the cleanness of my hands before his eyes.
To the merciful thou showest thyself merciful; To the upright thou showest thyself upright;
To the pure thou showest thyself pure, And to the perverse thou showest thyself perverse.
For thou savest the afflicted people, But the haughty countenance thou bringest down.
Thou causest my lamp to shine; Jehovah, my God, enlighteneth my darkness.
For through thee I have broken through troops; Through my God I have leaped over walls.
The ways of God are just and true; His word is pure, tried in the fire; He is a shield to all who put their trust in him.
Who, then, is God, save Jehovah? And who is a rock, save our God?
It is God that girded me with strength, And made my way plain.
He made my feet like the hind's, And set me in my high places;
He taught my hands to war, So that my arm bent the bow of brass.
Thou gavest me the shield of thy protection; Thy right hand held me up, And thy goodness made me great.
Thou didst make a wide path for my steps, So that my feet did not stumble.
I pursued my enemies and overtook them, And turned not back till I had destroyed them.
I smote them, so that they could not rise; They fell under my feet.
Thou didst gird me with strength for the battle; Thou didst cast down my adversaries under me.
Thou didst cause my enemies to turn their backs, So that I destroyed them that hated me.
They cried, but there was none to help; To Jehovah, but he answered them not.
I beat them small, like dust before the wind; I cast them out as the dirt of the streets.
Thou hast delivered me from the assaults of the nations; Thou hast made me the head of the kingdoms. Nations whom I knew not serve me;
They who have only heard of me obey me; Yea, men of a strange land submit themselves to me;
Men of a strange land fade away, like a leaf, And come trembling from their strongholds.
Jehovah is the living God; blessed be my rock; Exalted be the God of my salvation!
It is God who hath given me vengeance, And subdued the nations under me;
He delivered me from my enemies; Yea, thou hast lifted me up above my adversaries; Thou hast saved me from the violent man!
Therefore I will give thanks to thee, O LORD! among the nations, And sing praises to thy name.
Great deliverance giveth he to his king, And showeth mercy to his anointed,—To David and to his posterity for ever.

“For the leader of the music. A psalm of David.” The heavens declare the glory of God; The firmament showeth forth the work of his hands.
Day uttereth instruction unto day, And night showeth knowledge unto night.
They have no speech nor language, And their voice is not heard;
Yet their sound goeth forth to all the earth, And their words to the ends of the world. In them hath he set a tabernacle for the sun,
Which cometh forth like a bridegroom from his chamber, And rejoiceth, like a strong man, to run his course.
He goeth forth from the extremity of heaven, And maketh his circuit to the end of it; And nothing is hid from his heat.
The law of the LORD is perfect, reviving the soul; The precepts of the LORD are sure, making wise the simple;
The statutes of the LORD are right, rejoicing the heart; The commandments of the LORD are pure, enlightening the eyes;
The fear of the LORD is clean, enduring for ever; The judgments of the LORD are true and righteous altogether.
More precious are they than gold; yea, than much fine gold; Sweeter than honey and the honeycomb.
By them also is thy servant warned, And in keeping of them there is great reward.
Who knoweth his own offences? Oh, cleanse thou me from secret faults!
Keep back also thy servant from presumptuous sins; Let them not have dominion over me! Then shall I be upright; I shall not be polluted with gross transgression.
May the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart Be acceptable in thy sight, O LORD, my strength and my redeemer!

“For the leader of the music. A psalm of David.” May Jehovah hear thee in the day of trouble; May the name of the God of Jacob defend thee!
May he send thee help from his sanctuary, And strengthen thee out of Zion!
May he have regard to all thine offerings, And accept thy burnt sacrifice! [[Pause.]]
May he grant thee thy heart's desire, And fulfill all thy purposes!
We will rejoice in thy protection, And in the name of our God will we set up our banners, When Jehovah hath fulfilled all thy petitions.
Now I know that Jehovah helpeth his anointed; That he heareth him from his holy heaven, And aideth him with the saving strength of his right hand.
Some glory in chariots, and some in horses, But we in the name of Jehovah our God.
They stumble and fall, But we stand and are erect.
The LORD save the king! May he hear us when we call!

“For the leader of the music. A psalm of David.” The king rejoiceth in thy strength, O LORD! Yea, he doth greatly exult in thy protection.
Thou hast given him his heart's desire, And hast not denied him the request of his lips. [[Pause.]]
Yea, thou hast met him with rich blessings, Thou hast placed a crown of pure gold upon his head.
He asked life of thee; thou gavest it him; Even long life, enduring for ever.
Great is his glory through thine aid; Honor and majesty hast thou laid upon him.
Thou hast made him blessed for evermore; Thou hast made him glad with the joy of thy countenance.
For the king trusteth in the LORD; And through the goodness of the Most High he shall never fall.
Thy hand shall overtake all thine enemies; Thy right hand shall overtake them that hate thee.
Thou wilt make them like a burning oven in the time of thine anger; Jehovah shall swallow them up in his wrath, And the fire shall devour them.
Their offspring shalt thou destroy from the earth, And their posterity from the sons of men.
For they spread a net of mischief against thee; They devised plots against thee, but they did not prevail.
Therefore thou wilt cause them to turn their backs; Thou wilt make ready thine arrows upon the strings against them.
Exalt thyself, O LORD! by thy strength! So will we sing, and praise thy mighty deeds.

“For the leader of the music. To the tune of “The hind of the morning.” A psalm of David.” My God, my God! why hast thou forsaken me? Why so far from mine aid, and from the words of my cry?
O my God! I cry during the day, but thou hearest not; In the night also, but I have no rest.
And yet thou art holy, Dwelling amid the praises of Israel!
Our fathers trusted in thee; They trusted, and thou didst save them.
They called upon thee, and were delivered; They trusted in thee, and were not put to shame.
But I am a worm, and not a man; The reproach of men, and the scorn of the people.
All who see me scoff at me; They open wide the lips; they shake the head.
“He trusted in the LORD, let him help him; Let him deliver him, since he delighted in him!”
Surely thou art he that didst bring me into the world; Thou didst make me lie secure upon my mother's breast!
Upon thee have I cast myself from my birth; Thou hast been my God from my earliest breath!
Oh, be not far from me, for trouble is near; For there is none to help!
Many bulls surround me; Strong bulls of Bashan close me in on every side.
They open their mouths wide against me, Like a ravening and roaring lion.
I am poured out like water, And all my bones are out of joint; My heart is become like wax; It melteth in my bosom.
My strength is dried up like an earthen vessel, And my tongue cleaveth to my jaws; Thou hast brought me to the dust of death!
For dogs have surrounded me; Bands of evil-doers have encompassed me,—Like lions my hands and my feet.
I can count all my bones; They gaze, and feast their eyes upon me.
They divide my garments among them, And for my vesture they cast lots.
But be not thou far from me, O LORD! O my strength! make haste to mine aid!
Deliver my life from the sword; My blood from the power of the dog;
Save me from the lion's mouth; Shield me from the horns of the buffaloes!
I will proclaim thy name to my brethren; In the midst of the congregation will I praise thee.
Praise him, ye worshippers of Jehovah! Extol him, all ye race of Jacob. And fear him, all ye race of Israel!
For he hath not despised nor abhorred the misery of the afflicted. Nor hath he hid his face from him; But when he cried unto him, he heard.
My praise shall be of thee in the great congregation; I will pay my vows before them that fear him!
The afflicted shall eat, and be satisfied; They that seek the LORD shall praise him; Your hearts shall be glad for ever and ever!
All the ends of the earth shall remember, and turn to Jehovah; All the families of the nations shall worship before thee!
For the kingdom is Jehovah's; He is the governor of the nations.
All the rich of the earth shall eat and worship; Before him shall they also bow, who are going down to the dust, Who cannot keep themselves alive.
The future generation shall serve him; The race which is to come shall hear of Jehovah.
They shall come, and declare his righteousness; His mighty deeds to the people that shall be born.
“A psalm of David.” The LORD is my shepherd: I shall not want.
He maketh me to lie down in green pastures; He leadeth me beside the still waters.
He reviveth my soul; He leadeth me in paths of safety, For his name's sake.
When I walk through a valley of deathlike shade, I fear no evil; for thou art with me; Thy crook and thy staff, they comfort me.
Thou preparest a table before me In the presence of mine enemies. Thou anointest my head with oil; My cup runneth over.
Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, And I shall dwell in the house of the LORD for ever.
“A psalm of David.” The earth is the LORD'S, and all that is therein; The world, and they who inhabit it.
For he hath founded it upon the seas, And established it upon the floods.
Who shall ascend the hill of the LORD? And who shall stand in his holy place?
He that hath clean hands and a pure heart; Who hath not inclined his soul to falsehood, Nor sworn deceitfully.
He shall receive a blessing from the LORD, And favor from the God of his salvation.
This is the race of them that seek him; They that seek thy face are Jacob. [[Pause.]]
Lift up your heads, O ye gates! Lift yourselves up, ye everlasting doors, That the king of glory may come in!
“Who is this king of glory?” Jehovah, strong and mighty; Jehovah, mighty in battle.
Lift up your heads, O ye gates! Lift yourselves up, ye everlasting doors, That the king of glory may enter in!
“Who is this king of glory?” Jehovah, God of hosts, he is the king of glory. [[Pause.]]
“A psalm of David.” To thee, O LORD! do I lift up my soul.
O my God! I trust in thee; let me not be put to shame! Let not my enemies triumph over me!
Yea, none that hope in thee shall be put to shame: They shall be put to shame who wickedly forsake thee.
Cause me to know thy ways, O LORD! Teach me thy paths!
Lead me in thy truth, and teach me! For thou art the God from whom cometh my help; In thee do I trust at all times!
Remember thy loving-kindness, O LORD! and thy tender mercy, Which thou hast exercised of old!
Remember not the faults and transgressions of my youth! According to thy mercy remember thou me, For thy goodness' sake, O LORD!
Good and righteous is the LORD; Therefore showeth he to sinners the way.
The humble he guideth in his statutes, And the humble he teacheth his way.
All the doings of the LORD are mercy and truth To those who keep his covenant and his precepts.
For thy name's sake, O LORD, Pardon my iniquity; for it is great!
Who is the man that feareth the LORD? Him doth he show the way which he should choose.
He shall himself dwell in prosperity, And his offspring shall inherit the land.
The friendship of the LORD is with them that fear him, And he will teach them his covenant.
Mine eyes are ever directed to the LORD, For he will pluck my feet from the net.
Look upon me, and pity me; For I am desolate and afflicted!
Lighten the sorrows of my heart, And deliver me from my troubles!
Look upon my affliction and distress, And forgive all my sins!
Consider how many are my enemies, And with what violence they hate me!
Guard thou my life, and deliver me! Let me not be put to shame, for I have trusted in thee!
Let integrity and uprightness preserve me, For on thee do I rest my hope!
Redeem Israel, O God! from all his troubles!
“A psalm of David.” Be thou my judge, O LORD! for I have walked in uprightness. I have put my trust in the LORD, therefore shall I not fall.
Examine me, O LORD! and prove me; Try my reins and my heart!
For thy kindness is ever before my eyes, And I walk in thy truth.
I sit not with men of falsehood. And go not in company with dissemblers.
I hate the assembly of evil-doers, And do not sit with the wicked.
I wash my hands in innocence. And go around thine altar. O LORD!
To utter the voice of thanksgiving, And tell of all thy wondrous works.
O LORD! I love the habitation of thy house, The place where thine honor dwelleth!
Gather not my breath with sinners, Nor my life with men of blood,
In whose hands is mischief, And whose right hands are full of bribes!
But as for me, I walk in my integrity; Oh, redeem me, and be merciful to me!
My feet tread in a straight path; In the congregation will I bless the LORD.
“A psalm of David.” The LORD is my light and my salvation; Whom shall I fear? The LORD is the shield of my life; Of whom shall I be afraid?
When the wicked came upon me to devour me, Even my persecutors and enemies, they stumbled and fell.
Though a host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear; Though war should rise against me, yet will I be confident.
One thing have I desired of the LORD; that do I yet seek; That I may dwell in the house of the LORD all the days of my life, To behold the grace of the LORD, And to gaze upon his temple.
For in the day of trouble he will hide me in his pavilion; Yea, in the secret place of his tabernacle will he shelter me; He will set me upon a rock.
Yea, already doth he lift my head above my enemies, who are around me; Therefore in his tabernacle will I offer sacrifices with the sound of trumpets; I will sing, yea, with instruments of music I will give praise to the LORD.
Hear my voice, O LORD! when I cry unto thee; Have pity upon me, and answer me!
When I think of thy precept, “Seek ye my face!” Thy face, LORD, do I seek.
O hide not thou thy face from me; Cast not thy servant away in displeasure! Thou hast been my help, do not leave me; Do not forsake me, O God, my helper!
For my father and my mother have forsaken me; But the LORD will take me up.
Teach me thy way, O LORD! And lead me in the right path, because of my enemies!
Give me not up to the will of my adversaries! For false witnesses have risen up against me, And such as breathe out injustice.
I trust that I shall see the goodness of the LORD In the land of the living. Hope thou in the LORD!
Be of good courage; let thy heart be strong; Hope thou in the LORD!
“A psalm of David.” To thee do I cry, O LORD! O my rock! be not silent to me, Lest, if thou answer me not, I become like those who go down to the pit!
Hear the voice of my supplication, when I cry unto thee, When I lift up my hands to thy most holy sanctuary!
Draw me not away with the impious, and with evil-doers, Who speak peace to their neighbors, while mischief is in their hearts!
Give them according to their deeds, and the wickedness of their doings; Give them according to the work of their hands; Render to them their desert!
For they regard not the doings of the LORD, nor the work of his hands; Therefore will he destroy them, and not again build them up.
Praised be the LORD, for he hath heard the voice of my supplications!
The LORD is my strength and my shield; My heart trusteth in him, and he helpeth me; Therefore doth my heart exult, And in my song I will praise him.
Jehovah is the strength of his people; He is the protecting shield of his anointed.
Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance; Feed them also, and build them up for ever!
“A psalm of David.” Give to Jehovah, O ye sons of God! Give to Jehovah glory and praise!
Give to Jehovah the glory due to his name; Worship Jehovah in holy attire!
The voice of Jehovah is heard above the waters; The God of glory thundereth,-Jehovah above the great waters.
The voice of Jehovah is powerful; The voice of Jehovah is full of majesty;
The voice of Jehovah breaketh the cedars; Yea, Jehovah breaketh the cedars of Lebanon;
Yea, he maketh them to leap like a calf,—Lebanon and Sirion like a young buffalo.
The voice of Jehovah divideth the flames of fire.
The voice of Jehovah maketh the wilderness tremble; Yea, Jehovah maketh the wilderness of Kadesh tremble.
The voice of Jehovah maketh the hinds bring forth, And layeth bare the forests; While, in his palace, every one declareth his glory.
Jehovah sitteth above the flood; Yea, Jehovah sitteth king for ever.
Jehovah will give strength to his people; Jehovah will bless his people with peace.

“A psalm of David. To the air of songs for the dedication of a house.” I will extol thee, O LORD! for thou hast lifted me up, And hast not suffered my enemies to rejoice over me.
O Jehovah, my God! I called upon thee, and thou hast healed me!
O LORD! thou hast raised me up from the underworld; Thou hast kept me alive, that I should not go down to the pit.
Sing unto the LORD, O ye his servants! And praise his holy name!
For his anger endureth but a moment, But his favor through life; In the evening sorrow may be a guest, But joy cometh in the morning.
I said in my prosperity, “I shall never be moved!”
Thou, O LORD! by thy favor, hast made my mountain to stand strong; Thou didst hide thy face, and I was troubled!
I cried unto thee, O LORD! To the LORD I made supplication:
“What will my blood profit thee, that I should go down to the pit? Can dust praise thee? Can it declare thy faithfulness?
Hear, O LORD! and have pity upon me! Be thou, LORD! my helper!”
Thou didst turn my mourning into dancing; Thou didst loose my sackcloth, and gird me with gladness.
Therefore I will sing praise to thee, and not be silent. O Jehovah, my God! I will give thanks to thee for ever!

“For the leader of the music. A psalm of David.” In thee, O LORD! do I trust; let me never be put to shame; According to thy goodness deliver me!
Bow down thine ear to me; help me speedily! Be to me a strong rock, a high fortress, for my deliverance!
For thou art my rock and my high fortress; Be thou also my guide, and lead me, for thy name's sake!
Draw me out of the net which they have secretly laid for me, For thou art my strength!
Into thy hand I commit my life; Thou wilt deliver me, O LORD, thou God of truth!
I hate those who regard lying vanities, And put my trust in the LORD.
I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy, That thou hast looked upon my trouble, And hast had regard to my distress;
That thou hast not given me up to the hands of my enemies, But hast set my feet in a wide place.
Have mercy upon me, O LORD! for I am in trouble! My face is consumed with grief; Yea, my spirit and my body.
For my life is wasted with sorrow, And my years with sighing; My strength faileth by reason of my affliction, And my bones are consumed on account of all my enemies.
I have become the scorn of my neighbors, And the terror of my acquaintance; They who see me abroad flee from me.
I am forgotten like a dead man out of mind; I am like a broken vessel.
I hear the slander of many; fear is on every side; For they take counsel together against me; They devise to take away my life.
But I trust in thee, O Jehovah! I say, “Thou art my God!”
My destiny is in thy hand; Deliver me from the power of my enemies and persecutors!
Let thy face shine upon thy servant, And save me through thy mercy!
Let me not be put to shame, O LORD! for I have called upon thee; Let the wicked be put to shame; Let them be silenced in the grave!
Let lying lips be put to silence, Which speak proud things against the righteous, With haughtiness and contempt!
O how great is thy goodness, which thou treasurest up for them that fear thee; Which thou showest to them that trust in thee, before the sons of men!
Thou hidest them in the secret place of thy presence from the machinations of men; Thou shelterest them in thy pavilion from the violence of tongues.
Praised be the LORD; for he hath shown me his wonderful kindness, As in a fortified city!
I said in my distress, “I am cut off from before thine eyes;” But thou didst hear the voice of my supplication, When I cried unto thee.
O love the LORD, all ye his servants; For the LORD preserveth the faithful, And requiteth the proud in full measure!
Be of good courage; let your hearts be strong, All ye who trust in the LORD!
“A psalm of David.” Happy is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is pardoned!
Happy the man to whom the LORD imputeth not iniquity, And in whose spirit there is no guile!
While I kept silence, my bones were wasted, By reason of my groaning all the day long.
For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me; My moisture dried up, as in summer's drought.
At length I acknowledged to thee my sin, And did not hide my iniquity. I said, “I will confess my transgression to the LORD;” And thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin! [[Pause.]]
Therefore shall every pious man pray to thee, while thou mayst be found; Surely the floods of great waters shall not come near him.
Thou art my hiding-place; thou preservest me from trouble; Thou compassest me about with songs of deliverance. [[Pause.]]
I will instruct thee, and show thee the way thou shouldst go; I will give thee counsel, and keep mine eye upon thee.
Be ye not like the horse and the mule, which have no understanding, Whose mouths must be pressed with the bridle and curb, Because they will not come near thee!
The wicked hath many sorrows; But he that trusteth in the LORD is encompassed with mercies.
Rejoice in the LORD, and be glad, ye righteous; Shout for joy, all ye that are upright in heart!
Rejoice, O ye righteous, in the LORD! For praise becometh the upright.
Praise the LORD with the harp; Sing to him with the ten-stringed psaltery!
Sing to him a new song; Play skilfully amid the sound of trumpets!
For the word of the LORD is right, And all his acts are faithful.
He loveth justice and equity; The earth is full of the goodness of the LORD.
By the word of the LORD were the heavens made, And all the hosts of them by the breath of his mouth.
He gathereth the waters of the sea, as a heap; He layeth up the deep in storehouses.
Let all the earth fear the LORD; Let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him!
For he spake, and it was done; He commanded, and it stood fast.
The LORD bringeth the devices of the nations to nothing; He frustrateth the designs of kingdoms.
The purposes of the LORD stand for ever; The designs of his heart, to all generations.
Happy the nation whose God is Jehovah; The people whom he hath chosen for his inheritance.
The LORD looketh down from heaven; He beholdeth all the children of men;
From his dwelling-place he beholdeth all the inhabitants of the earth,—
He that formed the hearts of all, And observeth all their works.
A king is not saved by the number of his forces, Nor a hero by the greatness of his strength.
The horse is a vain thing for safety, Nor can he deliver his master by his great strength.
Behold, the eye of the LORD is upon them that fear him,—Upon them that trust in his goodness;
To save them from the power of death, And keep them alive in famine.
The hope of our souls is in the LORD; He is our help and our shield.
Yea, in him doth our heart rejoice; In his holy name we have confidence.
May thy goodness be upon us, O LORD! According as we trust in thee!

“A psalm of David, when he feigned himself mad before Abimelech, who drove him away, and he departed.” I will bless the LORD at all times; His praise shall continually be in my mouth.
In the LORD doth my soul boast; Let the afflicted hear, and rejoice!
O magnify the LORD with me, And let us exalt his name together!
I sought the LORD, and he heard me, And delivered me from all my fears.
Look up to him, and ye shall have light; Your faces shall never be ashamed.
This afflicted man cried, and the LORD heard, And saved him from all his troubles.
The angels of the LORD encamp around those who fear him, And deliver them.
O taste, and see how good is the LORD! Happy the man who trusteth in him!
O fear the LORD, ye his servants! For to those who fear him there shall be no want.
Young lions want, and suffer hunger; But they who fear the LORD want no good thing.
Come, ye children, hearken to me! I will teach you the fear of the LORD.
Who is he that loveth life, And desireth many days, in which he may see good?
Guard well thy tongue from evil, And thy lips from speaking guile!
Depart from evil, and do good; Seek peace, and pursue it!
The eyes of the LORD are upon the righteous, And his ears are open to their cry.
But the face of the LORD is against evil-doers, To cut off their remembrance from the earth.
The righteous cry, and the LORD heareth, And delivereth them from all their troubles.
The LORD is near to them that are of a broken heart, And saveth such as are of a contrite spirit.
Many are the afflictions of the righteous; But the LORD delivereth him from them all.
He guardeth all his bones; Not one of them shall be broken.
Calamity destroyeth the wicked, And they who hate the righteous suffer for it.
The LORD redeemeth the life of his servants, And none that put their trust in him will suffer for it.
“A psalm of David.” Contend, O LORD! with them that contend with me! Fight against them that fight against me!
Take hold of shield and buckler, And stand up for my help!
Draw forth the spear and the axe against my persecutors; Say to me, “I am thy salvation.”
May they be confounded and put to shame, who seek my life; May they be turned back with disgrace, who devise my hurt!
May they be like dust before the wind; May the angel of the LORD drive them!
May their way be dark and slippery, And may the angel of the LORD pursue them!
For without cause they have laid for me a snare; Without cause they have digged for me a pit.
May unforeseen destruction come upon them! May the snare which they have laid lay hold on themselves, And may they fall into destruction!
Then shall my soul rejoice in the LORD; It shall exult in his protection.
All my bones shall say, Who, O LORD! is like thee, Who dost rescue the afflicted from the oppressor, The afflicted and destitute from the spoiler?
False witnesses have risen up; They charge me with that which has not entered my mind.
They repay me evil for good; They cause bereavement to my soul.
And yet I, during their sickness, clothed myself with sackcloth, And afflicted myself with fasting; And my prayer was turned to my bosom.
I behaved myself as if he had been my friend or brother; I bowed down in sadness, as one mourning for his mother.
But at my fall they rejoice, and gather themselves together; Revilers whom I know not assemble themselves against me; They tear me without ceasing.
With base men who mock for their bread, They gnash at me with their teeth.
How long, O LORD! wilt thou look on? O rescue my life from the destruction they plot for me; My precious life from these young lions!
I will thank thee in the great assembly! Before a numerous people I will praise thee.
Let not them that are my enemies wrongfully triumph over me; Let them not wink with the eye, who hate me without cause!
For they speak not peace; They devise deceit against them that are quiet in the land.
Yea, they open their mouths wide against me; They say, “Aha, aha! our eyes seeth it.”
Thou seest it, O LORD! be not silent! O LORD! be not far from me!
Arouse thyself; awake for my defence! My God and my Lord, awake to my cause!
Judge me according to thy righteousness, O Jehovah, my God! Let them not triumph over me!
Let them not say in their hearts, “Aha! we have our wish!” Let them not say, “We have swallowed him up!”
May they all be confounded and brought to shame, Who rejoice at my calamity! May they be clothed with ignominy and disgrace, Who exalt themselves against me!
Let them shout for joy, and be glad, Who favor my righteous cause; Let them ever say, “The LORD be praised, Who delighteth in the prosperity of his servant!”
So shall my tongue speak of thy righteousness, And daily repeat thy praise.

“For the leader of the music. A psalm of David, the servant of the Lord.” To speak of the ungodliness of the wicked is in my heart. He hath no fear of God before his eyes.
For he flattereth himself in his own eyes, Till his iniquity is found out and hated.
The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit; He neglecteth to be wise and to do good.
He deviseth mischief upon his bed; He persevereth in an evil way; He abhorreth not sin.
Thy goodness, O LORD! reacheth to the heavens, And thy faithfulness to the clouds;
Thy righteousness is like the high mountains; Thy judgments are a great deep; Thou, O LORD! preservest man and beast!
How precious is thy loving-kindness, O God! Yea, the sons of men seek refuge under the shadow of thy wings.
They are satisfied with the abundance of thy house, And thou causest them to drink of the full stream of thy pleasures.
For with thee is the fountain of life; Through thy light we see light.
O continue thy loving-kindness to them that know thee, And thy favor to the upright in heart!
Let not the foot of the proud come upon me, Nor the hand of the wicked remove me!
Lo! already are the workers of iniquity fallen; They are cast down; they are unable to rise!
“A psalm of David.” Be not thou angry on account of the wicked, Nor be envious of those who do iniquity.
For soon shall they be cut down like grass, And wither like the green herb.
Trust in the LORD, and do good; Abide in the land, and delight in faithfulness.
Place thy delight in the LORD. And he will give thee thy heart's desires.
Commit thy way to the LORD; Trust in him, and he will give thee success!
He will cause thy justice to shine forth like the light, And thy righteousness like the noonday's brightness.
Hope thou patiently on the LORD, And in him place thy trust! Be not angry on account of the prosperous,—On account of him that deviseth deceit!
Cease from anger; give not way to wrath; Be not provoked, so as to do evil!
For evil-doers shall be rooted out; But they who trust in the LORD, they shall inherit the land.
Yet a little while, and the wicked shall be no more; Thou mayst look for his place, and he will not be found.
But the meek shall inherit the land, And delight themselves in the fulness of prosperity.
The wicked man plotteth against the just, And gnasheth at him with his teeth.
The Lord laugheth at him; For he seeth that his day is coming.
The wicked draw the sword, And bend their bow, To cast down the afflicted and the needy, And to slay the upright.
Their swords shall enter their own hearts, And their bows shall be broken in pieces.
Better is the little of the righteous man Than the great abundance of the wicked;
For the arms of the wicked shall be broken, But the LORD will uphold the righteous.
The LORD careth for the life of the upright, And their inheritance shall endure for ever.
They shall not be ashamed in the evil time, And in the days of famine they shall have enough.
But the wicked shall perish; Yea, the enemies of the LORD shall be consumed, like the glory of the fields; They shall be consumed into smoke.
The wicked borroweth, and repayeth not; But the righteous is merciful and bountiful.
For they who are blessed by God shall inherit the land, And they who are cursed by him shall be rooted out.
The steps of the good man are directed by the LORD; He delighteth himself in his way.
Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, For the LORD holdeth him by the hand.
I have been young, and now am old; Yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, Nor his offspring begging bread.
He is ever merciful and lendeth, And his offspring shall be blessed.
Depart from evil, and do good; So thou shalt dwell in the land for ever.
For the LORD loveth righteousness, And forsaketh not his servants; They are preserved for ever; But the posterity of the wicked shall be rooted out.
The righteous shall inherit the land, And shall dwell therein for ever.
The mouth of the righteous uttereth wisdom, And his tongue speaketh what is right.
The law of his God is in his heart; His footsteps shall not slip.
The wicked watcheth the righteous, And seeketh to slay him;
The Lord will not leave him in his hand, Nor suffer him to be condemned, when he is judged.
Trust in the LORD, and keep his way, And he will exalt thee to the possession of the land, Whilst thou shalt see the destruction of the wicked!
I have seen a wicked man in great power, And spreading himself like a green cedar;
But he passed away, and, lo! he was no more; Yea, I sought him, but he was not found.
Mark the righteous man, and behold the upright, That posterity is to the man of peace!
But transgressors will all be destroyed; The posterity of the wicked shall be rooted out.
The salvation of the just is from the LORD. He is their strength in the time of trouble.
The LORD will help and deliver them; He will deliver them from their enemies, and save them, Because they trust in him.

“A psalm of David. To bring to remembrance.” O LORD! rebuke me not in thy wrath, Nor chasten me in thy hot displeasure!
For thine arrows have deeply pierced me, And thy hand hath been heavy upon me.
There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger; Nor rest in my bones, because of my sin.
For my iniquities have gone over my head; Like a heavy burden, they are more than I can bear.
My wounds putrefy and are loathsome on account of my folly.
I am bent; I am bowed down greatly; I go mourning all the day long.
For my loins are full of burning heat, And there is no soundness in my flesh.
I am weakened and bruised exceedingly; I roar by reason of the disquietude of my heart.
O Lord! thou knowest all my desire, And my groaning is not hidden from thee!
My heart panteth; my strength faileth me; The very light of my eyes is gone from me.
My friends and acquaintance keep aloof from my woe, And my kinsmen stand afar off:
While they who seek my life lay snares for me; They who seek my hurt threaten destruction, And meditate deceit all the day long.
But I, like a deaf man, hear not; And, like a dumb man, open not my mouth.
I am like one who heareth nothing, And in whose mouth is no reply.
For in thee, O LORD! do I put my trust; Thou wilt hear, O Lord, my God!
For I have prayed, “Let them not rejoice over me; Let them not exult at the slipping of my feet!”
For I am ready to fall, And my pain doth never leave me;
For I confess my iniquity, And am troubled on account of my sin.
But my enemies flourish and are strong; They who hate me without cause are multiplied.
They who repay good with evil are my enemies, Because I follow that which is good.
Forsake me not, O LORD! O my God! be not far from me!
Make hast to mine aid, O Lord, my salvation!

“A psalm of David. For the leader of the music of the Jeduthunites.” I said, I will take heed to my ways, That I may not sin with my tongue; I will keep my mouth with a bridle, While the wicked is before me.
I was dumb with silence; I spake not even what was good; But my pain was increased.
My heart was hot within me; In my anguish the fire burst forth, And I spake with my tongue:
LORD, make me to know mine end, And the number of my days, That I may know how frail I am!
Behold, thou hast made my days as a hand-breadth, And my life is as nothing before thee; Yea, every man in his firmest state is altogether vanity. [[Pause.]]
Surely every man walketh in a vain show; Surely he disquieteth himself in vain; He heapeth up riches, and knoweth not who shall gather them.
What, then, O Lord! is my hope? My hope is in thee!
Deliver me from all my transgressions; Let me not be the reproach of scoffers!
Yet I am dumb; I open not my mouth; For thou hast done it!
But remove from me thine infliction; For I am perishing by the blow of thine hand.
When thou with rebukes dost chasten man for iniquity, Thou causest his glory to waste away like a moth! Surely every man is vanity.
Hear my prayer, O LORD! Give ear to my cry; Be not silent at my tears! For I am but a stranger with thee, A sojourner, as all my fathers were.
O spare me, that I may recover strength, Before I go away, and be no more!

“For the leader of the music. A psalm of David.” I trusted steadfastly in the LORD, And he listened, and heard my cry.
He drew me out of a horrible pit, Out of the miry clay; He set my feet upon a rock, And made my steps firm.
He hath put into my mouth a new song, A song of praise to our God. Many shall see, and fear, And put their trust in the LORD.
Happy the man who maketh the LORD his trust, And resorteth not to men of pride and falsehood!
Many, O LORD, my God! are the wonderful works which thou hast done; Many have been thy gracious purposes towards us; None can be compared to thee! Would I declare and rehearse them, they are more than can be numbered.
In sacrifice and oblation thou hast no pleasure; Mine ears thou hast opened; Burnt-offering and sin-offering thou requirest not.
Therefore I said, “Lo, I come; In the scroll of the book it is prescribed to me;
O my God! to do thy will is my delight, And thy law dwelleth in my heart!”
I have proclaimed thy righteousness in the great assembly; Lo, I have not restrained my lips, O LORD! thou knowest!
I hide not thy justice in my heart; I declare thy faithfulness and thy salvation; I conceal not thy mercy and truth from the great assembly.
Withdraw not from me thy tender mercies, O LORD! May thy loving-kindness and thy truth continually preserve me!
For evils without number have encompassed me; My iniquities have overtaken me; I cannot see the end of them; They are more than the hairs of my head, And my heart dieth within me.
May it please thee, O LORD! to deliver me! O LORD! make haste to mine aid!
May they all be confounded and covered with shame Who seek to take away my life! Let them be driven back with disgrace Who desire to do me injury!
Let them be overwhelmed with confusion Who cry out to me, Aha! aha!
But let all who seek thee Be glad and rejoice in thee! Let those who love thy protection Ever say, “Great is Jehovah!”
I am poor and afflicted, yet the Lord thinketh upon me; Thou art my help and my deliverer; My God! make no delay!

“For the leader of the music. A psalm of David.” Happy is he who hath regard to the poor! The LORD will deliver him in time of trouble.
The LORD will preserve him, and keep him alive; He shall be happy on the earth; Thou wilt not give him up to the will of his enemies!
The LORD will strengthen him upon the bed of disease; All his bed thou wilt change in his sickness.
I said, O LORD! be merciful to me! Heal me, for I have sinned against thee!
My enemies speak evil of me: “When will he die, and his name perish?”
If one come to see me, he speaketh falsehood; His heart gathereth malice; When he goeth abroad, he uttereth it.
All that hate me whisper together against me; Against me do they devise mischief:
“A deadly disease cleaveth fast unto him; He lieth down, and he shall never arise!”
Yea, my familiar friend in whom I trusted, who did eat of my bread,—He hath lifted up his heel against me.
But do thou, O LORD! have pity upon me; Raise me up, that I may requite them!
By this I know that thou favorest me, Because my enemy doth not triumph over me.
As for me, thou wilt uphold me in my integrity; Thou wilt set me before thy face for ever!
[Praised be Jehovah, the God of Israel, From everlasting to everlasting. Amen! Amen!]

“BOOK II. For the leader of the music. A song of the sons of Korah.” As the hart panteth for the water-brooks, So panteth my soul for thee, O God!
My soul thirsteth for God, the living God: When shall I come, and appear before God?
My tears have been my food day and night, While they say to me continually, “Where is thy God?”
When I think of it, I pour out my soul in grief; How I once walked with the multitude, Walked slowly with them to the house of God, Amid sounds of joy and praise with the festive multitude!
Why art thou cast down, O my soul? And why art thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God; for I shall yet praise him, Him, my deliverer and my God!
My soul is cast down within me, While I remember thee from the land of Jordan and Hermon, From the mountain Mizar.
Deep calleth for deep at the noise of thy waterfalls; All thy waves and billows have gone over me!
Once the LORD commanded his kindness by day, And by night his praise was with me,-Thanksgiving to the God of my life.
Now I say to God, my rock, Why hast thou forgotten me? Why go I mourning on account of the oppression of the enemy?
Like the crushing of my bones are the reproaches of the enemy, While they say to me continually, “Where is thy God?”
Why art thou cast down, O my soul? And why art thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God; for I shall yet praise him, Him, my deliverer and my God!
Judge me, O God! and defend my cause against a merciless nation! Deliver me from unjust and deceitful men!
Thou art the God of my refuge: why dost thou cast me off? Why go I mourning on account of the oppression of the enemy?
O send forth thy light and thy truth; let them guide me; Let them lead me to thy holy mountain, and to thy dwelling-place!
Then will I go to the altar of God, To the God of my joy and exultation; Yea, upon the harp will I praise thee, O God, my God!
Why art thou cast down, O my soul? And why art thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God; for I shall yet praise him, Him, my deliverer and my God!

“For the leader of the music. A psalm of the sons of Korah.” O God! we have heard with our ears, Our fathers have told us, What deeds thou didst in their days, In the days of old.
With thine own hand didst thou drive out the nations, And plant our fathers; Thou didst destroy the nations, And cause our fathers to flourish.
For not by their own swords did they gain possession of the land, Nor did their own arms give them victory; But thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance; For thou didst favor them!
Thou art my king, O God! O send deliverance to Jacob!
Through thee we may cast down our enemies; Through thy name we may trample upon our adversaries!
I trust not in my bow, Nor can my sword save me.
But it is thou only who savest us from our enemies, And puttest to shame those who hate us!
In God will we glory continually; Yea, we will praise thy name for ever! [[Pause.]]
Yet now thou hast cast us off, and put us to shame; Thou goest not forth with our armies.
Thou makest us turn back from the enemy, And they who hate us make our goods their prey.
Thou makest us like sheep destined for food, And scatterest us among the nations.
Thou sellest thy people for nought, And increasest not thy wealth by their price.
Thou makest us a reproach to our neighbors, A scorn and a derision to those who are around us.
Thou makest us a byword among the nations, And causest the people to shake their heads at us.
My ignominy is continually before me, And shame covereth my face,
On account of the voice of the scoffer and the reviler, And on account of the enemy and the avenger.
All this hath come upon us; Yet have we not forgotten thee, Nor have we been false to thy covenant.
Our hearts, have not wandered from thee, Nor have our feet gone out of thy path;
Though thou hast crushed us in a land of jackals, And covered us with thick darkness.
If we had forgotten the name of our God, Or stretched forth our hands to a strange God,
Surely God would search it out; For he knoweth the secrets of the heart.
But for thy sake we are killed all the day; We are counted as sheep for the slaughter.
Awake! why sleepest thou, O Lord? Arise! cast us not off for ever!
Wherefore dost thou hide thy face, And forget our affliction and oppression?
Our soul is bowed down to the dust; Our body cleaveth to the earth.
Arise, O thou, our strength! And deliver us, for thy mercy's sake!

“For the leader of the music. To be accompanied with the Shoshannim. A song of loveliness by the sons of Korah.” My heart is overflowing with a good matter; I will address my work to the king: May my tongue be like the pen of a ready writer!
Thou art the fairest of the sons of men; Grace is poured upon thy lips; For God hath blessed thee for ever!
Gird thy sword to thy thigh, thou hero!-Thy glory and ornament!
In thy glorious array ride forth victoriously, On account of truth and mildness and justice; And thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things!
Thine arrows are sharp; Nations shall fall before thee; They shall pierce the hearts of the king's enemies.
Thy throne is God's for ever and ever; The sceptre of thy kingdom is a sceptre of equity!
Thou lovest righteousness, and hatest iniquity; Therefore hath God, thy God, anointed thee With the oil of gladness above thy fellows!
All thy garments are myrrh, aloes, and cassia; From ivory palaces stringed instruments delight thee.
Daughters of kings are among thy chosen women; On the right hand stands the queen In gold of Ophir.
Listen, O daughter! consider, and incline thine ear; Forget thy people and thy father's house!
For the king is captivated with thy beauty; He is now thy lord; honor thou him!
So shall the daughter of Tyre seek thy favor with gifts, The rich among the people.
All glorious is the king's daughter in her apartment; Her robe is embroidered with gold.
In variegated garments shall she be led to the king; The virgin companions that follow her shall be brought unto thee.
With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought; They shall enter the king's palace.
Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children, Whom thou shalt make princes through all the land.
I will make thy name memorable throughout all generations; So shall the nations praise thee for ever and ever!

“For the leader of the music. Of, or for, the sons of Korah. To be sung in the manner, or with the voice, of virgins.” God is our refuge and strength; An ever present help in trouble.
Therefore will we not fear, though the earth be changed; Though the mountains tremble in the heart of the sea;
Though its waters roar and be troubled, And the mountains shake with the swelling thereof. [[Pause.]]
A river with its streams shall make glad the city of God, The holy dwelling-place of the Most High.
God is the midst of her; she shall not be moved; God will help her, and that full early.
The nations raged; kingdoms were moved; He uttered his voice, the earth melted.
The LORD of hosts is with us; The God of Jacob is our refuge. [[Pause.]]
Come, behold the doings of the LORD; What desolations he hath made in the earth!
He causeth wars to cease to the end of the earth; He hath broken the bow, and snapped the spear asunder, And burned the chariots in fire.
“Desist, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted throughout the earth!”
The LORD of hosts is with us; The God of Jacob is our refuge.

“For the leader of the music. A psalm of the sons of Korah.” O clap your hands, all ye nations! Shout unto God with the voice of triumph!
For terrible is Jehovah, the Most High, The great king over all the earth.
He hath subdued nations under us, And kingdoms under our feet;
He hath chosen for us an inheritance, The glory of Jacob, whom he loved. [[Pause.]]
God goeth up with a shout; Jehovah with the sound of the trumpet.
Sing praises to God, sing praises! Sing praises to our king, sing praises!
For God is king of all the earth; Sing to him hymns of praise!
God reigneth over the nations; God sitteth upon his holy throne.
The princes of the nations gather themselves together To the people of the God of Abraham; For the mighty of the earth belong to God; He is supremely exalted.

“A psalm of the sons of Korah.” Great is Jehovah, and greatly to be praised In the city of our God, upon his holy mountain.
Beautiful in its elevation is Mount Zion, The joy of the whole earth; The joy of the farthest North is the city of the great king;
In her palaces God is known as a refuge.
For, lo! kings were assembled against it; They passed away together.
As soon as they saw, they were astonished; They were confounded, and hasted away.
There terror seized upon them,—Pain, as of a woman in travail;
As when the east wind breaketh in pieces The ships of Tarshish.
As we have heard, so have we seen In the city of the LORD of hosts, in the city of our God; God will establish it for ever. [[Pause.]]
We think of thy loving-kindness, O God! In the midst of thy temple!
As thy name, O God! so thy praise, extendeth to the ends of the earth; Thy right hand is full of righteousness.
Mount Zion rejoiceth, The daughters of Judah exult, On account of thy righteous judgments.
Go round about Zion; number her towers;
Mark well her bulwarks; count her palaces; That ye may tell it to the next generation!
For this God is our God for ever and ever; He will be our guide unto death.

“For the leader of the music. A psalm of the sons of Korah.” Hear this, all ye nations; Give ear, all ye inhabitants of the world;
Both high and low, rich and poor alike!
My mouth shall speak wisdom, And the meditation of my mind shall be understanding.
I will incline mine ear to a poem; I will utter my song upon the harp.
Why should I fear in the days of adversity, When the iniquity of my adversaries encompasseth me;
They who trust in their riches, And glory in the greatness of their wealth?
No one can redeem his brother from death, Nor give a ransom for him to God,
That he should live to eternity, And not see the pit.
Too costly is the redemption of his life, And he giveth it up for ever.
For he seeth that wise men die, As well as the foolish and the ignorant; They perish alike, And leave their wealth to others.
They imagine that their houses will endure for ever, And their dwelling-places from generation to generation: Men celebrate their names on the earth.
Yet man, who is in honor, abideth not; He is like the beasts that perish.
Such is the way which is their confidence! And they who come after them approve their maxims. [[Pause.]]
Like sheep they are cast into the underworld; Death shall feed upon them; And the upright shall soon trample upon them. Their form shall be consumed in the underworld, And they shall no more have a dwelling-place.
But God will redeem my life from the underworld; Yea, he will take me under his care. [[Pause.]]
Be not thou afraid, when one becometh rich; When the glory of his house is increased!
For, when he dieth, he will carry nothing away; His glory will not descend after him.
Though in his life he thought himself happy,—Though men praised thee, while thou wast in prosperity,—
Yet shalt thou go to the dwelling-place of thy fathers, Who never more shall see the light!
The man who is in honor, but without understanding, Is like the beasts that perish.
“A psalm of Asaph.” The mighty God, Jehovah, speaketh, and calleth the earth, From the rising of the sun to its going down.
Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God shineth forth.
Our God cometh, and will not be silent; Before him is a devouring fire, And around him a raging tempest.
He calleth to the heavens on high, And to the earth, while he judgeth his people:
“Gather together before me my godly ones, Who have made a covenant with me by sacrifice!”
(And the heavens shall declare his righteousness, For it is God himself that is judge.) [[Pause.]]
“Hear, O my people, and I will speak! O Israel, and I will testify against thee! For I am God, thine own God.
I reprove thee not on account of thy sacrifices; For thy burnt-offerings are ever before me.
I will take no bullock from thy house, Nor he-goat from thy folds;
For all the beasts of the forest are mine, And the cattle on a thousand hills.
I know all the birds of the mountains, And the wild beasts of the field are before me.
If I were hungry, I would not tell thee; For the world is mine, and all that is therein.
Do I eat the flesh of bulls, Or drink the blood of goats?
Offer to God thanksgiving, And pay thy vows to the Most High!
Then call upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me!”
And to the wicked God saith, “To what purpose dost thou talk of my statutes? And why hast thou my laws upon thy lips?—
Thou, who hatest instruction And castest my words behind thee!
When thou seest a thief, thou art in friendship with him, And hast fellowship with adulterers.
Thou lettest loose thy mouth to evil, And thy tongue frameth deceit;
Thou sittest and speakest against thy brother; Thou slanderest thine own mother's son.
These things hast thou done, and I kept silence; Hence thou thoughtest that I was altogether like thyself: But I will reprove thee, and set it in order before thine eyes.
Mark this, ye that forget God, Lest I tear you in pieces, and none deliver you!
Whoso offereth praise honoreth me; And to him who hath regard to his ways Will I show salvation from God.”


“For the leader of the music. A psalm of David, when Nathan the prophet came unto him, after his intercourse with Bathsheba.” Be gracious unto me, O God! according to thy loving kindness; According to the greatness of thy mercy, blot out my transgressions!
Wash me thoroughly from my iniquity, And cleanse me from my sin!
For I acknowledge my transgressions, And my sin is ever before me.
Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, And in thy sight have I done evil; So that thou art just in thy sentence, And righteous in thy judgment.
Behold! I was born in iniquity, And in sin did my mother conceive me.
Behold! thou desirest truth in the heart; So teach me wisdom in my inmost soul!
Purge me with hyssop, until I be clean; Wash me, until I be whiter than snow!
Make me to hear joy and gladness, So that the bones which thou hast broken may rejoice!
Hide thy face from my sins, And blot out all my iniquities!
Create within me a clean heart, O God! Renew within me a steadfast spirit!
Cast me not away from thy presence, And take not thy holy spirit from me!
Restore to me the joy of thy protection, And strengthen me with a willing spirit!
Then will I teach thy ways to transgressors, And sinners shall be converted to thee.
Deliver me from the guilt of blood, O God, the God of my salvation! That my tongue may sing aloud of thy goodness!
O Lord! open thou my lips, That my mouth may show forth thy praise!
For thou desirest not sacrifice, else would I give it; Thou delightest not in burnt-offerings.
The sacrifice which God loveth is a broken spirit; A broken and contrite heart, O God! thou wilt not despise!
Do good to Zion according to thy mercy; Build up the walls of Jerusalem!
Then shalt thou be pleased with sacrifices of righteousness, With burnt-offerings and complete offerings; Then shall bullocks be offered upon thine altar.


“For the leader of the music. A psalm of David, when Doeg, the Edomite, came and told Saul, and said to him, David is come to the house of Abimelech.” Why gloriest thou in mischief, thou man of violence? The goodness of God yet continueth daily.
Thy tongue deviseth mischief, Like a sharp razor, thou contriver of deceit!
Thou lovest evil more than good, And to lie more than to speak truth. [[Pause.]]
Thou lovest all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue!
Thee also shall God utterly destroy! o He shall seize thee, and tear thee from thy dwelling-place, And uproot thee from the land of the living. [[Pause.]]
The righteous shall see and fear, And shall laugh at him.
“Behold the man that made not God his strength, But trusted in the abundance of his riches, And placed his strength in his wickedness!”
But I shall be like a green olive-tree in the house of God; I will trust in the goodness of God for ever and ever.
I will praise thee for ever for what thou hast done; I will trust in thy name, because it is good, Before the eyes of thy godly ones!

“For the leader of the music. To be sung on wind instruments. A psalm of David.” The fool saith in his heart, “There is no God!” They are corrupt; their doings are abominable; There is none that doeth good.
God looketh down from heaven upon the children of men, To see if there are any that have understanding, That have regard to God.
They are all gone astray; together are they corrupt; There is none that doeth good, no, not one.
Shall not the evil-doers be requited, Who eat up my people like bread, And call not upon God?
Yea! fear shall come upon them, Where no fear is; For God will scatter the bones of him that encampeth against thee; Thou shalt put them to shame, for God despiseth them!
O that salvation for Israel would come out of Zion! When God bringeth back the captives of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel be glad.


“For the leader of the music. To be sung on stringed instruments A psalm of David, when the Ziphites came and said to Saul, Doth not David hide himself with us?” Save me, O God! by thy name, And by thy strength defend my cause!
O God! hear my prayer, Give ear to the words of my mouth!
For enemies have risen up against me, And oppressors seek my life; They have not set God before their eyes. [[Pause.]]
Behold! God is my helper; The Lord is the support of my life.
He will repay evil to my enemies; For thy truth's sake, O God! cut them off!
With a willing heart will I sacrifice to thee; I will praise thy name, O LORD! for it is good;
For thou hast delivered me from all trouble, So that my eye hath looked with joy upon my enemies!

“For the leader of the music. To be sung on stringed instruments. A psalm of David.” Give ear to my prayer, O God! Hide not thyself from my supplication!
Attend unto me, and hear me! I wander about mourning and wailing,
On account of the clamors of the enemy, On account of the violence of the wicked. For they bring evil upon me, And in wrath set themselves against me.
My heart trembleth in my bosom, And the terrors of death have fallen upon me.
Fear and trembling have seized me, And horror hath overwhelmed me.
Then I say, O that I had wings like a dove! For then would I fly away, and be at rest.
Behold, I would wander far away, And take up my abode in a wilderness. [[Pause.]]
I would hasten away to a shelter From the rushing wind and tempest.
Confound, O Lord! divide their counsels! For I behold violence and strife in the city.
Day and night do these go about its walls; In the midst of it are iniquity and mischief.
Wickedness is in the midst of it; Oppression and fraud depart not from its streets.
It was not an enemy that reviled me, Then I could have borne it; Nor one that hated me, who rose up against me; From him I could have hid myself.
But it was thou, a man my equal, My friend, and my acquaintance.
We held sweet converse together, And walked to the house of God in company.
May sudden death seize upon them! May they go down to the underworld alive! For wickedness is in their dwellings, in the midst of them.
As for me, I will call upon God, And Jehovah will save me.
At evening, at morn, and at noon I mourn and sigh, And he will hear my voice.
He will deliver me in peace from my conflict; For many have risen up against me.
God will hear me, and bring them down,—He that hath been judge of old. [[Pause.]] Because they have no changes, Therefore they fear not God.
They lift up their hands against their friend, And break their covenant with him.
Their speech was softer than butter, But war was in their heart; Their words were smoother than oil, Yet were they drawn swords.
“Cast thy burden upon the LORD, and he will sustain thee; He will never suffer the righteous to fall!”
Yea, thou, O God! wilt bring them down into the lowest pit! Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days. But I will trust in thee!

“For the leader of the music. To be sung to the tune of “The dumb dove among strangers.” A psalm of David, when the Philistines took him in Gath.” Have pity upon me, O God! for man panteth for my life; My adversary daily oppresseth me!
Mine enemies daily pant for my life, And many are they who war proudly against me.
When I am in fear, I will put my trust in thee!
Through God shall I praise his word; In God do I put my trust; I will not fear; What can flesh do to me?
Every day they wrest my words; All their thoughts are against me for evil.
They gather themselves together, they hide themselves, they watch my steps, Lying in wait for my life.
Shall they escape by their iniquity? In thine anger cast down the people, O God!
Count thou my wanderings; Put my tears into thy bottle! Are they not recorded in thy book?
When I cry to thee, my enemies shall turn back; This I know, that God is for me.
Through God shall I praise his word; I shall glory in the promise of Jehovah.
In God do I put my trust; I will not fear: What can man do to me?
Thy vows are upon me, O God! I will render praises to thee!
For thou hast delivered me from death, Yea, my feet from falling, That I may walk before God in the light of the living.

“For the leader of the music. To be sung to the tune of “Do not destroy.” A psalm of David, when he fled from Saul in the cave.” Have pity upon me, O God! have pity upon me, For in thee doth my soul seek refuge! Yea, in the shadow of thy wings do I take shelter, Until these calamities be overpast!
I call upon God the Most High, Upon God, who performeth all things for me;
He will send from heaven, and save me; He will put to shame him that panteth for my life; [[Pause.]] God will send forth his mercy and his truth.
My life is in the midst of lions; I dwell among them that breathe out fire; Among men whose teeth are spears and arrows, And whose tongue is a sharp sword.
Exalt thyself, O God! above the heavens, And thy glory above all the earth!
They have prepared a net for my steps; My soul is bowed down; They have digged a pit before me, But into it they have themselves fallen.
My heart is strengthened, O God! my heart is strengthened! I will sing, and give thanks.
Awake, my soul! awake, psaltery and harp! I will wake with the early dawn.
I will praise thee, O Lord! among the nations; I will sing to thee among the kingdoms!
For thy mercy reacheth to the heavens, And thy truth to the clouds!
Exalt thyself, O God! above the heavens, And thy glory above all the earth!

“For the leader of the music. To the tune of “Do not destroy.” A psalm of David.” Do ye, indeed, administer justice faithfully, ye mighty ones? Do ye judge with uprightness, ye sons of men?
Nay, in your hearts ye contrive iniquity; Your hands weigh out violence in the land!
The wicked are estranged, from their very birth; The liars go astray as soon as they are born.
They have poison, like the poison of a serpent; Like the deaf adder's, which stoppeth her ear;
Which listeneth not to the voice of the charmer, And of the sorcerer, skilful in incantations.
Break their teeth, O God! in their mouths! Break out the great teeth of the lions, O LORD!
May they melt like waters, which flow away; May their arrows, when they aim them, be as if cut in pieces!
May they be like the snail, which melteth away as it goeth; Like the abortion of a woman, that seeth not the sun!
Before your pots feel the heat of the thorns, Whether fresh, or burning, may they be blown away!
The righteous shall rejoice, when he seeth such vengeance; He shall bathe his feet in the blood of the wicked.
Then shall men say, “Truly there is a reward for the righteous! Truly there is a God who is judge upon the earth!”

“For the leader of the music. To the tune of “Do not destroy.” A psalm of David, when Saul sent, and they watched the house to kill him.” Deliver me from my enemies, O my God! Defend me from them that rise up against me!
Deliver me from the doers of iniquity, And save me from men of blood!
For, lo! they lie in wait for my life; The mighty are gathered against me, Without any offence or fault of mine, O LORD!
Without any offence of mine, they run and prepare themselves; Awake to help me, and behold!
Do thou, O Jehovah, God of hosts, God of Israel, Awake to punish all the nations! Show no mercy to any wicked transgressors! [[Pause.]]
Let them return at evening, Let them howl like dogs, And go round about the city!
Behold! with their mouths they belch out malice; Swords are upon their lips; “For who,” say they, “will hear?”
Yet thou, O LORD! wilt laugh at them; Thou wilt hold all the nations in derision!
O my Strength! to thee will I look! For God is my defence;
My God will come to meet me with his mercy; God will cause me to look with joy upon my enemies.
Slay them not, lest my people forget; Scatter them by thy power, and cast them down, O Lord, our shield!
The word of their lips is the sin of their mouth; Let them be overtaken in their pride, For the curses and the falsehood which they utter!
Consume them in thy wrath; consume them that they be no more, That they may know that God ruleth in Jacob, Even to the ends of the earth! [[Pause.]]
Let them return at evening, Let them howl like dogs, And go round about the city!
Let them wander about for food, When they have passed the night unsatisfied!
But I will sing of thy power; Yea, in the morning will I sing aloud of thy mercy; For thou hast been my defence, My refuge in the day of my distress.
To thee, O my Strength! will I sing! For God is my defence; a God of mercy to me.


“For the leader of the music; upon the Shushan-Eduth; a psalm of David for instruction; when he was at strife with the Syrians of Mesopotamia, and the Syrians of Zoba; when Joab returned, and smote twelve thousand Edomites in the valley of Salt.” O God! thou hast forsaken us; thou hast broken us in pieces; Thou hast been angry! O revive us again!
Thou hast made the land tremble; thou hast rent it; O heal its breaches, for it tottereth!
Thou hast caused thy people to see hard things; Thou hast made us drink the wine of reeling.
Lift up a banner for them that fear thee, For the sake of thy faithfulness, that they may escape!
That thy beloved may be delivered, Save with thy right hand, and answer me!
God promiseth in his holiness; I will rejoice; I shall yet divide Shechem, And measure out the valley of Succoth.
Gilead shall be mine, and mine Manasseh; Ephraim shall be my helmet, And Judah my sceptre;
Moab shall be my wash-bowl; Upon Edom shall I cast my shoe; I shall triumph over Philistia!
Who will bring me to the strong city? Who will lead me into Edom?
Wilt not thou, O God! who didst forsake us, And didst not go forth with our armies?
Give us thine aid in our distress, For vain is the help of man!
Through God we shall do valiantly; For he will tread down our enemies.

“For the leader of the music. To be sung upon stringed instruments. A psalm of David.” Hear my cry, O God! Attend to my prayer!
From the extremity of the land I cry unto thee in deep sorrow of heart; Lead me to the rock that is high above me!
For thou art my refuge, My strong tower against the enemy.
I shall dwell in thy tabernacle for ever; I will seek refuge under the covert of thy wings.
For thou, O God! wilt hear my vows, And give me the inheritance of those who fear thy name.
O prolong the life of the king! May his years extend through many generations!
May he reign for ever before God! Grant that mercy and truth may preserve him!
So will I sing praise to thy name for ever; I will daily perform my vows.

“For the leader of the music of the Jeduthunites, A psalm of David.” Truly my soul resteth on God alone; From him cometh my deliverance!
He alone is my rock and my salvation; He is my safeguard, I shall not wholly fall!
How long will ye continue to assault a single man? How long will ye all seek to destroy me, Like a bending wall, or a tottering fence?
They study how to cast me down from my eminence; They delight in falsehood; They bless with their mouths, but in their hearts they curse.
My soul, rest thou on God alone, For from him cometh my hope!
He alone is my rock and my salvation; He is my safeguard, —I shall not fall.
From God cometh my help and my glory: My strong rock, my refuge, is God.
Trust in him at all times, ye people! Pour out your hearts before him! God is our refuge!
Truly men of low degree are vanity, And men of high degree are a lie; Placed in the balance, They are all lighter than vanity.
Trust not in extortion; Place no vain hopes in rapine! If riches increase, set not your heart upon them!
Once hath God promised, twice have I heard it, That power belongeth unto God.
To thee also, O Lord! belongeth mercy; For thou dost render to every man according to his work!

“A psalm of David, when he was in the wilderness of Judah.” O God! thou art my God! earnestly do I seek thee! My soul thirsteth, my flesh longeth for thee, In a dry, thirsty land. where is no water!
Thus I look toward thee in thy sanctuary, To behold thy power and thy glory!
For thy loving-kindness is better than life; Therefore my lips shall praise thee!
Thus will I bless thee, while I live; In thy name will I lift up my hands!
My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, And with joyful lips my mouth shall praise thee,
When I think of thee upon my bed, And meditate on thee in the night-watches.
For thou art my help, And in the shadow of thy wings I rejoice.
My soul cleaveth to thee; Thy right hand holdeth me up.
While they who seek to destroy my life Shall themselves go down into the depths of the earth.
They shall be given up to the sword, And be a portion for jackals.
But the king shall rejoice in God; All that swear by him shall be honored; But the mouth of liars shall be stopped.

“For the leader of the music. A psalm of David.” Hear my voice, O God! when I pray! Preserve my life from the terrors of the enemy!
Hide me from the assembly of the wicked, From the brawling crowd of evil-doers!
For like a sword they sharpen their tongues, Like arrows they aim their poisoned words,
To shoot in secret at the upright; Suddenly do they shoot at him without fear.
They prepare themselves for an evil deed; They commune of laying secret snares: “Who,” say they, “will see them?”
They meditate crimes: “We have finished,” say they, “our plans!” The heart and bosom of every one of them are deep.
But God will shoot an arrow at them; Suddenly shall they be wounded.
Thus their own tongues shall bring them down; All who see them will flee away.
Then will all men stand in awe, And declare what God hath done, And attentively consider his work.
The righteous shall rejoice, and trust in the LORD; All the upright in heart shall glory.

“For the leader of the music. A psalm of David.” To thee belongeth trust, to thee praise, O God in Zion! And to thee shall the vow be performed!
O Thou that hearest prayer! To thee shall all flesh come!
My iniquities are heavy upon me; But thou wilt forgive our transgressions!
Happy is he whom thou choosest, And bringest near thee to dwell in thy courts! May we be satisfied with the blessings of thy house, Thy holy temple!
By wonderful deeds dost thou answer us in thy goodness, O God, our salvation! Who art the confidence of all the ends of the earth, And of the most distant seas!
Thou makest fast the mountains by thy power, Being girded with strength!
Thou stillest the roar of the sea, The roar of its waves, And the tumult of the nations.
They who dwell in the ends of the earth are awed by thy signs; Thou makest the outgoings of the morning and of the evening to rejoice!
Thou visitest the earth and waterest it; Thou enrichest it exceedingly; The river of God is full of water. Thou suppliest the earth with corn, When thou hast thus prepared it.
Thou waterest its furrows, And breakest down its ridges; Thou makest it soft with showers, And blessest its increase.
Thou crownest the year with thy goodness; Thy footsteps drop fruitfulness;
They drop it upon the pastures of the wilderness, And the hills are girded with gladness.
The pastures are clothed with flocks, And the valleys are covered with corn; They shout, yea, they sing for joy.
“For the leader of the music. A psalm.” Shout joyfully unto God. all ye lands!
Sing ye the honor of his name; Make his praise glorious!
Say unto God, How terrible are thy doings! Through the greatness of thy power thine enemies are suppliants to thee!
Let all the earth worship thee; Let it sing praise to thee, let it sing praise to thy name! [[Pause.]]
Come, behold the works of God! How terrible his doings among the sons of men!
He turned the sea into dry land; They went through the deep on foot; Then we rejoiced in him.
By his power he ruleth for ever; His eyes are fixed upon the nations; Let not the rebellious exalt themselves! [[Pause.]]
O bless our God, ye nations. And make the voice of his praise to be heard!
It is he who preserveth our lives, And suffereth not our feet to stumble.
Thou hast, indeed, proved us, O God! Thou hast tried us as silver is tried.
Thou broughtest us into a snare, And didst lay a heavy burden upon our backs;
Thou didst cause men to ride upon our heads, And we have gone through fire and water: But thou hast brought us to a place of abundance.
I will go into thy house with burnt-offerings! I will pay thee my vows,—
The vows which my lips uttered. Which my mouth promised in my trouble.
Burnt sacrifices of fatlings will I offer to thee with the fat of rams; Bullocks, with he-goats, will I sacrifice to thee. [[Pause.]]
Come and hear, all ye who fear God, And I will relate what he hath done for me!
I called upon him with my mouth, And praise is now upon my tongue.
If I had meditated wickedness in my heart, The Lord would not have heard me:
But surely God hath heard me; He hath had regard to the voice of my supplication.
Blessed be God, who did not reject my prayer, Nor withhold his mercy from me!

“For the leader of the music. To be sung on stringed instruments. A psalm.” O God! be merciful to us, and bless us, And cause thy face to shine upon us! [[Pause.]]
That thy doings may be known on earth, And thy saving power to all the nations.
Let the nations praise thee, O God! Yea, let all the nations praise thee!
Let all the nations be glad, and shout for joy! For justly dost thou judge the people, And govern the nations on the earth.
Let the nations praise thee, O God! Yea, let all the nations praise thee!
For the earth hath yielded her increase, And God, our God, hath blessed us.
May God continue to bless us, And may all the ends of the earth fear him!

“For the leader of the music. A psalm of David.” Let God arise, and his enemies are scattered, And they who hate him flee before him!
As smoke is dispersed, so thou dispersest them; As wax melteth before the fire, So perish the wicked before the face of God.
But the righteous are glad and rejoice in his presence, Yea, they exult exceedingly.
Sing unto God; sing praises to his name! Prepare a way for him who rideth through the desert! Jehovah is his name; be joyful in his presence!
The father of the fatherless, and the protector of the widow, Is God in his holy habitation.
God causeth the forsaken to dwell in houses; He leadeth forth to prosperity them that are bound; But the rebellious shall dwell in a barren land.
O God! when thou didst go before thy people, When thou didst march through the wilderness. [[Pause.]]
The earth quaked, and the heavens dropped at the presence of God; This Sinai trembled at the presence of God, the God of Israel.
Thou, O God! didst send a plentiful rain; Thou didst strengthen thy wearied inheritance.
Thy people established themselves in the land; Thou, O God! in thy goodness, didst prepare it for the needy!
The Lord gave the song of victory Of the maidens publishing glad tidings to the mighty host.
“The kings with their armies have fled, —have fled! And the matron at home divideth the spoil.
Truly ye may repose yourselves in the stalls, Like the wings of a dove covered with silver, And her feathers with shining gold.”
When the Most High destroyed the kings in the land, It was white [[with their bones]] like Salmon.
Ye lofty hills, ye hills of Bashan, Ye many-topped hills, ye hills of Bashan,
Why frown ye, ye many-topped hills, At the hill in which God is pleased to dwell, In which Jehovah will dwell for ever?
The chariots of God are myriads, yea, thousands of thousands; The Lord is in the midst of them, as upon Sinai, in the sanctuary.
Thou hast ascended on high, Thou hast led captive the vanquished, Thou hast received gifts among men, Even the rebellious, that here thou mightst dwell, O LORD God!
Praised be the Lord daily! When we are heavy-laden, the Mighty One is our help.
Our God is a God of salvation; From the Lord Jehovah cometh deliverance from death.
But God smiteth the head of his enemies, Even the hairy crowns of those who go on in their iniquity.
“I will bring them back,” saith the Lord, “from Bashan; I will bring them back from the deep sea;
That thy foot may be dipped in their blood, That thy dogs may drink the blood of thine enemies.”
We have seen thy procession, O God! The procession of my God, my king, to his sanctuary!
The singers go before, the minstrels follow, Amidst damsels playing on timbrels.
Praise ye God in your assemblies; Praise the Lord, all ye from the fountain of Israel!
Here is Benjamin, the youngest, and his leaders; The chiefs of Judah, and their band; The chiefs of Zebulon, and the chiefs of Naphtali.
Thy God has ordained thy strength, [[O Israel!]] Show forth thy might, O God! thou who hast wrought for us!
Because of thy temple in Jerusalem Shall kings bring presents to thee.
Rebuke the wild beast of the reeds, The multitude of bulls with the calves of the nations, So that they shall cast themselves down with masses of silver; Scatter thou the nations that delight in war!
Princes shall come out of Egypt; Ethiopia shall haste with outstretched hands to God.
Ye kingdoms of the earth, sing unto God; Sing praises to Jehovah;
To him who rideth upon the ancient heaven of heavens! Behold, he uttereth his voice, his mighty voice!
Give glory to God, Whose majesty is in Israel, and whose might is in the clouds!
Terrible art thou, O God! from thy sanctuary! The God of Israel giveth strength and power to his people. Praised be God!

“For the leader of the music. Upon the Shoshannim. A psalm of David.” Save me, O God! For the waters press in to my very life!
I sink in deep mire, where is no standing; I have come into deep waters, and the waves flow over me.
I am weary with crying; my throat is parched; Mine eyes are wasted, while I wait for my God.
More numerous than the hairs of my head are they who hate me without reason; Mighty are they who seek to destroy me, being my enemies without cause: I must restore what I took not away.
O God! thou knowest my offences, And my sins are not hidden from thee!
Let not them that trust in thee through me be put to shame, O Lord Jehovah, God of hosts! Let not them that seek thee through me be confounded, O God of Israel!
For on account of thee do I suffer reproach, And shame covereth my face!
I am become a stranger to my brothers; Yea, an alien to my mother's sons.
For zeal for thy house consumeth me, And the reproaches of them that reproach thee fall upon me.
When I weep and fast, That is made my reproach;
When I clothe myself in sackcloth, Then I become their by-word.
They who sit in the gate speak against me, And I am become the song of drunkards.
Yet will I address my prayer to thee, O LORD! May it be in an acceptable time according to thy great goodness! Hear, O God! and afford me thy sure help!
Save me from the mire, and let me not sink; May I be delivered from my enemies,—from the deep waters!
Let not the water-flood overflow me; Let not the deep swallow me up, And let not the pit close her mouth upon me!
Hear me, O LORD! since great is thy loving-kindness; According to the abundance of thy tender mercies look upon me!
Hide not thy face from thy servant; I am greatly distressed, O make haste to mine aid!
Draw near to me, and redeem my life; Deliver me because of my enemies!
Thou knowest my reproach, and dishonor, and shame; All my adversaries are in thy view!
Reproach hath broken my heart, and I am full of heaviness; I look for pity, but there is none; For comforters, but find none.
For my food they give me gall, And in my thirst they give me vinegar to drink.
May their table be to them a snare; May it be a trap to them, while they are at ease!
May their eyes be darkened, that they may not see; And cause their loins continually to shake!
Pour out upon them thine indignation, And may the heat of thine anger overtake them!
Let their habitation be desolate, And let none dwell in their tents!
For they persecute those whom thou hast smitten, And talk of the pain of those whom thou hast wounded.
Add iniquity to their iniquity, And let them never come into thy favor!
Let them be blotted out of the book of the living; Let not their names be written with the righteous!
But I am poor, and sorrowful: May thine aid, O God! set me on high!
Then I will praise the name of God in a song; I will give glory to him with thanksgiving.
More pleasing shall this be to the LORD Than a full-horned and full-hoofed bullock.
The afflicted shall see, and rejoice; The hearts of them that fear God shall be revived.
For the LORD heareth the poor, And despiseth not his people in their bonds.
Let the heaven and the earth praise him; The sea, and all that move therein!
For God will save Zion, and will build the cities of Judah, That they may dwell therein, and possess it.
Yea, the posterity of his servants shall possess it, And they that love him shall dwell therein.

“For the leader of the music. A psalm of David, for remembrance.” Make haste, O God! to deliver me, O LORD! come speedily to mine aid!
May they all be confounded, and covered with shame, Who seek to take my life! May they be driven back with disgrace Who desire to do me injury!
May they be turned back with shame Who cry out to me, “Aha! aha!”
But let all who seek thee be glad and rejoice in thee! Let them that love thy protection ever say, “May God be praised!”
But I am poor and needy; O God! hasten to mine aid! Thou art my help and my deliverer, O LORD! make no delay!
In thee, O LORD! do I put my trust! Let me never be put to shame!
In thy goodness deliver and rescue me; Incline thine ear to me, and save me!
Be thou the rock of my abode, where I may continually resort! Thou hast granted me deliverance; For thou art my rock and my fortress!
Save me, O my God! from the hand of the wicked,-From the hand of the unjust and cruel!
For thou art my hope, O Lord Jehovah! Thou hast been my trust from my youth!
Upon thee have I leaned from my birth; From my earliest breath thou hast been my support; My song hath been continually of thee!
I am a wonder to many, But thou art my strong refuge.
Let my mouth be filled with thy praise; Yea, all the day long, with thy glory.
Cast me not off in mine old age; Forsake me not, When my strength faileth!
For my enemies speak against me, And they who lay wait for my life consult together:
“God,” say they, “hath forsaken him; Pursue and seize him; for he hath none to deliver him!”
O God! be not far from me! Come speedily to mine aid, O my God!
Let them perish with shame who are my enemies; Let them be covered with contempt and dishonor who seek my hurt!
But I will hope continually; I shall yet praise thee more and more.
My mouth shall speak of thy goodness,—Of thy sure protection all the day long; For thy mercies are more than I can number.
I will celebrate thy mighty deeds, O Lord Jehovah! I will make mention of thy goodness, of thine only!
O God! thou hast taught me from my youth, And thus far have I declared thy wondrous deeds;
And now, when I am old and gray-headed, O God! forsake me not, Until I make known thine arm to the next generation,-Thy mighty power to all that are to come!
For thy goodness, O God! reacheth to the heavens; Wonderful things doest thou! O God! who is like unto thee?
Thou hast suffered us to see great and grievous troubles; Thou wilt again give us life, And wilt bring us back from the depths of the earth!
Thou wilt increase my greatness; Thou wilt again comfort me!
Then will I praise thee with the psaltery; Even thy faithfulness, O my God! To thee will I sing with the harp, O Holy One of Israel!
My lips shall rejoice, when I sing to thee; And my soul, which thou hast redeemed from death;
My tongue also shall continually speak of thy righteousness: For all who seek my hurt are brought to shame and confounded.
“For Solomon.” To the king, O God! give thy justice, And to the son of a king thy righteousness!
Yea! he shall judge thy people with equity, And thine oppressed ones with justice.
For the mountains shall bring forth peace to the people, And the hills, through righteousness.
He shall defend the oppressed of the people; He shall save the needy, And break in pieces the oppressor.
They shall fear thee as long as the sun and moon shall endure, From generation to generation.
He shall be like rain descending on the mown field,—Like showers which water the earth.
In his days shall the righteous flourish, And great shall be their prosperity, as long as the moon shall endure.
He shall have dominion from sea to sea, And from the river to the ends of the earth.
They that dwell in the desert shall bow before him, And his enemies shall lick the dust.
The kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall bring presents; The kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts;
Yea, all kings shall fall down before him; All nations shall serve him.
For he shall deliver the poor who crieth for aid, And the oppressed who hath no helper.
He shall spare the weak and needy, And save the lives of the poor.
He shall redeem them from deceit and violence, And their blood shall be precious in his sight.
He shall prosper, and to him shall be given of the gold of Sheba; Prayer also shall be made for him continually, And daily shall he be praised.
There shall be an abundance of corn in the land; Its fruit shall shake like Lebanon, even on the tops of the mountains; And they of the cities shall flourish as the grass of the earth.
His name shall endure for ever; His name shall be continued as long as the sun. By him shall men bless themselves; All nations shall call him blessed.
[[Praised be God, Jehovah, the God of Israel, Who alone doeth wonderful things!
Praised be his glorious name for ever! May his glory fill the whole earth! Amen, Amen!
Here end the Psalms of David, the son of Jesse.]]
“BOOK III. A psalm of Asaph.” Truly God is good to Israel,—To those who are pure in heart.
Yet my feet almost gave way; My steps had well nigh slipped:
For I was envious of the proud, When I saw the prosperity of the wicked.
For they have no pains even to their death; Their bodies are in full health.
They have not the woes of other men, Neither are they smitten like other men.
Therefore pride encircleth their neck as a collar; Violence covereth them as a garment.
From their bosom issueth their iniquity; The designs of their hearts burst forth.
They mock, and speak of malicious oppression; Their words are haughty;
They stretch forth their mouth to the heavens, And their tongue goeth through the earth;
Therefore his people walk in their ways, And there drink from full fountains.
And they say, “How doth God know? How can there be knowledge with the Most High?”
Behold these are the ungodly! Yet they are ever prosperous; they heap up riches.
Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain; In vain have I washed my hands in innocence.
For every day have I been smitten; Every morn have I been chastened.
If I should resolve to speak like them, Surely I should be treacherous to the family of thy children.
So, when I studied to know this, It was painful to my eyes;
Until I went into the sanctuaries of God, And considered what was their end.
Behold! thou hast set them on slippery places; Thou castest them down into unseen pits.
How are they brought to desolation in a moment, And utterly consumed with sudden destruction!
As a dream when one awaketh, Thou, O Lord! when thou awakest, wilt make their vain show a derision.
When my heart was vexed And I was pierced in my reins,
Then was I stupid and without understanding; I was like one of the brutes before thee.
Yet am I ever under thy care; By my right hand thou dost hold me up.
Thou wilt guide me with thy counsel, And at last receive me in glory.
Whom have I in heaven but thee, And whom on earth do I love in comparison with thee?
Though my flesh and my heart fail, God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.
For, lo! they who are far from thee perish; Thou destroyest all who estrange themselves from thee.
But it is good for me to draw near to God; I put my trust in the Lord Jehovah, That I may declare all thy works.
“A psalm of Asaph.” O God! why hast thou cast us off for ever? Why doth thine anger smoke against the flock of thy pasture?
Remember the people which thou didst purchase of old; Thine own inheritance, which thou didst redeem; That Mount Zion, where thou once didst dwell!
Hasten thy steps to those utter desolations! Every thing in the sanctuary hath the enemy abused!
Thine enemies roar in the place of thine assemblies; Their own symbols have they set up for signs.
They appear like those who raise the axe against a thicket;
They have broken down the carved work of thy temple with axes and hammers;
They have cast fire into thy sanctuary; They have profaned, and cast to the ground, the dwelling-place of thy name.
They said in their hearts, “Let us destroy them all together!” They have burned all God's places of assembly in the land.
We no longer see our signs; There is no prophet among us, Nor any one that knoweth how long this desolation shall endure.
How long, O God! shall the adversary revile? Shall the enemy blaspheme thy name for ever?
Why withdrawest thou thy hand, even thy right hand? Take it from thy bosom, and destroy!
Yet God was our king of old, Working salvation in the midst of the earth.
Thou didst divide the sea by thy power; Thou didst crush the heads of the sea-monsters in the waters.
Thou didst break in pieces the head of the crocodile; Thou gavest him for food to the inhabitants of the desert.
Thou didst cleave forth the fountain and the stream; Thou didst dry up perennial rivers.
Thine is the day, and thine the night; Thou didst prepare the light and the sun.
Thou didst establish all the boundaries of the earth; Thou didst make summer and winter.
O remember that the enemy hath reviled Jehovah; That an impious people hath blasphemed thy name!
Give not up the life of thy turtle-dove to the wild beast; Forget not for ever thine afflicted people!
Have regard to thy covenant! For all the dark places of the land are full of the abodes of cruelty.
O let not the afflicted go away ashamed! Let the poor and needy praise thy name!
Arise, O God! maintain thy cause! Remember how the impious revileth thee daily!
Forget not the clamor of thine adversaries,—The noise of thine enemies, which continually increaseth!

“For the leader of the music. To the tune of “Do not destroy.” A psalm of Asaph.” We give thanks to thee, O God! we give thanks to thee, and near is thy name; Men shall declare thy wondrous deeds!
“When I see my time, Then will I judge with equity.
The earth trembleth, and all her inhabitants; But I uphold her pillars.”
I say to the proud, Behave not proudly! To the wicked, Lift not up your horn!
Lift not up your horn on high, And speak not with a stiff neck!
For promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the south;
But it is God that judgeth; He putteth down one, and setteth up another.
For in the hand of the LORD there is a cup; The wine is foaming and full of spices, And of it he poureth out; Even to the dregs shall all the wicked of the earth drink it.
Therefore I will extol him for ever; I will sing praise to the God of Jacob.
“I will bring down all the power of the wicked; But the righteous shall lift up their heads.”

“For the leader of the music. Upon stringed instruments. A Psalm of Asaph.” In Judah is God known; Great is his name in Israel.
In Jerusalem is his tabernacle, And in Zion his dwelling-place.
There brake he the lightning of the bow, The shield, the sword, and all the weapons of battle.
More glorious and excellent art thou Than those mountains of robbers!
Spoiled are the stout-hearted; They sank into their sleep; The hands of the mighty were powerless.
Before thy rebuke, O God of Jacob! Fell chariot and horseman into a deep sleep!
Thou, thou, O God! art terrible! Who can stand before thee in thine anger?
Thou didst cause judgment to be heard from heaven; The earth trembled and was still,
When God arose to judgment, To save all the oppressed of the earth!
The wrath of man shall praise thee, When thou girdest on the whole of thy wrath!
Make and perform vows to Jehovah, your God! Let all that dwell around him bring gifts to the terrible One,
Who casteth down the pride of princes, Who is terrible to the kings of the earth!

“For the leader of the music of the Jeduthunites. A psalm of Asaph.” I call upon God; I cry aloud for help; I call upon God, that he would hear me!
In the day of my trouble I seek the Lord; In the night is my hand stretched forth continually; My soul refuseth to be comforted.
I remember God, and am disquieted; I think of him, and my spirit is overwhelmed.
Thou keepest mine eyelids from closing; I am distressed, so that I cannot speak!
I think of the days of old,—The years of ancient times.
I call to remembrance my songs in the night; I meditate in my heart, And my spirit inquireth:
Will the Lord be angry for ever? Will he be favorable no more?
Is his mercy utterly withdrawn for ever? Doth his promise fail from generation to generation?
Hath God forgotten to be gracious? Hath he in anger shut up his compassion?
Then I say, “This is mine affliction, A change in the right hand of the Most High.”
I remember the deeds of Jehovah; I think of thy wonders of old.
I meditate on all thy works, And talk of thy doings.
Thy ways, O God! are holy! Who so great a god as our God?
Thou art a God who doest wonders; Thou hast manifested thy power among the nations.
With thy strong arm thou didst redeem thy people,—The sons of Jacob and Joseph.
The waters saw thee, O God! The waters saw thee, and feared, And the deep trembled.
The clouds poured out water, The skies sent forth thunder, And thine arrows flew.
Thy thunder roared in the whirlwind; Thy lightning illumined the world; The earth trembled and shook.
Thy way was through the sea, And thy path through great waters; And thy footsteps could not be found.
Thou didst lead thy people like a flock, By the hands of Moses and Aaron.
“A psalm of Asaph.” Give ear, O my people, to my instruction! Incline your ears to the words of my mouth!
I will open my mouth in a psalm; I will utter sayings of ancient times.
What we have heard and learned, And our fathers have told us,
We will not hide from their children; Showing to the generation to come the praises of Jehovah, His might, and the wonders he hath wrought.
For he appointed statutes in Jacob, And established a law in Israel, Which he commanded our fathers To make known to their children;
So that the generation to come might know them; The children, which should be born, and rise up, Who should declare them to their children;
That they might put their trust in God, And not forget his deeds, But keep his commandments;
And might not be, like their forefathers, A stubborn and rebellious generation,—A generation whose heart was not fixed upon God, And whose spirit was not steadfast toward the Almighty.
The children of Ephraim were like armed bowmen, Who turn their backs in the day of battle.
They kept not the covenant of God, And refused to walk in his law;
And forgot his mighty deeds, And the wonders he had shown them.
Marvellous things did he in the sight of their fathers, In the land of Egypt, in the field of Zoan.
He divided the sea, and caused them to pass through; Yea, he made the waters to stand as a heap.
By day he led them by a cloud, And all the night by a light of fire.
He clave the rocks in the wilderness, And gave them drink, as from the great deep.
From the rock he brought flowing streams, And made water to run down like rivers.
Yet still they sinned against him, And provoked the Most High in the desert.
They tempted God in their hearts, By asking food for their delight.
Yea, they spake against God, and said, “Can God spread a table in the wilderness?
Behold! he smote the rock, and the water flowed, And streams gushed forth: Is he also able to give bread? Can he provide flesh for his people?”
When, therefore, the LORD heard this, he was wroth: So a fire was kindled against Jacob, And anger arose against Israel.
Because they believed not in God, And trusted not in his aid.
Yet he had commanded the clouds above, And had opened the doors of heaven;
And had rained down upon them manna for food, And had given them the corn of heaven.
Every one ate the food of princes; He sent them bread to the full.
Then he caused a strong wind to blow in the heavens, And by his power he brought a south wind;
He rained down flesh upon them as dust, And feathered fowls as the sand of the sea.
He caused them to fall in the midst of their camp, Round about their habitations.
So they did eat, and were filled; For he gave them their own desire.
Their desire was not yet satisfied, And their meat was yet in their mouths,
When the wrath of God came upon them, And slew their strong men, And smote down the chosen men of Israel.
For all this they sinned still, And put no trust in his wondrous works.
Therefore he consumed their days in vanity, And their years in sudden destruction.
When he slew them, they sought him; They returned, and sought earnestly for God;
And remembered that God was their rock, And the Most High their redeemer.
But they only flattered him with their mouths, And spake falsely to him with their tongues.
For their hearts were not true to him, Nor were they steadfast in his covenant.
Yet, being full of compassion, he forgave their iniquity, And would not utterly destroy them; Often he restrained his indignation, And stirred not up all his anger.
He remembered that they were but flesh,—A breath, that passeth and cometh not back.
How often did they provoke him in the wilderness! How often did they anger him in the desert!
Again and again they tempted God, And offended the Holy One of Israel.
They remembered not his hand, Nor the day when he delivered them from the enemy;
What signs he had wrought in Egypt, And what wonders in the fields of Zoan.
He turned their rivers into blood, So that they could not drink of their streams.
He sent amongst them flies, which devoured them, And frogs, which destroyed them.
He gave also their fruits to the caterpillar, And their labor to the locust.
He destroyed their vines with hail, And their sycamore-trees with frost.
He also gave up their cattle to hail, And their flocks to hot thunderbolts.
He sent against them the fierceness of his anger, Wrath, indignation, and woe,—A host of angels of evil.
He made a way for his anger, He spared them not from death, But gave up their lives to the pestilence.
He smote all the firstborn in Egypt; The first-fruits of their strength in the tents of Ham.
But he led forth his own people like sheep, And guided them like a flock in the wilderness.
He led them on safely, so that they feared not, While the sea overwhelmed their enemies.
He brought them to his own sacred border, Even to this mountain which his right hand had gained.
He cast out the nations before them, And divided their land by a measuring-line, as an inheritance, And caused the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents.
Yet they tempted and provoked God, the Most High, And kept not his statutes;
Like their fathers they were faithless, and turned back; They turned aside, like a deceitful bow.
They provoked his anger by their high places, And stirred up his jealousy by their graven images.
God saw this, and was wroth, And greatly abhorred Israel;
So that he forsook the habitation at Shiloh, The tabernacle where he dwelt among men,
And delivered his strength into captivity, And his glory into the hand of the enemy.
His own people he gave up to the sword, And was wroth with his own inheritance.
Fire consumed their young men, And their maidens did not bewail them.
Their priests fell by the sword, And their widows made no lamentation.
But at length the Lord awaked as from sleep, As a hero who had been overpowered by wine;
He smote his enemies, and drove them back, And covered them with everlasting disgrace.
Yet he rejected the tents of Joseph, And chose not the tribe of Ephraim;
But chose the tribe of Judah, The Mount Zion which he loved;
Where he built, like the heavens, his sanctuary; Like the earth, which he hath established for ever.
And he chose David, his servant, And took him from the sheepfolds;
From tending the suckling ewes he brought him To feed Jacob his people, And Israel his inheritance.
He fed them with an upright heart, And guided them with skilful hands.
“A psalm of Asaph.” O God! the nations have come into thine inheritance; They have polluted thy holy temple; They have made Jerusalem a heap of ruins!
They have given the dead bodies of thy servants to be food for the birds of heaven, The flesh of thy holy ones to the wild beasts of the earth!
Their blood have they shed like water around Jerusalem, And there was none to bury them!
We have become the reproach of our neighbors,—The scorn and derision of those around us.
How long, O LORD! wilt thou be angry for ever? How long shall thy jealousy burn like fire?
Pour out thy wrath on the nations which acknowledge thee not. And on the kingdoms which call not upon thy name!
For they have devoured Jacob, And laid waste his dwelling-place.
O remember not against us former iniquities; Let thy tender mercy speedily succor us,
For we are brought very low! Help us, O God of our salvation! for the honor of thy name; F or thy name's sake save us, and forgive our iniquities!
Why should the nations say, “Where is their God?” May the revenging of the blood of thy servants, which hath been shed, Be manifested among the nations before our eyes!
Let the cry of the prisoner come before thee! According to the greatness of thy power preserve those that are appointed to die!
And return sevenfold into our neighbors' bosoms The reproach with which they have reproached thee, O Lord!
So shall we, thy people, and the flock of thy pasture, Give thanks to thee for ever. And show forth thy praise to all generations.

“For the leader of the music. Upon the Shushan-Eduth. A psalm of Asaph.” Give ear, O Shepherd of Israel! Thou who leadest Joseph like a flock, Thou who sittest between the cherubs, shine forth!
Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh, stir up thy strength, And come and save us!
Bring us back, O God! And cause thy face to shine, that we may be saved!
O LORD, God of hosts! How long wilt thou be angry against the prayer of thy people?
For thou causest them to eat the bread of tears, And givest them tears to drink, in full measure.
Thou hast made us the object of strife to our neighbors, And our enemies hold us in derision.
Bring us back, O God of hosts! And cause thy face to shine that we may be saved!
Thou didst bring a vine out of Egypt; Thou didst expel the nations, and plant it.
Thou didst prepare a place for it; It spread its roots, and filled the land.
The mountains were covered with its shade, And its branches were like the cedars of God.
It sent out its boughs to the sea, And its branches to the river.
Why hast thou now broken down its hedges, So that all who pass by do pluck from it?
The boar from the wood doth waste it, And the wild beast of the forest doth devour it.
O God of hosts! return, we beseech thee, Look down from heaven, and behold, And have regard to this vine!
Protect what thy right hand planted; The branch which thou madest strong for thyself!
It is burnt with fire; it is cut down; Under thy rebuke they perish.
May thy hand be over the man of thy right hand, The man whom thou madest strong for thyself!
So will we no more turn back from thee: Revive us, and upon thy name alone will we call!
Bring us back, O LORD, God of hosts! And cause thy face to shine, that we may he saved!

“For the leader of the music. On the Gittith. A psalm of Asaph.” Sing joyfully to God, our strength! Shout with gladness to the God of Jacob!
Raise a song, and strike the timbrel, The sweet-sounding harp, and the psaltery!
Blow the trumpet at the new moon; At the full moon, also, on our festal day!
For this is a statute for Israel, A law of the God of Jacob;
He appointed it as a memorial in Joseph, When he went out of the land of Egypt, Where he heard a language which he knew not.
“I relieved [[said he]] thy shoulders from their burden; Thy hands were removed from the hod.
Thou didst call in trouble, and I delivered thee; In the secret place of thunder I answered thee; I proved thee at the waters of Meribah. [[Pause.]]
Hear, O my people! and I will admonish thee! O Israel! that thou wouldst hearken to me!
Let there be no strange god within thee, Nor worship thou any foreign god!
I Jehovah am thy God, Who brought thee out of the land of Egypt: Open wide thy mouth, and I will fill it!
But my people would not listen to my voice, And Israel would not hearken to me.
So I gave them up to the obstinacy of their hearts, And they walked according to their own devices.
“O that my people had hearkened to me! That Israel had walked in my ways!
Soon would I have brought low their enemies, And turned my hand against their adversaries.
The haters of Jehovah should have become suppliants to them, And their prosperity should have endured for ever.
With the finest of the wheat I would have fed them, And with honey out of the rock would I have satisfied them.”
“A psalm of Asaph.” God standeth in God's assembly, He judgeth in the midst of the gods.
“How long will ye judge unjustly, And favor the cause of the wicked? [[Pause.]]
Defend the poor and the fatherless; Do justice to the wretched and the needy!
Deliver the poor and the destitute; Save them from the hand of the wicked!
They are without knowledge and without understanding; They walk in darkness: Therefore all the foundations of the land are shaken.
I have said, Ye are gods, And all of you children of the Most High;
But ye shall die like men, And fall like the rest of the princes.”
Arise, O God! judge the earth! For all the nations are thy possession.

“A psalm of Asaph.” O God! keep not silence! Hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God!
For, lo! thine enemies roar, And they who hate thee lift up their heads.
For they form secret plots against thy people, And consult together against thy chosen ones.
“Come,” say they, “let us blot them out from the number of the nations, That the name of Israel may no more be remembered!”
With one consent they consult together, Against thee do they form a league,—
The tents of Edom and the Ishmaelites, Of Moab and the Hagarenes,
Gebal and Ammon and Amalek, The Philistines, with the inhabitants of Tyre.
The Assyrians also are joined with them; They lend their strength to the children of Lot.
Do to them as to the Midianites, As to Sisera, as to Jabin at the brook Kison,
Who perished at Endor, And were trampled like dung to the earth.
Make their chiefs like Oreb and Zeeb; Yea, all their princes as Zeba and Zalmunna!
Who say, “Let us seize on God's habitations!”
Make them, O my God! like whirling chaff; Like stubble before the wind!
As fire consumeth the forest, And as flame setteth the mountains in a blaze,
So pursue them with thy tempest, And terrify them with thy storm!
Cover their faces with shame, That they may seek thy name, O LORD!
Let them be confounded! Yea, let them be put to shame, and perish!
That they may know that thy name alone is Jehovah; That thou art the Most High over all the earth.

“For the leader of the music. On the Gittith. A psalm of the sons of Korah.” How lovely are thy tabernacles, O LORD of hosts!
My soul longeth, yea, fainteth, for the courts of the LORD; My heart and my flesh cry aloud for the living God.
The very sparrow findeth an abode, And the swallow a nest, where they may lay their young, By thine altars, O LORD of hosts, My king and my God!
Happy they who dwell in thy house, Who are continually praising thee! [[Pause.]]
Happy the man whose glory is in thee, In whose heart are the ways [[to Jerusalem]]!
Passing through the valley of Baca, they make it a fountain; and the early rain covereth it with blessings.
They go on from strength to strength; Every one of them appeareth before God in Zion.
Hear my prayer, O LORD, God of hosts! Give ear, O God of Jacob! [[Pause.]]
Look down, O God! our shield, And behold the face of thine anointed!
For a day spent in thy courts is better than a thousand: I would rather stand on the threshold of the house of my God, Than dwell in the tents of wickedness.
For the LORD God is a sun and a shield; The LORD giveth grace and glory; No good thing doth he withhold From them that walk uprightly.
O LORD of hosts! Happy the man who trusteth in thee!

“For the leader of the music. A psalm of the sons of Korah.” O LORD! thou hast been favorable to thy land; Thou hast brought back the captives of Jacob;
Thou didst forgive the iniquity of thy people, And cover all their sins! [[Pause.]]
Thou didst take away all thy displeasure, And abate the fierceness of thy wrath.
Restore us, O God of our salvation! And let thine anger towards us cease!
Wilt thou be angry with us for ever? Wilt thou continue thy wrath from generation to generation?
Wilt thou not revive us again, That thy people may rejoice in thee?
Show us thy compassion, O LORD! And grant us thy salvation!
I will hear what God the LORD will speak: Truly he will speak peace to his people, and to his servants; Only let them not turn again to folly!
Yea, his salvation is near to those who fear him, That glory may dwell in our land.
Mercy and truth shall meet together, Righteousness and peace shall kiss each other;
Truth shall spring out of the earth; Righteousness shall look down from heaven.
Yea, Jehovah will give prosperity, And our land shall yield her increase.
Righteousness shall go before him, And set us in the way of his steps.
“A prayer of David.” Incline thine ear, O LORD! and hear me, For I am poor and distressed!
Preserve my life, for I am devoted to thee! Save, O thou my God! thy servant who trusteth in thee!
Have pity upon me, O Lord! For to thee do I cry daily!
Revive the soul of thy servant, For to thee, O Lord! do I lift up my soul!
For thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive; Yea, rich in mercy to all that call upon thee!
Give ear, O LORD! to my prayer, And attend to the voice of my supplication!
In the day of my trouble I call upon thee, For thou dost answer me!
Among the gods there is none like thee, O Lord! And there are no works like thy works!
All the nations which thou hast made must come and worship before thee, O Lord! And glorify thy name!
For great art thou, and wondrous are thy works; Thou alone art God!
Teach me, O LORD! thy way, That I may walk in thy truth; Unite all my heart to fear thy name!
I will praise thee, O Lord, my God! with my whole heart; I will give glory to thy name for ever!
For thy kindness to me hath been great; Thou hast delivered me from the depths of the underworld!
O God! the proud have risen against me; Bands of cruel men seek my life, And set not thee before their eyes.
But thou, O Lord! art a God full of compassion and kindness, Long-suffering, rich in mercy and truth!
Look upon me, and have compassion upon me! Give thy strength to thy servant, And save the son of thy handmaid!
Show me a token for good, That my enemies may see it and be confounded; Because thou, O LORD! helpest and comfortest me!
“A psalm of the sons of Korah.” His foundation is in the holy mountains;
Jehovah loveth the gates of Zion More than all the dwellings of Jacob.
Glorious things are said of thee, O city of God! [[Pause.]]
“I name Egypt and Babylon among them that know me; Behold! Philistia, Tyre, and Ethiopia,—They also were born there.”
And of Zion it shall be said, “Men of every nation were born there, And the Most High hath established her.”
Jehovah, when he numbereth the nations, shall write, “These were born there!” [[Pause.]]
Singers as well as dancers,—All my springs are in thee!

“A psalm of the sons of Korah. For the leader of the music. Upon wind instruments. A psalm of Heman, the Ezrahite.” O LORD, God of my salvation! To thee do I cry by day, And by night is my prayer before thee!
Let my supplication come before thee; Incline thine ear to my cry!
For my soul is full of misery, And my life draweth near to the underworld.
I am counted with those who are going down to the pit; I am like one who hath no strength.
I am left to myself among the dead, Like the slain who lie in the grave, Whom thou no more rememberest, And who are cut off from thy [[protecting]] hand.
Thou hast placed me in a deep pit, In a dark and deep abyss.
Thy wrath presseth hard upon me, And thou afflictest me with all thy waves! [[Pause.]]
Thou hast put mine acquaintances far from me, Yea, thou hast made me their abhorrence: I am shut up, and cannot go forth.
Mine eyes languish by reason of my affliction. I call upon thee daily, O LORD! To thee do I stretch out my hands!
Canst thou show wonders to the dead? Shall the dead arise, and praise thee? [[Pause.]]
Shall thy goodness be declared in the grave, Or thy faithfulness in the place of corruption?
Shall thy wonders be known in the dark, And thy justice in the land of forgetfulness?
To thee do I cry, O LORD! In the morning doth my cry come before thee.
Why, O LORD! dost thou cast me off? Why hidest thou thy face from me?
I have been afflicted and languishing from my youth; I suffer thy terrors, and am distracted.
Thy fierce wrath overwhelmeth me; Thy terrors utterly destroy me.
They surround me daily like water; They compass me about together.
Lover and friend hast thou put far from me; My acquaintances are withdrawn from my sight.

“A psalm of Ethan, the Ezrahite.” I will sing of the mercies of the LORD for ever; With my mouth will I make known thy faithfulness to all generations!
For I know that thy mercy endureth for ever; Thou hast established thy truth like the heavens.
“I have made a covenant with my chosen; I have sworn to David, my servant:
Thy family I will establish for ever, And build up thy throne to all generations.” [[Pause.]]
The heavens shall praise thy wonders, O LORD! And the assembly of the holy ones thy truth!
Who in the heavens can be compared to Jehovah? Who is like Jehovah among the sons of God?
A God greatly to be feared in the assembly of the holy ones, And to be had in reverence above all who are around him?
O Jehovah, God of hosts! Who is mighty like thee, O Jehovah? And thy faithfulness is round about thee.
Thou rulest the raging of the sea; When the waves thereof rise, thou stillest them!
Thou didst break Rahab in pieces, as one that is slain; Thou didst scatter thine enemies with thy mighty arm.
The heavens are thine; thine also is the earth; The world and all that is therein, thou didst found them.
The North and the South were created by thee; Tabor and Hermon rejoice in thy name.
Thine is a mighty arm; Strong is thy hand, and high thy right hand.
Justice and equity are the foundation of thy throne; Mercy and truth go before thy face.
Happy the people that know the trumpet's sound! They walk, O LORD! in the light of thy countenance;
In thy name they daily rejoice, And in thy righteousness they glory!
For thou art the glory of their strength; Yea, through thy favor our horn exalteth itself!
For from Jehovah is our shield, And from the Holy One of Israel is our king.
Once thou spakest in a vision to thy holy one, And saidst,—”I have laid help on one that is mighty; I have exalted one chosen from the people;
I have found David, my servant; With my holy oil have I anointed him.
With him shall my hand be established, And my arm shall strengthen him.
The enemy shall not have power over him, Nor shall the unrighteous man oppress him.
For I will beat down his foes before him, And overthrow them that hate him.
My faithfulness and mercy shall be with him, And through my name shall his horn be exalted.
I will extend his hand to the sea, And his right hand to the rivers.
He shall say to me, 'Thou art my father, My God, and the rock of my salvation!'
I will also make him my first-born, Highest of the kings of the earth.
My mercy I will continue to him for ever; My covenant with him shall be steadfast.
I will make his family to endure for ever; And his throne shall be as lasting as the heavens.
Should his children forsake my law, And walk not in my statutes,
Should they break my commandments, And observe not my precepts,
I will punish their transgressions with a rod, And their iniquity with stripes.
But my kindness will I not withdraw from him, Nor suffer my faithfulness to fail.
I will not break my covenant, Nor alter what hath gone from my lips.
Once have I sworn in my holiness, That I will not be false unto David.
His family shall endure for ever, And his throne as the sun before me.
It shall be established for ever like the moon; Like the faithful witness in the sky.”
But now thou forsakest and abhorrest, And art angry with, thine anointed.
Thou hast made void the covenant with thy servant; Thou hast cast his crown to the ground.
Thou hast broken down all his hedges; Thou hast brought his strongholds to ruin.
All who pass by plunder him; He is a reproach to his neighbors.
Thou hast lifted up the right hand of his enemies; Thou hast made all his adversaries to rejoice.
Yea, thou hast turned the edge of his sword, And made him unable to stand in battle.
Thou hast brought his glory to an end, And hast cast down his throne to the ground.
Thou hast shortened the days of his youth; Thou hast covered him with shame.
How long, O LORD! wilt thou hide thyself for ever? How long shall thine anger burn like fire?
Remember how short is my life, To what frailty thou hast created all men!
What man liveth, and seeth not death? Who can deliver himself from the underworld?
Where, Lord, is thy former loving-kindness Which thou didst swear to David in thy truth?
Remember, O Lord! the reproach of thy servants, How I bear in my bosom the taunts of all the many nations,
With which thine enemies have reproached me, O LORD! With which they have reproached the footsteps of thine anointed!
[Praised be Jehovah for ever! Amen, yea, amen!]
“BOOK IV. A prayer of Moses, the man of God.” LORD! thou hast been our dwelling-place In all generations!
Before the mountains were brought forth, Or ever thou hadst formed the earth and the world, Even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God!
But man thou turnest again to dust, And sayst, “Return, ye children of men!”
For a thousand years are, in thy sight, As yesterday when it is past, And as a watch in the night.
Thou carriest him away as with a flood; He is a dream; In the morning he springeth up like grass,
Which flourisheth and shooteth up in the morning, And in the evening is cut down, and withered.
For we are consumed by thine anger, And by thy wrath are we destroyed.
Thou settest our iniquities before thee, Our secret sins in the light of thy countenance.
By reason of thine anger all our days vanish away; We spend our years like a thought.
The days of our life are threescore years and ten, And, by reason of strength, may be fourscore years: Yet is the pride of them weariness and sorrow; For it vanisheth swiftly, and we fly away.
Yet who attendeth to the power of thine anger? Who with due reverence regardeth thine indignation?
Teach us so to number our days, That we may apply our hearts to wisdom!
Desist, O LORD! How long—? Have compassion upon thy servants!
Satisfy us speedily with thy mercy, That we may rejoice and be glad all our days!
Make us glad according to the time in which thou hast afflicted us; According to the years in which we have seen adversity!
Let thy deeds be known to thy servants, And thy glory to their children!
Let the favor of the LORD our God be upon us, And establish for us the work of our hands; Yea, the work of our hands, establish thou it!
He who sitteth under the shelter of the Most High Maketh his abode in the shadow of the Almighty.
I say to the LORD, Thou art my refuge and my fortress; My God, in whom I trust.
Surely he will deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, And from the wasting pestilence;
He will cover thee with his feathers, And under his wings shalt thou find refuge; His faithfulness shall be thy shield and buckler.
Thou shalt not be afraid of the terror of the night, Nor of the arrow that flieth by day;
Nor of the pestilence that walketh in darkness, Nor of the plague that destroyeth at noonday.
A thousand shall fall by thy side, And ten thousand at thy right hand; But thee it shall not touch.
Thou shalt only behold with thine eyes, And see the recompense of the wicked.
Because thou hast made the LORD thy refuge, And the Most High thy habitation,
No evil shall befall thee, Nor any plague come near thy dwelling.
For he will give his angels charge over thee, To guard thee in all thy ways.
They shall bear thee up in their hands, Lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.
Thou shalt tread upon the lion and the adder; The young lion and the dragon shalt thou trample under foot.
“Because he loveth me, I will deliver him; I will set him on high, because he knoweth my name.
When he calleth upon me, I will answer him; I will be with him in trouble; I will deliver him, and bring him to honor.
With long life will I satisfy him, And show him my salvation.”

“A psalm for the Sabbath-day.” It is a good thing to give thanks to the LORD, And to sing praises to thy name, O Most High!
To show forth thy loving-kindness in the morning, And thy faithfulness every night,
Upon the ten-stringed instrument and the lute, Upon the harp with a solemn sound.
For thou, LORD, hast made me glad by thy doings; In the works of thy hands I greatly rejoice!
How great are thy works, O LORD! How deep thy purposes!
But the unwise man knoweth not this, And the fool understandeth it not.
When the wicked spring up like grass, And all who practise iniquity flourish, It is but to be destroyed for ever!
Thou, O LORD! art for ever exalted!
For, lo! thine enemies, O LORD! For, lo! thine enemies perish, And dispersed are all who do iniquity!
But my horn thou exaltest like the buffalo's; I am anointed with fresh oil.
Mine eye hath gazed with joy upon mine enemies; Mine ears have heard with joy of my wicked adversaries.
The righteous shall flourish like the palm-tree; They shall grow up like the cedars of Lebanon;
Planted in the house of the LORD, They shall flourish in the courts of our God.
Even in old age they bring forth fruit; They are green, and full of sap;
To show that the LORD, my rock, is upright, That there is no unrighteousness in him.
Jehovah reigneth; he is clothed with majesty; Jehovah is clothed with majesty, and girded with strength; Therefore the earth standeth firm, and cannot be moved.
Thy throne was established of old; Thou art from everlasting!
The floods, O LORD! lift up, The floods lift up their voice; The floods lift up their roaring!
Mightier than the voice of many waters, Yea, than the mighty waves of the sea, Is the LORD in his lofty habitation.
Thy promises are most sure; Holiness becometh thy house, O LORD! for ever!
O LORD! thou God of vengeance! O thou God of vengeance! shine forth!
Rouse thyself, thou judge of the earth! Render a recompense to the proud!
How long, O LORD! shall the wicked, How long shall the wicked triumph?
How long shall their lips pour forth insolence? How long shall all the evil-doers boast?
O LORD! they trample upon thy people, And oppress thine inheritance!
They slay the widow, and the stranger, And murder the fatherless;
And they say, “The LORD doth not see, The God of Jacob doth not regard!”
Be instructed, ye most stupid of mankind! O when, ye fools, will ye be wise?
He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? He that formed the eye, shall he not see?
He that chastiseth nations, shall not he punish? He that teacheth man knowledge, shall not he know?
The LORD knoweth the thoughts of men, That they are vanity.
Happy the man, O LORD! whom thou correctest, Whom by thy teaching thou makest wise;
To give him peace in the days of adversity, Until a pit be digged for the wicked!
For the LORD will not forsake his people, Nor abandon his own inheritance.
For judgment shall return to justice, And all the upright in heart shall follow it.
Who will rise up for me against the wicked? Who will stand up for me against the evil-doers?
If the LORD had not been my help, I had well nigh dwelt in the land of silence.
When I think that my foot is slipping, Thy goodness, O LORD! holdeth me up.
In the multitude of anxieties within me, Thy consolations revive my soul.
Shall with thee be allied the throne of iniquity, Which deviseth mischief against law?
They band together against the life of the righteous, And condemn innocent blood.
But the LORD is my fortress, And my God the rock of my refuge.
He will bring upon them their own iniquity; Yea, through their own wickedness he will cut them off; Yea, the LORD, our God, will cut them off.
O come, let us sing to the LORD; Let us raise a voice of joy to the rock of our salvation!
Let us come into his presence with thanksgiving, And sing joyfully to him with psalms!
For Jehovah is a great God; Yea, a great king over all gods.
In his hands are the depths of the earth; His also are the heights of the mountains.
The sea is his, and he made it; The dry land also his hands formed.
O come, let us worship and bow down! Let us kneel before the LORD, our maker!
For he is our God, And we are the people of his pasture and the flock of his hand. O that ye would now hear his voice!
“Harden not your hearts as at Meribah [[the strife]], As in the day of temptation [[Massah]] in the wilderness,
Where your fathers tempted me And tried me, although they had seen my works.
Forty years was I offended with that generation: And I said, 'They are a people of a perverse heart, And who have no regard to my ways.'
Therefore I sware, in my wrath, That they should not enter into my rest.”
O sing to Jehovah a new song; Sing to Jehovah, all the earth!
Sing to Jehovah; praise his name, Show forth his salvation from day to day!
Proclaim his glory among the nations, His wonders among all people!
For Jehovah is great, and greatly to be praised; He is to be feared above all gods.
For all the gods of the nations are idols; But Jehovah made the heavens.
Honor and majesty are before him; Glory and beauty are in his holy abode.
Give to Jehovah, ye tribes of the people, Give to Jehovah glory and praise!
Give to Jehovah the glory due to his name; Bring an offering, and come into his courts!
O worship Jehovah in holy attire! Tremble before him, all the earth!
Say among the nations, Jehovah is king; The world shall stand firm; it shall not be moved; He will judge the nations in righteousness.
Let the heavens be glad, and the earth rejoice; Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof;
Let the fields be joyful, with all that is therein; Let all the trees of the forest rejoice
Before Jehovah! for he cometh, He cometh to judge the earth! He will judge the world with justice, And the nations with faithfulness.
The LORD reigneth, let the earth rejoice! Let the multitude of isles be glad!
Clouds and darkness are round about him; Justice and equity are the foundation of his throne.
Before him goeth a fire, Which burneth up his enemies around.
His lightnings illumine the world; The earth beholdeth and trembleth.
The mountains melt like wax at the presence of the LORD, At the presence of the Lord of the whole earth.
The heavens declare his righteousness, And all nations behold his glory.
Confounded be they who worship graven images, Who glory in idols! To him, all ye gods, bow down!
Zion hath heard, and is glad, And the daughters of Judah exult On account of thy judgments, O LORD!
For thou, O LORD! art most high above all the earth; Thou art far exalted above all gods!
Ye that love the LORD, hate evil! He preserveth the lives of his servants, And delivereth them from the hand of the wicked.
Light is sown for the righteous, And joy for the upright in heart.
Rejoice, O ye righteous, in the LORD, And praise his holy name!
“A psalm.” Sing to the LORD a new song; For he hath done marvellous things; His own right hand and his holy arm have gotten him the victory!
The LORD hath made known his salvation; His righteousness hath he manifested in the sight of the nations.
He hath remembered his mercy and truth toward the house of Israel, And all the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.
Shout unto the LORD, all the earth! Break forth into joy, and exult, and sing!
Sing to the LORD with the harp, With the harp, and the voice of song!
With clarions, and the sound of trumpets, Make a joyful noise before the LORD the King!
Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof; The world, and they that dwell therein;
Let the rivers clap their hands, And the mountains rejoice together
Before the LORD! for he cometh to judge the earth! With righteousness will he judge the world, And the nations with equity.
The LORD reigneth, let the nations tremble! He sitteth between the cherubs, let the earth quake!
Great is the LORD upon Zion; He is exalted over all the nations.
Let men praise thy great and terrible name! It is holy.
Let them declare the glory of the King who loveth justice! Thou hast established equity; Thou dost execute justice in Jacob!
Exalt ye Jehovah, our God, And bow yourselves down at his footstool! He is holy.
Moses and Aaron, with his priests, And Samuel, who called upon his name,—They called upon the LORD, and he answered them.
He spake to them in the cloudy pillar; They kept his commandments, And the ordinances which he gave them.
Thou, O LORD, our God! didst answer them; Thou wast to them a forgiving God, Though thou didst punish their transgressions!
Exalt the LORD, our God. And worship at his holy mountain! For the LORD, our God, is holy.
“A psalm of praise.” Raise a voice of joy unto the LORD, all ye lands!
Serve the LORD with gladness; Come before his presence with rejoicing!
Know ye that Jehovah is God! It is he that made us, and we are his, His people, and the flock of his pasture.
Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, And his courts with praise; Be thankful to him, and bless his name!
For the LORD is good; his mercy is everlasting; And his truth endureth to all generations.
“A psalm of David.” I will sing of mercy and justice; To thee, O LORD! will I sing!
I will have regard to the way of uprightness: When thou shalt come to me, I will walk within my house with an upright heart.
I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes; I hate the work of evil-doers; It shall not cleave to me.
The perverse in heart shall be far from me; I will not know a wicked person.
Whoso slandereth his neighbor in secret, him will I cut off; Him that hath a haughty look and a proud heart I will not endure.
Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me; He that walketh in the way of uprightness shall serve me.
He who practiseth deceit shall not dwell in my house; He who telleth lies shall not remain in my sight.
Every morning will I destroy the wicked of the land, That I may cut off all evil-doers from the city of the LORD.

“A prayer of the afflicted, when in deep distress he poureth out his complaint before the Lord.” Hear my prayer, O LORD! And let my cry come unto thee!
Hide not thy face from me in the day of my trouble; Incline thine ear to me when I call! Answer me speedily!
For my life is consumed like smoke, And my bones burn like a brand.
My heart is smitten and withered like grass; Yea, I forget to eat my bread.
By reason of my sighing, my bones cleave to my skin;
I am like the pelican of the wilderness; I am like an owl amid ruins.
I am sleepless; I am like a solitary bird upon the house-top.
All the day long my enemies reproach me; They who rage against me curse by me.
For I eat ashes like bread, And mingle my drink with tears.
On account of thine indignation and thy wrath; For thou hast lifted me up and cast me down!
My life is like a declining shadow, And I wither like grass.
But thou, O LORD! endurest for ever, And thy name from generation to generation!
Thou wilt arise and have pity upon Zion, For the time to favor her, yea, the set time, is come.
For thy servants take pleasure in her stones; Yea, they have a regard for her dust.
Then shall the nations fear the name of Jehovah, And all the kings of the earth thy glory.
For Jehovah will build up Zion; He will appear in his glory.
He will regard the prayer of the destitute, And not despise their supplication.
This shall be written for the generation to come, That the people to be born may praise Jehovah.
For he looketh down from his holy height, From heaven doth he cast his eye upon the earth,
To listen to the sighs of the prisoner. To release those that are doomed to death;
That they may declare the name of Jehovah in Zion, And his praise in Jerusalem,
When the nations are assembled together, And the kingdoms to serve Jehovah.
He hath weakened my strength on the way, He hath shortened my days.
I say, O my God! take me not away in the midst of my days! Thy years endure through all generations.
Of old hast thou laid the foundations of the earth, And the heavens are the work of thy hands;
They shall perish, but thou shalt endure; Yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment; As a vesture shalt thou change them, And they shall be changed;
But thou art the same, And thy years have no end.
The children of thy servants shall dwell securely, And their posterity shall be established before thee.
“A psalm of David.” Bless the LORD, O my soul! And all that is within me, bless his holy name!
Bless the LORD, O my soul! And forget not all his benefits!
Who forgiveth all thine iniquities; Who healeth all thy diseases;
Who redeemeth thy life from the grave; Who crowneth thee with loving-kindness and tender mercies;
Who satisfieth thine old age with good, So that thy youth is renewed like the eagle's.
The LORD executeth justice And equity for all the oppressed.
He made known his ways to Moses, His doings to the children of Israel.
The LORD is merciful and kind, Slow to anger and rich in mercy.
He doth not always chide, Nor doth he keep his anger for ever.
He hath not dealt with us according to our sins, Nor requited us according to our iniquities.
As high as are the heavens above the earth, So great is his mercy to them that fear him.
As far as the east is from the west, So far hath he removed our transgressions from us.
Even as a father pitieth his children, So the LORD pitieth them that fear him.
For he knoweth our frame, He remembereth that we are dust.
As for man, his days are as grass; As a flower of the field, so he flourisheth.
The wind passeth over it, and it is gone; And its place shall know it no more.
But the mercy of the LORD is from everlasting to everlasting to them that fear him, And his righteousness to children's children,
To such as keep his covenant, And remember his commandments to do them.
The LORD hath established his throne in the heavens, And his kingdom ruleth over all.
Bless the LORD, ye his angels, Ye mighty ones who do his commands, Hearkening to the voice of his word!
Bless the LORD, all ye his hosts; Ye, his ministers, who do his pleasure!
Bless the LORD, all his works, In all places of his dominion! Bless the LORD, O my soul!
Bless the LORD, O my soul! O LORD, my God! thou art very great! Thou art clothed with glory and majesty!
He covereth himself with light as with a garment; He spreadeth out the heavens like a curtain;
He layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters; He maketh the clouds his chariot; He rideth upon the wings of the wind.
He maketh the winds his messengers, The flaming lightnings his ministers.
He established the earth on its foundations; It shall not be removed for ever.
Thou didst cover it with the deep as with a garment; The waters stood above the mountains!
At thy rebuke they fled; At the voice of thy thunder they hasted away.
The mountains rose, the valleys sank, In the place which thou didst appoint for them.
Thou hast established a bound which the waters may not pass, That they may not return, and cover the earth.
He sendeth forth the springs in brooks; They run among the mountains;
They give drink to all the beasts of the forest; In them the wild asses quench their thirst.
About them the birds of heaven have their habitation; They sing among the branches.
He watereth the hills from his chambers; The earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works!
He causeth grass to spring up for cattle, And herbage for the service of man, To bring forth food out of the earth,
And wine that gladdeneth the heart of man, Making his face to shine more than oil, And bread that strengtheneth man's heart.
The trees of the LORD are full of sap, The cedars of Lebanon, which he hath planted;
There the birds build their nests; In the cypresses the stork hath her abode.
The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats, And the rocks for the conies.
He appointed the moon to mark seasons; The sun knoweth when to go down.
Thou makest darkness, and it is night, When all the beasts of the forest go forth!
The young lions roar for prey, And seek their food from God.
When the sun ariseth, they withdraw themselves, And lie down in their dens.
Man goeth forth to his work, And to his labor, until the evening.
O LORD! how manifold are thy works! In wisdom hast thou made them all! The earth is full of thy riches!
Lo! this great and wide sea! In it are moving creatures without number, Animals small and great.
There go the ships; There is the leviathan, which thou hast made to play therein.
All these wait on thee To give them their food in due season.
Thou givest it to them, they gather it; Thou openest thine hand, they are satisfied with good.
Thou hidest thy face, they are confounded; Thou takest away their breath, they die, And return to the dust.
Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created, And thou renewest the face of the earth.
The glory of the LORD shall endure for ever; The LORD shall rejoice in his works;
He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth; He toucheth the hills, and they smoke.
I will sing to the LORD as long as I live, I will sing praise to my God while I have my being.
May my meditation be acceptable to him! I will rejoice in the LORD.
May sinners perish from the earth, And the wicked be no more! Bless the LORD, O my soul! Praise ye the LORD!
O give thanks unto the LORD; Call upon his name; Make known his deeds among the people!
Sing unto him; sing psalms unto him; Tell ye of all his wondrous works!
Glory ye in his holy name; Let the hearts of them that seek the LORD rejoice!
Seek the LORD, and his majesty; Seek his face continually!
Remember the wonders he hath wrought, His miracles and the judgments of his mouth,
Ye offspring of Abraham his servant, Ye children of Jacob his chosen!
Jehovah, he is our God, His judgments are over all the earth.
He remembereth his covenant for ever, And the promise to a thousand generations;
The covenant which he made with Abraham, And the oath which he gave to Isaac;
Which he confirmed to Jacob for a decree, And to Israel for an everlasting covenant.
“To thee,” said he, “will I give the land of Canaan For the lot of your inheritance.”
When they were yet few in number, Very few, and strangers in the land;
When they went from nation to nation, From one kingdom to another people,
He suffered no man to oppress them; Yea, he rebuked kings for their sakes.
“Touch not,” said he, “mine anointed, And do my prophets no harm!”
Again, when he commanded a famine in the land, And broke the whole staff of bread,
He sent a man before them; Joseph was sold as a slave.
His feet they hurt with fetters; He was bound in chains of iron;
Until his prediction came to pass, And the word of the LORD proved him.
Then the king sent, and loosed him; The ruler of nations, and set him free;
He made him governor of his house, And lord of all his possessions;
To bind his princes at his pleasure, And teach his counsellors wisdom.
Israel also came into Egypt, And Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham;
Where God increased his people greatly, And made them stronger than their enemies.
He turned their hearts to hate his people, And form devices against his servants.
Then sent he Moses his servant, And Aaron, whom he had chosen.
They showed his signs among them, And his wonders in the land of Ham.
He sent darkness upon them, and made it dark; And they did not disobey his word.
He turned their waters into blood, And caused their fish to die.
Their land brought forth frogs in abundance, Even in the chambers of their kings.
He spake, and there came flies, And lice in all their coasts.
Instead of rain he gave them hail, And flaming fire in their land.
He smote also their vines and fig-trees, And broke the trees of their coasts.
He spake, and the locusts came. Destructive locusts without number,
Which ate up all the herbage in their land, And devoured the fruits of their fields.
Then he smote all the first-born in their land, The first-fruits of all their strength.
He led forth his people with silver and gold; Nor was there one feeble person in all their tribes.
Egypt was glad when they departed, For their terror had fallen upon them.
He spread out a cloud for a covering, And fire to give light by night.
They asked, and he brought quails, And satisfied them with the bread of heaven.
He opened the rock, and the waters gushed forth, And ran in the dry places like a river.
For he remembered his holy promise, Which he had made to Abraham his servant;
And he led forth his people with joy, And his chosen with gladness.
He gave to them the lands of the nations, And they inherited the labor of the peoples;
That they might observe his statutes, And obey his laws. Praise ye the LORD!
Praise ye the LORD! O give thanks to the LORD, for he is good; For his mercy endureth for ever!
Who can utter the mighty deeds of the LORD? Who can show forth all his praise?
Happy are they who have regard to justice, Who practise righteousness at all times!
Remember me, O LORD! with the favor promised to thy people; O visit me with thy salvation!
That I may see the prosperity of thy chosen, That I may rejoice in the joy of thy people, That I may glory with thine inheritance!
We have sinned with our fathers; We have committed iniquity; we have done wickedly.
Our fathers in Egypt did not regard thy wonders; They remembered not the multitude of thy mercies; But rebelled at the sea, the Red sea.
Yet he saved them for his own name's sake. That he might make his mighty power to be known.
He rebuked the Red sea, and it was dried up, And he led them through the deep as through a desert.
He saved them from the hand of him that hated them, And redeemed them from the hand of the enemy.
The waters covered their enemies; There was not one of them left.
Then believed they his words, And sang his praise.
But they soon forgot his deeds, And waited not for his counsel.
They gave way to appetite in the wilderness, And tempted God in the desert;
And he gave them their request, But sent upon them leanness.
They also envied Moses in the camp, And Aaron, the holy one of the LORD.
Then the earth opened, and swallowed up Dathan, And covered the company of Abiram,
And a fire was kindled in their company; The flames burned up the wicked.
They made a calf in Horeb, And worshipped a molten image;
They changed their God of glory Into the image of a grass-eating ox.
They forgot God, their saviour, Who had done such great things in Egypt,
Such wonders in the land of Ham. Such terrible things at the Red sea.
Then he said that he would destroy them; Had not Moses, his chosen, stood before him in the breach, To turn away his wrath, that he might not destroy them.
They also despised the pleasant land, And believed not his word;
But murmured in their tents, And would not hearken to the voice of the LORD.
Then he lifted up his hand against them, And swore that he would make them fall in the wilderness;
That he would overthrow their descendants among the nations, And scatter them in the lands.
They also gave themselves to the worship of Baal-peor, And ate sacrifices offered to lifeless idols.
Thus they provoked his anger by their practices, And a plague broke in upon them.
Then stood up Phinehas, and executed judgment, And the plague was stayed.
And this was counted to him for righteousness, To all generations for ever.
They provoked him also at the waters of Meribah [[strife]], And evil befell Moses on their account.
For they provoked his spirit, So that he spake inconsiderately with his lips.
They did not destroy the nations, As Jehovah had commanded them.
They mingled themselves with the peoples, And learned their practices.
They even worshipped their idols, Which became to them a snare.
Their sons and their daughters they sacrificed to demons,
And shed innocent blood, The blood of their own sons and daughters, Whom they sacrificed to the idols of Canaan; And the land was polluted with blood.
Thus they defiled themselves with their works, And played the harlot with their practices.
Then burned the anger of the LORD against his people, So that he abhorred his own inheritance.
And he gave them into the hand of the nations, And they who hated them ruled over them.
Their enemies oppressed them, And they were bowed down under their hand.
Many times did he deliver them; But they provoked him by their devices, And they were brought low for their iniquities.
Yet, when he heard their cries, He had regard to their affliction;
He remembered his covenant with them, And repented according to the greatness of his mercy,
And caused them to find pity Among all that carried them captive.
Save us, O Jehovah, our God! and gather us from among the nations, That we may give thanks to thy holy name, And glory in thy praise!
[Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, From everlasting to everlasting! And let all the people say, Amen! Praise ye Jehovah!]
“BOOK V.” O give thanks to the LORD, for he is good; For his mercy endureth for ever!
Let the redeemed of the LORD say it, Whom he hath redeemed from the hand of the enemy;
Whom he hath gathered from the lands, From the east, the west, the north, and the south.
They were wandering in the wilderness, in a desert, They found no way to a city to dwell in.
They were hungry and thirsty, And their souls fainted within them.
Then they cried to the LORD in their trouble, And he delivered them out of their distress.
He led them in a straight way, Till they came to a city where they might dwell.
O let them praise the LORD for his goodness, For his wonderful works to the children of men!
For he satisfieth the thirsty, And the hungry he filleth with good.
They dwelt in darkness and the shadow of death, Being bound in affliction and iron;
Because they disobeyed the commands of God, And contemned the will of the Most High;
Their hearts he brought down by hardship; They fell down, and there was none to help.
But they cried to the LORD in their trouble, And he saved them out of their distresses;
He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death, And brake their bands asunder.
O let them praise the LORD for his goodness, For his wonderful works to the children of men!
For he hath broken the gates of brass, And cut the bars of iron asunder.
The foolish, because of their transgressions, And because of their iniquities, were afflicted;
They abhorred all kinds of food; They were near to the gates of death.
Then they cried to the LORD in their trouble, And he delivered them out of their distresses;
He sent his word, and healed them, And saved them from their destruction.
O let them praise the LORD for his goodness, For his wonderful works to the children of men!
Let them offer the sacrifices of thanksgiving, And declare his works with joy!
They who go down to the sea in ships, And do business in great waters,
These see the works of the LORD, And his wonders in the deep.
He commandeth, and raiseth the stormy wind, Which lifteth high the waves.
They mount up to the heavens, They sink down to the depths, Their soul melteth with distress;
They reel and stagger like a drunken man, And all their skill is vain.
Then they cry to the LORD in their trouble, And he saveth them out of their distresses;
He turneth the storm into a calm, And the waves are hushed;
Then they rejoice that they are still, And he bringeth them to their desired haven.
O let them praise the LORD for his goodness. For his wonderful works to the children of men!
Let them extol him in the congregation of the people, And praise him in the assembly of the elders!
He turneth rivers into a desert, And springs of water into dry ground;
A fruitful land into barrenness, For the wickedness of them that dwell therein.
He turneth the desert into a lake of water, And dry ground into springs of water;
And there he causeth the hungry to dwell, And they build a city for a dwelling-place,
And sow fields and plant vineyards, Which yield a fruitful increase.
He blesseth them, so that they multiply greatly, And suffereth not their cattle to decrease.
When they are diminished and brought low By oppression, affliction, and sorrow,
He poureth contempt upon princes, And causeth them to wander in a pathless wilderness;
But he raiseth the poor from their affliction, And increaseth their families like a flock.
The righteous see it and rejoice, And all iniquity shutteth her mouth.
Whoso is wise, let him observe this, And have regard to the loving-kindness of the LORD!

“A psalm of David.” O God! my heart is strengthened! I will sing and give thanks.
Awake, my soul! awake, my psaltery and harp! I will wake with the early dawn.
I will praise thee, O LORD! among the nations; I will sing to thee among the peoples!
For thy mercy reacheth to the heavens, And thy truth above the clouds.
Exalt thyself, O God! above the heavens, And thy glory above all the earth!
That thy beloved ones may be delivered, Save with thy right hand, and answer me!
God promiseth in his holiness; I will rejoice; I shall yet divide Shechem, And measure out the valley of Succoth;
Gilead shall be mine, and mine Manasseh; Ephraim shall be my helmet, And Judah my sceptre.
Moab shall be my washbowl; Upon Edom shall I cast my shoe; I shall triumph over Philistia.
Who will bring me to the strong city? Who will lead me into Edom?
Wilt not thou, O God! who didst forsake us, Who didst not go forth with our armies?
Give us thine aid in our distress, For vain is the help of man!
Through God we shall do valiantly; For he will tread down our enemies.
“For the leader of the music. A psalm of David.” O God of my praise! be not silent!
For the mouths of the wicked and the deceitful are opened against me; They speak against me with a lying tongue.
They assault me on every side with words of hatred; They fight against me without a cause.
For my love they are my adversaries: But I give myself unto prayer.
They repay me evil for good, And hatred for love.
Set thou a wicked man over him, And let an adversary stand at his right hand!
When he is judged, may he be condemned, And may his prayer be a crime!
May his days be few, And another take his office!
May his children be fatherless, And his wife a widow!
May his children be vagabonds and beggars, And from their ruined dwellings seek their bread!
May a creditor seize on all that he hath, And a stranger plunder his substance!
May there be none to show him compassion, And none to pity his fatherless children!
May his posterity be cut off; In the next generation may his name be blotted out!
May the iniquity of his fathers be remembered by the LORD, And may the sin of his mother never be blotted out!
May they be before the LORD continually; And may he cut off their memory from the earth!
Because he remembered not to show pity, But persecuted the afflicted and the poor man, And sought the death of the broken-hearted.
As he loved cursing, let it come upon him; As he delighted not in blessing, let it be far from him!
May he be clothed with cursing as with a garment; May it enter like water into his bowels, And like oil into his bones!
May it be to him like the robe that covereth him, Like the girdle with which he is constantly girded!
May this be the wages of mine adversaries from the LORD, And of them that speak evil against me!
But do thou, O LORD, my God! take part with me, For thine own name's sake! Because great is thy mercy, O deliver me!
For I am afflicted and needy, And my heart is wounded within me.
I am going like a shadow; I am driven away as the locust.
My knees totter from fasting, And my flesh faileth of fatness.
I am a reproach to my enemies; They gaze at me; they shake their heads.
Help me, O LORD, my God! O save me, according to thy mercy!
That they may know that this is thy hand; That thou, O Lord! hast done it!
Let them curse, but do thou bless! When they arise, let them be put to shame; But let thy servant rejoice!
May my enemies be clothed with ignominy; May they be covered with their shame, as with a mantle!
I will earnestly praise the LORD with my lips; In the midst of the multitude I will praise him.
For he standeth at the right hand of the poor, To save him from those who would condemn him.
“A psalm of David.” Jehovah said to my lord, “Sit thou at my right hand, Until I make thy foes thy footstool.”
Jehovah will extend the sceptre of thy power from Zion: Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies!
Thy people shall be ready, when thou musterest thy forces, in holy splendor; Thy youth shall come forth like dew from the womb of the morning.
Jehovah hath sworn, and he will not repent: “Thou art a priest for ever, After the order of Melchisedeck!”
The Lord is at thy right hand, He shall crush kings in the day of his wrath.
He shall execute justice among the nations; He shall fill them with dead bodies, He shall crush the heads of his enemies over many lands.
He shall drink of the brook in the way; Therefore shall he lift up his head.
Praise ye the LORD! I will praise the LORD with my whole heart, In the assembly of the righteous, and in the congregation.
The works of the LORD are great, Sought out by all who have pleasure in them.
His deeds are honorable and glorious, And his righteousness endureth for ever.
He hath established a memorial of his wonders; The LORD is gracious and full of compassion.
He giveth meat to them that fear him; He is ever mindful of his covenant.
He showed his people the greatness of his works, When he gave them the inheritance of the heathen.
The deeds of his hands are truth and justice; All his commandments are sure;
They stand firm for ever and ever, Being founded in truth and justice.
He sent redemption to his people; He established his covenant for ever; Holy, and to be had in reverence, is his name.
The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom; A good understanding have all they who keep his commandments; His praise endureth for ever.
Praise ye the LORD! Happy the man who feareth the LORD, Who taketh delight in his commandments!
His posterity shall be mighty on the earth; The race of the righteous shall be blessed.
Wealth and riches shall be in his house; His righteousness shall endure for ever.
To the righteous shall arise light out of darkness; He is gracious and full of compassion and righteousness.
Happy the man who hath pity and lendeth! He shall sustain his cause in judgment;
Yea, he shall never be moved: The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance.
He is not afraid of evil tidings; His heart is firm, trusting in the LORD.
His heart is firm; he hath no fear, Till he see his desire upon his enemies.
He hath scattered blessings; he hath given to the poor; His righteousness shall endure for ever; His horn shall be exalted with honor.
The wicked shall see, and be grieved; He shall gnash his teeth, and melt away; The desire of the wicked shall perish.
Praise ye the LORD! Praise, O ye servants of the LORD! Praise the name of the LORD!
Blessed be the name of the LORD From this time forth, even for ever!
From the rising of the sun to its going down, May the LORD'S name be praised!
The LORD is high above all nations; His glory is above the heavens.
Who is like the LORD, our God, That dwelleth on high,
That looketh down low Upon the heavens and the earth?
He raiseth the poor from the dust, And exalteth the needy from the dunghill,
To set him among princes, Even among the princes of his people.
He causeth the barren woman to dwell in a house, A joyful mother of children. Praise ye the LORD!
When Israel came forth from Egypt, The house of Jacob from a people of strange language,
Judah was his sanctuary, And Israel his dominion.
The sea beheld, and fled; The Jordan turned back.
The mountains skipped like rams, And the hills like lambs.
What aileth thee, O thou sea! that thou fleest? Thou, Jordan, that thou runnest back?
Ye mountains, that ye skip like rams, And ye hills like lambs?
Tremble, O earth! at the presence of the Lord, At the presence of the God of Jacob;
Who turned the rock into a standing lake, And the flint into a fountain of water!
Not unto us, O LORD! not unto us, But unto thy name, give glory, For thy mercy and thy truth's sake!
Why should the nations say, “Where is now their God?”
Our God is in the heavens; He doeth whatever he pleaseth.
Their idols are silver and gold, The work of men's hands:
They have mouths, but they speak not; Eyes have they, but they see not;
They have ears, but they hear not; Noses have they, but they smell not;
They have hands, but they handle not; They have feet, but they walk not; Nor do they speak with their throats.
They who make them are like unto them; And so is every one that trusteth in them.
O Israel! trust thou in the LORD! He is their help and their shield.
O house of Aaron! trust ye in the LORD! He is their help and their shield.
Ye that fear the LORD trust in the LORD! He is their help and their shield.
The LORD hath been mindful of us; he will bless us; He will bless the house of Israel; He will bless the house of Aaron.
He will bless them that fear the LORD, both small and great.
The LORD will increase you more and more, You and your children.
Blessed are ye of the LORD, Who made heaven and earth.
The heaven is the LORD'S heaven; But the earth he hath given to the sons of men.
The dead praise not the LORD,—No one who goeth down into silence.
But we will bless the LORD, From this time forth even for ever! Praise ye the LORD!
I rejoice that the LORD hath heard the voice of my supplication,
That he hath inclined his ear to me and heard me; I will call upon him as long as I live.
The snares of death encompassed me, And the pains of the underworld seized upon me; I found distress and sorrow.
Then called I upon the LORD: O LORD! deliver me!
Gracious is the LORD, and righteous; Yea, our God is merciful.
The LORD preserveth the simple; I was brought low, and he helped me.
Return, O my soul! to thy rest! For the LORD hath dealt kindly with thee.
For thou hast preserved me from death; Thou hast kept mine eyes from tears, And my feet from falling!
I shall walk before the LORD, In the land of the living.
I had trust, although I said, “I am grievously afflicted!”
I said in my distress, “All men are liars.”
What shall I render to the LORD For all his benefits to me?
I will take the cup of salvation, And call upon the name of the LORD;
I will pay my vows to the LORD, In the presence of all his people.
Precious in the eyes of the LORD Is the death of his holy ones.
Hear, O LORD! for I am thy servant; I am thy servant, the son of thy handmaid! Thou hast loosed my bonds.
I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, And will call upon the name of the LORD.
I will pay my vows to the LORD In the presence of all his people,
In the courts of the house of the LORD, In the midst of thee, O Jerusalem! Praise ye the LORD!
Praise the LORD, all ye nations! Praise him, all ye people!
For great toward us hath been his kindness, And the faithfulness of the LORD endureth for ever. Praise ye the LORD!
O give thanks to the LORD, for he is good; For his kindness endureth for ever!
Let Israel now say, His kindness endureth for ever!
Let the house of Aaron now say, His goodness endureth for ever!
Let all who fear the LORD say, His kindness endureth for ever!
I called upon the LORD in distress; He heard, and set me in a wide place.
The LORD is on my side, I will not fear: What can man do to me?
The LORD is my helper; I shall see my desire upon my enemies.
It is better to trust in the LORD Than to put confidence in man;
It is better to trust in the LORD Than to put confidence in princes.
All the nations beset me around, But in the name of the LORD I destroyed them.
They beset me on every side; But in the name of the LORD I destroyed them.
They beset me around like bees; They were quenched like the fire of thorns, For in the name of the LORD I destroyed them.
Thou didst assail me with violence to bring me down! But the LORD was my support.
The LORD is my glory and my song; For to him I owe my salvation.
The voice of joy and salvation is in the habitations of the righteous: “The right hand of the LORD doeth valiantly;
The right hand of the LORD is exalted; The right hand of the LORD doeth valiantly.”
I shall not die, but live, And declare the deeds of the LORD.
The LORD hath sorely chastened me, But he hath not given me over to death.
Open to me the gates of righteousness, That I may go in, and praise the LORD!
This is the gate of the LORD, Through which the righteous enter.
I praise thee that thou hast heard me, And hast been my salvation.
“The stone which the builders rejected Hath become the chief corner-stone.
This is the LORD'S doing; It is marvellous in our eyes!
This is the day which the LORD hath made; Let us rejoice and be glad in it!
Hear, O LORD! and bless us! Hear, O LORD! and send us prosperity!”
“Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the LORD! We bless you from the house of the LORD.”
“Jehovah is God, he hath shone upon us: Bind the sacrifice with cords to the horns of the altar!”
Thou art my God, and I will praise thee; Thou art my God, and I will exalt thee!
O give thanks to the LORD, for he is good; For his kindness endureth for ever!
Happy are they who are upright in their way, Who walk in the law of the LORD!
Happy are they who observe his ordinances, And seek him with their whole heart;
Who also do no iniquity, But walk in his ways!
Thou hast commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently.
O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes!
Then shall I not be put to shame, When I have respect to all thy commandments.
I will praise thee in uprightness of heart, When I shall have learned thy righteous laws.
I will keep thy statutes; Do not utterly forsake me!
How shall a young man keep his way pure? By taking heed to it according to thy word.
With my whole heart have I sought thee; O let me not wander from thy commandments!
Thy word have I hid in my heart, That I might not sin against thee.
Blessed be thou, O LORD! O teach me thy statutes!
With my lips do I declare All the precepts of thy mouth.
In the way of thine ordinances I rejoice As much as in all riches.
I meditate on thy precepts, And have respect unto thy ways.
I delight myself in thy statutes; I do not forget thy word.
Deal kindly with thy servant, that I may live, And have regard to thy word!
Open thou mine eyes, That I may behold wondrous things out of thy law!
I am a stranger in the earth; O hide not thy precepts from me!
My soul breaketh within me, On account of longing for thy judgments at all times.
Thou rebukest the proud, the accursed, Who wander from thy commandments.
Remove from me reproach and contempt, For I have kept thine ordinances!
Princes sit and speak against me, But thy servant meditateth on thy statutes.
Thine ordinances are my delight; Yea, they are my counsellors.
My soul cleaveth to the dust; O revive me, according to thy word!
I have declared my ways, and thou hast heard me; Teach me thy statutes!
Make me to understand the way of thy precepts! So will I meditate upon thy wonders.
My soul weepeth for trouble; O lift me up according to thy promise!
Remove from me the way of falsehood, And graciously grant me thy law!
I have chosen the way of truth, And set thy statutes before me.
I cleave to thine ordinances; O LORD! let me not be put to shame!
I will run in the way of thy commandments, When thou shalt enlarge my heart.
Teach me, O LORD! the way of thy statutes, That I may keep it to the end!
Give me understanding, that I may keep thy law; That I may observe it with my whole heart!
Cause me to tread in the path of thy commandments, For in it I have my delight.
Incline my heart to thine ordinances, And not to the love of gain!
Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, And quicken me in thy law!
Fulfill to thy servant thy promise, Which thou hast made to him who feareth thee!
Turn away the reproach which I fear; For thy judgments are good.
Behold, I have longed for thy precepts; O quicken thou me in thy righteousness!
Let thy mercies come to me, O LORD! And thy help according to thy promise!
So shall I be able to answer him that reproacheth me; For I trust in thy promise.
O take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth! For I trust in thy judgments.
So shall I keep thy law continually, For ever and ever.
I shall walk in a wide path; For I seek thy precepts.
I will speak of thine ordinances before kings, And will not be ashamed.
I will delight myself in thy commandments, which I love;
I will lift up my hands to thy precepts, which I love; I will meditate on thy statutes.
Remember thy promise to thy servant, Because thou hast caused me to hope!
This is my comfort in my affliction; For thy promise reviveth me.
The proud have had me greatly in derision; Yet have I not swerved from thy law.
I remember thy judgments of old, O LORD! And I comfort myself.
Indignation burneth within me, On account of the wicked who forsake thy law.
Thy statutes have been my song In the house of my pilgrimage.
In the night, O LORD! I think of thy name, And keep thy law!
This have I as my own, That I keep thy precepts.
Thou art my portion, O LORD! I have resolved that I will keep thy precepts.
I have sought thy favor with my whole heart; Be gracious unto me according to thy promise!
I think on my ways, And turn my feet to thy statutes;
I make haste, and delay not, To keep thy commandments.
The snares of the wicked surround me; Yet do I not forget thy law.
At midnight I rise to give thanks to thee On account of thy righteous judgments.
I am the companion of all who fear thee, And who obey thy precepts.
The earth, O LORD! is full of thy goodness; O teach me thy statutes!
Thou dost bless thy servant, O LORD! According to thy promise!
Teach me sound judgment and knowledge! For I have faith in thy commandments.
Before I was afflicted, I went astray; But now I keep thy word.
Thou art good and doest good; O teach me thy statutes!
The proud forge lies against me, But I keep thy precepts with my whole heart.
Their heart is senseless like fat; But I delight in thy law.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, That I might learn thy statutes.
The law of thy mouth is better to me Than thousands of gold and silver.
Thy hands have made and fashioned me; Give me understanding, that I may learn thy commandments!
They who fear thee shall see me and rejoice, Because I trust in thy word.
I know, O LORD! that thy judgments are right, And that in faithfulness thou hast afflicted me.
O let thy loving-kindness be my comfort, According to thy promise to thy servant!
Let thy tender mercies come to me, that I may live! For thy law is my delight.
May the proud be put to shame, who wrong me without cause! But I will meditate on thy precepts.
Let those who fear thee turn unto me, And they that know thine ordinances!
May my heart be perfect in thy statutes, That I may not be put to shame!
My soul fainteth for thy salvation; In thy promise do I trust.
Mine eyes fail with looking for thy promise; When. say I, wilt thou comfort me?
Yea, I am become like a bottle in the smoke; Yet do I not forget thy statutes.
How many are the days of thy servant? When wilt thou execute judgment upon my persecutors?
The proud have digged pits for me; They who do not regard thy law.
All thy commandments are faithful; They persecute me without cause; help thou me!
They had almost consumed me from the earth; But I forsook not thy precepts.
Quicken me according to thy loving-kindness, That I may keep the law of thy mouth!
Thy word, O LORD! abideth for ever, Being established like the heavens;
Thy faithfulness endureth to all generations. Thou hast established the earth, and it abideth.
They continue to this day according to their ordinances; For they are all subject to thee.
Had not thy law been my delight, I should have perished in my affliction.
I will never forget thy precepts; For by them thou revivest me.
I am thine, help me! For I seek thy precepts.
The wicked lie in wait to destroy me; But I will have regard to thine ordinances.
I have seen an end of all perfection; But thy law is exceeding broad.
O how I love thy law! It is my daily meditation.
Thou hast made me wiser than my enemies by thy precepts; For they are ever before me.
I have more understanding than all my teachers; For thine ordinances are my meditation.
I have more wisdom than the ancients, Because I keep thy precepts.
I have restrained my feet from every evil way, That I might keep thy word.
I depart not from thy statutes, For thou teachest me!
How sweet are thy words to my taste; Yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth!
From thy precepts I learn wisdom; Therefore do I hate every false way.
Thy word is a lamp to my feet, And a light to my path.
I have sworn, and I will perform it, That I will keep thy righteous statutes.
I am exceedingly afflicted; Revive me, O LORD! according to thy word!
Accept, O LORD! the free-will offering of my mouth, And teach me thy statutes!
My life is continually in my hand; Yet do I not forget thy law.
The wicked lay snares for me, Yet do I not go astray from thy precepts.
I have made thine ordinances my possession for ever; For they are the joy of my heart.
I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes, Always,—even to the end.
I hate impious men, And thy law I do love.
Thou art my hiding-place and my shield; In thy word I put my trust!
Depart from me, ye evil-doers! For I will keep the commandments of my God.
Uphold me according to thy promise, that I may live; And let me not be ashamed of my hope!
Do thou hold me up, and I shall be safe, And I will have respect to thy statutes continually!
Thou castest off all who depart from thy laws; For their deceit is vain.
Thou throwest away all the wicked of the earth, like dross; Therefore I love thine ordinances.
My flesh trembleth through fear of thee, And I am afraid of thy judgments.
I have done justice and equity; O leave me not to mine oppressors.
Be surety for thy servant for good; Let not the proud oppress me!
Mine eyes fail with looking for thy help, And for thy righteous promise.
Deal with thy servant according to thy mercy, And teach me thy statutes!
I am thy servant; give me understanding, That I may know thine ordinances!
It is time for thee, O LORD! to act; For men have made void thy law.
Therefore I love thy commandments above gold; Yea, above fine gold.
Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right; I hate every false way.
Wonderful are thine ordinances; Therefore do I observe them.
The communication of thy precepts giveth light; It giveth understanding to the simple.
I open my mouth and pant: For I long for thy commandments.
Look thou upon me, and be gracious to me, As is just to those who love thy name!
Establish my footsteps in thy word, And let no iniquity have dominion over me!
Redeem me from the oppression of men, So will I keep thy precepts!
Let thy face shine on thy servant, And teach me thy statutes!
Rivers of water run down mine eyes, Because men keep not thy law.
Righteous art thou, O LORD! And just are thy judgments!
Just are the ordinances which thou hast ordained, And altogether righteous.
My zeal consumeth me, Because my enemies forget thy word.
Thy word is very pure, Therefore thy servant loveth it.
Of mean condition am I, and despised; Yet do I not forget thy precepts.
Thy righteousness is everlasting righteousness, And thy law is truth.
Trouble and anguish have taken hold of me, But thy laws are my delight.
The justice of thine ordinances is everlasting; Give me understanding, and I shall live!
I cry to thee with my whole heart; Hear me, O LORD! that I may keep thy statutes.
I cry unto thee; save me, And I will observe thine ordinances.
I come before the dawn with my prayer; I trust in thy promise!
My eyes anticipate the night-watches, That I may meditate upon thy promise.
Hear my voice according to thy loving-kindness; O LORD! revive me according to thy mercy!
Near are they whose aim is mischief; They are far from thy law;
Yet thou art near, O LORD! And all thy commandments are truth!
Long have I known concerning thine ordinances, That thou hast founded them for ever.
Look upon my affliction, and deliver me! For I do not forget thy law.
Maintain my cause, and redeem me; Revive me according to thy promise!
Salvation is far from the wicked, Because they seek not thy statutes.
Great is thy compassion, O LORD! Revive thou me according to thine equity!
Many are my persecutors and my enemies, Yet do I not depart from thine ordinances.
I behold the transgressors, and am grieved Because they regard not thy word.
Behold, how I love thy precepts! O LORD! revive me according to thy loving-kindness!
The whole of thy word is truth, And all thy righteous judgments endure for ever.
Princes have persecuted me without cause; But my heart standeth in awe of thy word.
I rejoice in thy word, As one that hath found great spoil.
I hate and abhor lying, And thy law do I love.
Seven times a day do I praise thee On account of thy righteous judgments.
Great peace have they who love thy law, And no evil shall befall them.
O LORD! I wait for thy salvation, And keep thy commandments!
My soul observeth thine ordinances, And loveth them exceedingly.
I keep thy precepts and thine ordinances; For all my ways are before thee.
Let my prayer come near before thee, O LORD! According to thy promise, give me understanding!
Let my supplication come before thee; O deliver me according to thy promise!
My lips shall pour forth praise; For thou teachest me thy statutes.
My tongue shall sing of thy word; For all thy commandments are right.
Let thy hand be my help; For I have chosen thy precepts!
I long for thy salvation, O LORD! And thy law is my delight!
Let me live, and I will praise thee; Let thy judgments help me!
I wander like a lost sheep; seek thy servant, For I do not forget thy commandments!
“A psalm of steps.” In my distress I called upon the LORD, And he answered me.
O LORD! deliver me from lying lips, From the deceitful tongue!
What profit to thee, Or what advantage to thee, is the false tongue?
It is like the sharp arrows of the mighty man; Like coals of the juniper.
Alas for me, that I sojourn in Mesech, That I dwell in the tents of Kedar!
Too long have I dwelt With them that hate peace!
I am for peace; yet, when I speak for it, They are for war.
“A psalm of the steps, or the goings up.” I lift up mine eyes to the hills: Whence cometh my help?
My help cometh from the LORD, Who made heaven and earth.
He will not suffer thy foot to stumble; Thy guardian doth not slumber.
Behold, the guardian of Israel Doth neither slumber nor sleep.
The LORD is thy guardian; The LORD is thy shade at thy right hand.
The sun shall not smite thee by day, Nor the moon by night.
The LORD will preserve thee from all evil; He will preserve thy life.
The LORD will preserve thee, when thou goest out and when thou comest in, From this time forth for ever.
“A psalm of the steps, or the goings up. By David.” I was glad when they said to me, Let us go up to the house of the LORD!
Our feet are standing Within thy gates, O Jerusalem!
Jerusalem, the rebuilt city! The city that is joined together!
Thither the tribes go up, The tribes of the LORD, according to the law of Israel, To praise the name of the LORD.
There stand the thrones of judgment, The thrones of the house of David.
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem! May they prosper who love thee!
Peace be within thy walls, And prosperity within thy palaces!
For my brethren and companions' sake will I say, Peace be within thee!
For the sake of the house of the LORD, our God, Will I seek thy good!
“A song of the steps, or the goings up.” To thee do I lift up mine eyes, O Thou who dwellest in the heavens!
Behold, as the eyes of servants look to the hand of their masters, And as the eyes of a maiden to the hand of her mistress, So do our eyes look to the LORD, our God, Until he have pity upon us.
Have mercy upon us, O LORD! have mercy upon us, For we are overwhelmed with contempt!
Our soul is filled to the full with the scorn of those who are at ease, And with the contempt of the proud.
“A psalm of the steps, or the goings up. By David.” If the LORD had not been for us, Now may Israel say,
If the LORD had not been for us, When men rose up against us,
Then had they swallowed us up alive, When their wrath burned against us;
Then the waters had overwhelmed us; The stream had gone over our soul;
The proud waters had gone over our soul.
Blessed be the LORD, Who hath not given us a prey to their teeth!
We have escaped like a bird from the snare of the fowler; The snare is broken, and we have escaped.
Our help is in the name of the LORD, Who made heaven and earth.
“A psalm of the steps, or the goings up.” They who trust in the LORD shall be as Mount Zion, Which cannot be moved, which standeth for ever.
As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, So the LORD is round about his people, Henceforth even for ever!
For the sceptre of the wicked shall not remain upon the portion of the righteous, Lest the righteous put forth their hands to iniquity.
Do good, O LORD! to the good, To them that are upright in heart!
But such as turn aside to their crooked ways,-May the LORD destroy them with the evil-doers! Peace be to Israel!
“A psalm of the steps, or the goings up.” When the LORD brought back the captivity of Zion, We were like them that dream.
Then was our mouth filled with laughter, And our tongue with singing. Then said they among the nations, “The LORD hath done great things for them!”
Yea, the LORD hath done great things for us, For which we are glad.
Bring back, O LORD! our captivity, Like streams in the South!
They who sow in tears Shall reap in joy.
Yea, he goeth forth weeping, bearing his seed; He shall surely come back rejoicing, bearing his sheaves.
“A psalm of the steps, or the goings up. By Solomon.” Except the LORD build the house, The builders labor in vain; Except the LORD guard the city, The watchman waketh in vain.
In vain ye rise up early, and go to rest late, And eat the bread of care! The same giveth he his beloved one in sleep.
Behold! sons are an inheritance from the LORD, And the fruit of the womb is his gift.
As arrows in the hand of the warrior, So are the sons of young men:
Happy the man that hath his quiver full of them! They shall not be put to shame, When they speak with adversaries in the gate.
“A psalm of the steps, or the goings up.” Happy is he who feareth the LORD, Who walketh in his ways!
Thou shalt eat the labor of thy hands; Happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee!
Thy wife shall be like a fruitful vine within thy house; Thy children like olive-branches round about thy table.
Behold! thus happy is the man who feareth the LORD!
Jehovah shall bless thee out of Zion, And thou shalt see the prosperity of Jerusalem all the days of thy life;
Yea, thou shalt see thy children's children. Peace be to Israel!
“A psalm of the steps, or the goings up.” Much have they afflicted me from my youth, May Israel now say;
Much have they afflicted me from my youth, Yet have they not prevailed against me.
The ploughers ploughed up my back; They made long their furrows;
But the LORD was righteous; He cut asunder the cords of the wicked.
Let all be driven back with shame Who hate Zion!
Let them be as grass upon the house-tops, Which withereth before one pulleth it up;
With which the reaper filleth not his hand, Nor he that bindeth sheaves his bosom!
And they who pass by do not say, “The blessing of the LORD be upon you! We bless you in the name of the LORD!”
“A psalm of the steps, or the goings up.” Out of the depths do I cry to thee, O LORD!
O Lord! listen to my voice, Let thine ears be attentive to my supplication!
If thou, LORD, shouldst treasure up transgressions, Lord, who could stand?
But with thee is forgiveness, That thou mayst be feared.
I trust in the LORD; my soul doth trust, And in his promise do I confide.
My soul waiteth for the LORD More than they who watch for the morning; Yea, more than they who watch for the morning!
O Israel! trust in the LORD! For with the LORD is mercy, And with him is plenteous redemption.
He will redeem Israel From all his iniquities.
“A psalm of the steps, or the goings up. Of David.” O LORD! my heart is not haughty, nor my eyes lofty; I employ not myself on great things, or things too wonderful for me!
Yea, I have stilled and quieted my soul As a weaned child upon his mother; My soul within me is like a weaned child.
O Israel! trust in the LORD, Henceforth even for ever!
“A psalm of the steps, or the goings up.” O LORD! remember David, And all his affliction!
How he sware to Jehovah, And vowed to the Mighty One of Jacob:
“I will not go into my house, Nor lie down on my bed,
I will not give sleep to my eyes, Nor slumber to my eyelids,
Until I find a place for Jehovah, A habitation for the Mighty One of Jacob.”
Behold, we heard of it at Ephratah; We found it in the fields of the forest.
Let us go into his habitation; Let us worship at his footstool!
Arise, O LORD! into thy rest, Thou, and the ark of thy strength!
Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness, And thy holy ones shout for joy!
For the sake of thy servant David, Reject not the prayer of thine anointed!
Jehovah hath sworn in truth unto David, And he will not depart from it: “Of the fruit of thy body will I place upon the throne for thee.
If thy children keep my covenant, And my statutes, which I teach them, Their children also throughout all ages Shall sit upon thy throne.”
For Jehovah hath chosen Zion; He hath desired it as his dwelling-place.
“This is my resting-place for ever; Here will I dwell, for I have chosen it.
I will abundantly bless her provision; I will satisfy her poor with bread.
I will also clothe her priests with salvation, And her holy ones shall shout aloud for joy.
There will I cause to spring forth a horn for David; I have prepared a light for mine anointed.
His enemies will I clothe with shame, And the crown shall glitter upon his head.”
“A psalm of the steps, or the goings up. By David.” Behold, how good and pleasant it is For brethren to dwell together in unity!
It is like precious perfume upon the head, Which ran down upon the beard, The beard of Aaron; Which went down to the very border of his garments;
Like the dew of Hermon, Like that which descendeth upon the mountains of Zion. For there the LORD commandeth a blessing, Even life for evermore.
“A psalm of the steps, or the goings up.” Praise the LORD, all ye servants of the LORD, Who stand in the house of the LORD by night!
Lift up your hands to the sanctuary, And praise the LORD!
May the LORD, who made heaven and earth, Bless thee out of Zion!
Praise ye the LORD! Praise ye the name of the LORD! Praise him, O ye servants of the LORD!
Ye who stand in the house of the LORD, In the courts of the house of our God!
Praise ye the LORD, for the LORD is good; Praise his name, for he is kind!
For the LORD chose Jacob for himself, And Israel for his own possession.
I know that the LORD is great; That our Lord is above all gods.
All that the LORD pleaseth, that he doeth, In heaven and upon earth, In the sea, and in all deeps.
He causeth the clouds to ascend from the ends of the earth; He maketh lightnings for the rain; He bringeth the wind from his store-houses.
He smote the first-born of Egypt, Both of man and beast.
He sent signs and wonders into the midst of thee, O Egypt! Against Pharaoh and all his servants!
He smote many nations, And slew mighty kings;
Sihon, the king of the Amorites, And Og, the king of Bashan, And all the kings of Canaan;
And gave their land for an inheritance, For an inheritance to Israel, his people.
Thy name, O LORD! endureth for ever; Thy memorial, O LORD! to all generations!
For the LORD judgeth his people, And hath compassion on his servants.
The idols of the nations are silver and gold, The work of men's hands.
They have mouths, but they speak not; Eyes have they, but they see not.
They have ears, but they hear not; And there is no breath in their mouths.
They that make them are like them; So is every one that trusteth in them.
Praise the LORD, O house of Israel! Praise the LORD, O house of Aaron!
Praise the LORD, O house of Levi! Ye that fear the LORD, bless the LORD!
Praised be the LORD out of Zion, He that dwelleth in Jerusalem! Praise ye the LORD!
O give thanks to the LORD! for he is kind; For his goodness endureth for ever!
O give thanks to the God of gods; For his goodness endureth for ever!
O give thanks to the Lord of lords; For his goodness endureth for ever!
To him that alone doeth great wonders; For his goodness endureth for ever!
To him that made the heavens with wisdom; For his goodness endureth for ever!
To him that spread out the earth upon the waters; For his goodness endureth for ever!
To him that made the great lights; For his goodness endureth for ever!
The sun to rule the day; For his goodness endureth for ever!
The moon and stars to rule the night; For his goodness endureth for ever!
To him that smote in Egypt their first-born; For his goodness endureth for ever!
And brought Israel from the midst of them; For his goodness endureth for ever!
With a strong hand and an outstretched arm; For his goodness endureth for ever!
To him who divided the Red sea into parts; For his goodness endureth for ever!
And made Israel to pass through the midst of it; For his goodness endureth for ever!
And overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red sea; For his goodness endureth for ever!
To him who led his people through the wilderness; For his goodness endureth for ever!
To him who smote great kings; For his goodness endureth for ever!
And slew mighty kings; For his goodness endureth for ever!
Sihon, the king of the Amorites; For his goodness endureth for ever!
And Og, the king of Bashan; For his goodness endureth for ever!
And gave their land for an inheritance; For his goodness endureth for ever!
For an inheritance to Israel his servant; For his goodness endureth for ever!
Who remembered us in our low estate; For his goodness endureth for ever!
And redeemed us from our enemies; For his goodness endureth for ever!
Who giveth food unto all; For his goodness endureth for ever!
O give thanks to the God of heaven; For his goodness endureth for ever!
By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept, When we remembered Zion.
We hung our harps on the willows in the midst thereof.
For there they who carried us away captive required of us a song; They who wasted us required of us mirth: “Sing us one of the songs of Zion!”
How shall we sing the LORD'S song In a strange land?
If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, Let my right hand forget her cunning!
If I do not remember thee, Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; If I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy!
Remember, O LORD! against the children of Edom The day of the calamity of Jerusalem! Who said, “Raze it, Raze it to its foundations!”
O daughter of Babylon, thou destroyer! Happy be he who requiteth thee As thou hast dealt with us!
Happy be he who seizeth thy little ones And dasheth them against the stones!
“A psalm of David.” I will praise thee with my whole heart; Before the gods will I sing praise to thee;
I will worship toward thy holy temple, And praise thy name for thy goodness and thy truth; For thy promise thou hast magnified above all thy name!
In the day when I called, thou didst hear me; Thou didst strengthen me, and encourage my soul.
All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O LORD! When they hear the promises of thy mouth!
Yea, they shall sing of the ways of the LORD; For great is the glory of the LORD.
The LORD is high, yet he looketh upon the humble, And the proud doth he know from afar.
Though I walk through the midst of trouble, thou wilt revive me; Thou wilt stretch forth thy hand against the wrath of my enemies; Thou wilt save me by thy right hand!
The LORD will perform all things for me; Thy goodness, O LORD! endureth ever: Forsake not the works of thine hands!
“For the leader of the music. A psalm of David.” O LORD! thou hast searched me and known me!
Thou knowest my sitting-down and my rising-up; Thou understandest my thoughts from afar!
Thou seest my path and my lying-down, And art acquainted with all my ways!
For before the word is upon my tongue, Behold, O LORD! thou knowest it altogether!
Thou besettest me behind and before, And layest thine hand upon me!
Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; It is high, I cannot attain to it!
Whither shall I go from thy spirit, And whither shall I flee from thy presence?
If I ascend into heaven, thou art there! If I make my bed in the underworld, behold, thou art there!
If I take the wings of the morning, And dwell in the remotest parts of the sea,
Even there shall thy hand lead me, And thy right hand shall hold me!
If I say, “Surely the darkness shall cover me;” Even the night shall be light about me.
Yea, the darkness hideth not from thee, But the night shineth as the day; The darkness and the light are both alike to thee!
For thou didst form my reins; Thou didst weave me in my mother's womb.
I will praise thee; for I am fearfully and wonderfully made; Marvellous are thy works, And this my soul knoweth full well!
My frame was not hidden from thee, When I was made in secret. When I was curiously wrought in the lower parts of the earth.
Thine eyes did see my substance, while yet unformed, And in thy book was every thing written; My days were appointed before one of them existed.
How precious to me are thy thoughts, O God! How great is the sum of them!
If I should count them, they would outnumber the sand: When I awake, I am still with thee!
O that thou wouldst slay the wicked, O God! Ye men of blood, depart from me!
For they speak against thee wickedly; Thine enemies utter thy name for falsehood.
Do I not hate them that hate thee, O LORD? Do I not abhor them that rise up against thee?
Yea, I hate them with perfect hatred; I count them mine enemies.
Search me, O God! and know my heart; Try me, and know my thoughts;
And see if the way of trouble be within me, And lead me in the way everlasting!

“For the leader of the music. A psalm of David.” Deliver me, O LORD! from the evil man, Save me from the man of violence,
Who meditate mischief in their heart, And daily stir up war!
They sharpen their tongues like a serpent; The poison of the adder is under their lips. [[Pause.]]
Defend me, O LORD! from the hands of the wicked, Preserve me from the man of violence, Who have purposed to cause my fall! [[Pause.]]
The proud have hidden snares and cords for me; They have spread a net by the way-side; They have set traps for me.
I say to Jehovah, Thou art my God; Hear, O Jehovah! the voice of my supplication!
The Lord Jehovah is my saving strength: Thou shelterest my head in the day of battle!
Grant not, O LORD! the desires of the wicked; Let not their devices prosper; Let them not exalt themselves!
As for the heads of those who encompass me, Let the mischief of their own lips cover them!
Let burning coals fall upon them; May they be cast into the fire, And into deep waters from which they shall not arise!
The slanderer shall not be established upon the earth; Evil shall pursue the violent man to destruction.
I know that the LORD will maintain the cause of the afflicted, And the right of the poor.
Yea, the righteous shall praise thy name; The upright shall dwell in thy presence!
“For the leader of the music. A psalm of David.” I cry to thee, O LORD! make haste unto me! Give ear to my voice, when I cry unto thee!
Let my prayer come before thee as incense, And the lifting-up of my hands, as the evening sacrifice!
Set a watch, O LORD! before my mouth; Guard the door of my lips!
Let not my heart incline to any evil thing; Let me not practise wickedness with the doers of iniquity, And let me not eat of their delicacies!
Let the righteous smite me,—it shall be a kindness; Let him reprove me, and it shall be oil for my head; Let him do it again, and my head shall not refuse it; But now I pray against their wickedness!
When their judges are hurled over the side of the rock, They shall hear how pleasant are my words.
So are our bones scattered at the mouth of the underworld, As when one furroweth and ploweth up the land.
But to thee do my eyes look, O Lord Jehovah! In thee is my trust; Let not my life be poured out!
Preserve me from the snares which they have laid for me, And from the nets of evil-doers!
Let the wicked fall together into their own traps, Whilst I make my escape!

“A psalm of David; a prayer, when he was in the cave” I cry unto the LORD with my voice; With my voice to the LORD do I make my supplication.
I pour out my complaint before him; I declare before him my distress.
When my spirit is overwhelmed within me, Thou knowest my path! In the way which I walk, they have hid a snare for me.
I look on my right hand, and behold, But no man knoweth me; Refuge faileth me; No one careth for me.
I cry unto thee, O LORD! I say, Thou art my refuge, My portion in the land of the living.
Attend to my cry, for I am brought very low; Deliver me from my persecutors, For they prevail against me!
Bring me out of prison, That I may praise thy name! The righteous shall gather around me, When thou shalt show me thy favor.
“A psalm of David.” Hear my prayer, O LORD! give ear to my supplications! In thy faithfulness, and in thy righteousness, answer me!
Enter not into judgment with thy servant; For before thee no man living is righteous.
For the enemy pursueth my life; He hath smitten me to the ground; He hath made me dwell in darkness, As those that have been dead of old.
My spirit is overwhelmed within me; My heart within me is desolate.
I remember the days of old; I meditate on all thy works; I muse on the deeds of thy hands.
I stretch forth my hands unto thee; My soul thirsteth for thee, like a parched land.
Hear me speedily, O LORD! My spirit faileth; Hide not thy face from me. Lest I become like those who go down to the pit!
Cause me so see thy loving-kindness speedily; For in thee do I trust! Make known to me the way which I should take; For to thee do I lift up my soul!
Deliver me, O LORD! from mine enemies; For in thee do I seek refuge!
Teach me to do thy will; For thou art my God! Let thy good spirit lead me in a plain path!
Revive me, O LORD! for thy name's sake! In thy righteousness, bring me out of my distress!
And, in thy compassion, cut off mine enemies, And destroy all that distress me! For I am thy servant.
Blessed be the LORD, my rock, Who teacheth my hands to war, And my fingers to fight!
He who is my loving-kindness and my fortress; My high tower and my deliverer, My shield, and he in whom I trust; Who subdueth peoples under me.
LORD, what is man, that thou art mindful of him, Or the son of man, that thou makest account of him?
Man is like a vapor; His day is like a shadow that passeth away.
Bow thy heavens, O LORD! and come down; Touch the mountains, so that they shall smoke!
Cast forth lightnings, and scatter them; Shoot forth thine arrows, and destroy them!
Send forth thine hand from above; Rescue and save me from deep waters; From the hands of aliens,
Whose mouth uttereth deceit, And whose right hand is a right hand of falsehood!
I will sing to thee a new song, O God! Upon a ten-stringed psaltery will I sing praise to thee;
To thee, who givest salvation to kings, Who deliverest David, thy servant, from the destructive sword!
Rescue and deliver me from the hands of aliens, Whose mouth uttereth deceit, And whose right hand is a right hand of falsehood!
That our sons may be as plants, Grown up in their youth; Our daughters as corner-pillars, Hewn like those of a palace!
That our garners may be full, Affording all kinds of store; That our sheep may bring forth thousands And ten thousands in our streets.
That our cattle may be fruitful; That there be no breaking in, or going out; And no outcry in our streets.
Happy the people that is in such a state! Yea, happy the people whose God is Jehovah!
“A song of praise. By David.” I will extol thee, my God, the King! I will praise thy name for ever and ever!
Every day will I bless thee, And praise thy name for ever and ever!
Great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised; Yea, his greatness is unsearchable.
One generation shall praise thy works to another, And shall declare thy mighty deeds.
I will speak of the glorious honor of thy majesty, And of thy wonderful works.
Men shall speak of the might of thy terrible deeds, And I will declare thy greatness;
They shall pour forth the praise of thy great good And sing of thy righteousness.
The LORD is gracious, and full of compassion, Slow to anger, and rich in mercy.
The LORD is good to all. And his tender mercies are over all his works.
All thy works praise thee, O LORD! And thy holy ones bless thee!
They speak of the glory of thy kingdom, And talk of thy power;
To make known to the sons of men his mighty deeds, And the glorious majesty of his kingdom.
Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, And thy dominion endureth throughout all generations.
The LORD upholdeth all that fall, And raiseth up all that are bowed down.
The eyes of all wait upon thee, And thou givest them their food in due season;
Thou openest thine hand, And satisfiest the desire of every living thing.
The LORD is righteous in all his ways, And merciful in all his works.
The LORD is nigh to all that call upon him, To all that call upon him in truth.
He fulfilleth the desire of them that fear him; He heareth their cry, and saveth them.
The LORD preserveth all that love him; But all the wicked he will destroy.
My mouth shall speak the praise of the LORD; And let all flesh bless his holy name for ever and ever!
Praise ye the LORD! Praise the LORD, O my soul!
I will praise the LORD, as long as I live; I will sing praises to my God, while I have my being.
Put not your trust in princes, In the son of man, in whom is no help!
His breath goeth forth; he returneth to the dust; In that very day his plans perish.
Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help; Whose hope is in the LORD, his God;
Who made heaven and earth, The sea, and all that is therein; Who keepeth truth for ever;
Who executeth judgment for the oppressed; Who giveth food to the hungry. The LORD setteth free the prisoners;
The LORD openeth the eyes of the blind; The LORD raiseth up them that are bowed down; The LORD loveth the righteous.
The LORD preserveth the strangers; He relieveth the fatherless and the widow; But the way of the wicked he maketh crooked.
The LORD shall reign for ever; Thy God, O Zion! to all generations! Praise ye the LORD!
Praise ye the LORD! For it is good to sing praise to our God; For it is pleasant, and praise is becoming.
The LORD buildeth up Jerusalem; He gathereth together the dispersed of Israel.
He healeth the broken in heart, And bindeth up their wounds.
He counteth the number of the stars; He calleth them all by their names.
Great is our Lord, and mighty in power; His understanding is infinite.
The LORD lifteth up the lowly; He casteth the wicked down to the ground.
Sing to the LORD with thanksgiving; Sing praises upon the harp to our God!
Who covereth the heavens with clouds, Who prepareth rain for the earth, Who causeth grass to grow upon the mountains.
He giveth to the cattle their food. And to the young ravens, when they cry.
He delighteth not in the strength of the horse, He taketh not pleasure in the legs of a man.
The LORD taketh pleasure in those who fear him, In those who trust in his mercy.
Praise the LORD. O Jerusalem! Praise thy God, O Zion!
For he hath strengthened the bars of thy gates; He hath blessed thy children within thee.
He maketh peace in thy borders, And satisfieth thee with the finest of the wheat.
He sendeth forth his command to the earth; His word runneth very swiftly.
He giveth snow like wool, And scattereth the hoar-frost like ashes.
He casteth forth his ice like morsels; Who can stand before his cold?
He sendeth forth his word, and melteth them; He causeth his wind to blow, and the waters flow.
He publisheth his word to Jacob, His statutes and laws to Israel.
He hath dealt in this manner with no other nation; And, as for his ordinances, they have not known them. Praise ye the LORD!
Praise ye the LORD! Praise the LORD from the heavens! Praise him in the heights!
Praise him, all ye his angels! Praise him, all ye his hosts!
Praise ye him, sun and moon! Praise him, all ye stars of light!
Praise him, ye heavens of heavens! Ye waters, that are above the heavens!
Let them praise the name of the LORD; For he commanded, and they were created.
He hath also established them for ever; He hath given them a law, and they transgress it not.
Praise the LORD from the earth, Ye sea-monsters, and all deeps!
Fire and hail, snow and vapor; Thou tempest, that fulfillest his word!
Ye mountains, and all hills! Fruit-trees, and all cedars!
Ye wild beasts, and all cattle! Ye creeping things, and winged birds!
Ye kings, and all peoples, Princes, and all judges of the earth!
Young men and maidens, Old men and children!
Let them praise the name of the LORD! For his name alone is exalted; His glory is above the earth and the heavens.
He exalteth the horn of his people, The glory of all his godly ones, Of the children of Israel, a people near to him. Praise ye the LORD!
Praise ye the LORD! Sing unto the LORD a new song; His praise in the assembly of the godly!
Let Israel rejoice in him that made him; Let the sons of Zion be joyful in their king!
Let them praise his name in the dance; Let them praise him with the timbrel and harp!
For the LORD taketh pleasure in his people; He will beautify the distressed with salvation.
Let the godly-rejoice in their glory; Let them shout for joy upon their beds!
Let the praises of God be in their mouth, And a two-edged sword in their hand,
To execute vengeance upon the nations, And punishment upon the peoples!
To bind their kings with chains. And their nobles with fetters of iron;
To execute upon them the sentence which is written: This honor have all his godly ones. Praise ye the LORD!
Praise ye the LORD! Praise God in his sanctuary! Praise him in his glorious firmament!
Praise him for his mighty deeds! Praise him according to his excellent greatness!
Praise him with the sound of trumpets! Praise him with the psaltery and harp!
Praise him with the timbrel and dance! Praise him with stringed instruments and pipes!
Praise him with the clear-sounding cymbals! Praise him with the high-sounding cymbals!
Let every thing that hath breath praise the LORD! Praise ye the LORD!
The proverbs of Solomon, the son of David, king of Israel:
That one may learn wisdom and instruction, And receive words of understanding;
That one may gain the instruction of prudence, Justice, equity, and uprightness;
Which will give caution to the simple, To the young man wisdom and discretion;
Let the wise man hear, and he will increase his knowledge, And the man of understanding will gain wise counsels;
So as to understand a proverb and a deep maxim, The words of the wise and their dark sayings.
The fear of the LORD is the beginning of knowledge; Fools despise wisdom and instruction.
Hear, O my son! the instruction of thy father, And neglect not the teaching of thy mother!
For they shall be a graceful wreath for thy head, And a chain around thy neck.
My son, if sinners entice thee, Consent thou not!
If they say, “Come with us, Let us lie in wait for blood, Let us lurk secretly for him who is innocent in vain;
Let us swallow them up alive, like the underworld, Yea, in full health, as those that go down into the pit;
We shall find all kinds of precious substance, We shall fill our houses with spoil;
Thou shalt cast thy lot among us; We will all have one purse;”—
My son, walk thou not in their way, Refrain thy foot from their path!
For their feet run to evil, And make haste to shed blood.
For as the net is spread in vain Before the eyes of any bird,
So they lie in wait for their own blood; They lurk secretly for their own lives.
Such are the ways of every one greedy of unjust gain; It taketh away the life of the possessor thereof.
Wisdom crieth out in the highway; In the market-place she uttereth her voice;
At the head of the noisy streets she crieth aloud; At the entrances of the gates, throughout the city, she proclaimeth her words [[saying]]:
How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? How long will scoffers delight themselves in scoffing, And fools hate knowledge?
Turn ye at my reproof! Behold, I will pour out my spirit to you; I will make known my words to you!
“Because I have called, and ye have refused,—Because I have stretched out my hand, and no one hath regarded.
Because ye have rejected all my counsel, And have slighted my rebuke,—
I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear cometh;
When your fear cometh upon you like a storm. And destruction overtaketh you like a whirlwind, When distress and anguish come upon you.
Then will they call upon me, but I will not answer! They will seek me early, But they shall not find me!
Because they have hated knowledge, And have not chosen the fear of the LORD,—
Because they would not attend to my counsel, And have despised all my reproof,—
Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, And be filled to the full with their own devices;
Yea, the turning away of the simple shall slay them, And the carelessness of fools shall destroy them.
But whoso hearkeneth to me shall dwell securely, And shall not be disquieted with the fear of evil.”
Oh, my son, that thou wouldst receive my words, And treasure up my precepts within thee;
That thou wouldst apply thine ear to wisdom, And incline thy heart to understanding!
For if thou wilt call aloud to knowledge, And lift up thy voice to understanding,—
If thou wilt seek her as silver, And search for her as for hidden treasures,
Then shalt thou understand the fear of the LORD, And find the knowledge of God.
For the LORD giveth wisdom; From his mouth proceed knowledge and understanding:
He layeth up safety for the righteous; He is a shield to them that walk uprightly:
He guardeth the paths of equity, And defendeth the way of his servants.
Then shalt thou understand righteousness and equity And uprightness, yea, every good path.
When wisdom entereth into thy heart, And knowledge is pleasant to thy soul,
Discretion will guard thee, Understanding will preserve thee.
It will deliver thee from the way of the wicked, From the men who speak perverse things;
Who forsake the paths of uprightness, To walk in the ways of darkness;
Who rejoice in doing evil, And delight in the perverseness of the wicked;
Whose paths are crooked, And who are froward in their ways.
It will deliver thee from the wife of another, From the stranger, who useth smooth words;
Who forsaketh the friend of her youth, And forgetteth the covenant of her God.
For her house sinketh down to Death, And her paths to the shades of the dead:
None that go to her return again; They will not attain the paths of life.
Therefore walk thou in the way of good men, And keep the paths of the righteous:
For the upright shall dwell in the land, And the righteous shall remain in it;
But the wicked shall be cut off from the land, And transgressors shall be rooted out of it.
My son, forget not my teaching, And let thy heart observe my precepts!
For length of days, and years of life, And peace shall they multiply to thee.
Let not kindness and truth forsake thee; Bind them around thy neck, Write them upon the tablet of thy heart:
Then shalt thou find favor and good success In the sight of God and man.
Trust in the LORD with all thy heart, And lean not on thine own understanding;
In all thy ways acknowledge him, And he will make thy paths plain.
Be not wise in thine own eyes; Fear the LORD, and depart from evil.
It shall be health to thy muscles, And moisture to thy bones.
Honor the LORD with thy substance, And with the first-fruits of all thy increase;
So shall thy barns be filled with plenty, And thy vats overflow with new wine.
My son, despise not the correction of the LORD, Nor be impatient under his chastisement!
For whom the LORD loveth he chasteneth, Even as a father the son in whom he delighteth.
Happy the man who findeth wisdom; Yea, the man who getteth understanding!
For the profit thereof is greater than that of silver, And the gain thereof than that of fine gold.
More precious is she than pearls, And none of thy jewels is to be compared with her.
Length of days is in her right hand; In her left hand are riches and honor.
Her ways are ways of pleasantness, And all her paths are peace.
She is a tree of life to them that lay hold of her, And happy is every one who hath her in his grasp.
The LORD by wisdom founded the earth; By understanding he framed the heavens.
By his knowledge the deep waters were cleft, And the clouds drop down the dew.
My son, let them not depart from thine eyes; Keep sound wisdom and discretion!
For they shall be life to thy soul, And grace to thy neck.
Then shalt thou go on thy way securely, And thy foot shall not stumble;
When thou liest down, thou shalt not be afraid, Yea, thou shalt lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet.
Be not thou afraid of sudden alarm, Nor of the storm that is for the wicked, when it cometh;
For the LORD shall be thy confidence; Yea, he will keep thy foot from being taken.
Withhold not kindness from those who need it, When it is in the power of thy hand to do it.
Say not to thy neighbor, “Go, and come again, And to-morrow I will give to thee,” when thou hast it by thee.
Devise not evil against thy neighbor, While he dwelleth securely by thee.
Contend not with a man without cause, When he hath done thee no harm.
Envy not the oppressor, And choose none of his ways.
For the perverse man is the abomination of the LORD, But he is in friendship with the upright.
The curse of the LORD is upon the house of the wicked, But he blesseth the dwelling of the righteous.
Surely the scorners he treadeth scornfully, But giveth favor to the lowly.
The wise shall obtain honor, But fools shall bear off shame.
Hear, ye children, the instruction of a father, And attend, that ye may learn understanding!
For I give you good instruction; Forsake ye not my commandments.
For I was my father's son, A tender and only child in the sight of my mother.
He taught me, and said to me, Let thy heart hold fast my words; Keep my commandments, and live.
Get wisdom, get understanding; Forget not, and depart not from, the words of my mouth.
Forsake her not, and she will guard thee: Love her, and she will preserve thee.
Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore gain wisdom, And with all thy gain, gain understanding.
Exalt her, and she will promote thee; She will bring thee to honor, when thou dost embrace her;
She will give to thy head a graceful wreath, A beautiful crown will she bestow upon thee.
Hear, O my son! and receive my sayings! So shall the years of thy life be many.
I have taught thee the way of wisdom, I have guided thee in the right path.
When thou goest, thy steps shall not be confined; And, when thou runnest, thou shalt not stumble.
Take fast hold of instruction; let her not go; Keep her, for she is thy life.
Enter not into the path of the wicked, And go not in the way of evil men;
Avoid it, pass not upon it, Turn from it, and go away.
For they sleep not, unless they have done mischief; Yea, their sleep is taken away, unless they have caused some to fall.
For they eat the bread of wickedness, And drink the wine of violence.
But the path of the righteous is as the light of dawn, Which groweth brighter and brighter unto the perfect day.
The way of the wicked is as thick darkness; They know not at what they stumble.
My son, attend to my words; Incline thine ear to my sayings;
Let them not depart from thine eyes; Keep them in the midst of thy heart!
For they are life to those who find them, And health to all their flesh.
More than any thing which thou watchest, watch thy heart; For from it goeth forth life.
Put away from thee a deceitful mouth, And remove far from thee perverse lips.
Let thine eyes look straight forward, And thine eyelids be directed before thee.
Give heed to the path of thy foot, And let all thy ways be steadfast.
Turn not to the right hand or to the left; Remove thy foot from evil.
My son, attend to my wisdom. And bow thine ear to my understanding;
That thou mayest keep discretion, And that thy lips may preserve knowledge!
Truly, the lips of a strange woman drop honey, And her mouth is smoother than oil;
But her end is bitter as wormwood, Sharp as a two-edged sword.
Her feet go down to death; Her steps lay hold of the under-world.
That she may not ponder the way of life, Her paths waver when she heedeth it not.
Hear me now, therefore, O children! And turn not away from the words of my mouth!
Remove thy way far from her. And come not nigh the door of her house:
Lest thou give thy bloom to others, And thy years to a cruel one;
Lest strangers be filled with thy wealth, And thine earnings be in the house of an alien;
And lest thou mourn in thy latter end. When thy flesh and thy body are consumed,
And say, “How have I hated instruction! And how hath my heart despised reproof!
I have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, Nor inclined mine ear to my instructors;
I have well-nigh fallen into utter misery; In the midst of the congregation and the assembly.”
Drink water out of thine own cistern. And running water out of thine own well:
So shall thy fountains overflow in the streets, In the wide streets, as streams of water;
They shall belong to thee alone, And not to strangers with thee;
And thy fountain shall be blessed, Yea, thou shalt have joy in the wife of thy youth.
A lovely hind, a graceful doe, Her breasts shall satisfy thee at all times, And thou shalt be always ravished with her love.
Why, then, my son, wilt thou be ravished with a wanton, And embrace the bosom of a stranger?
For the ways of man are before the eyes of the LORD, And he weigheth well all his paths.
His own iniquities shall ensnare the wicked; Yea, he shall be held fast by the cords of his own sins.
He shall die for want of instruction; Yea, through the greatness of his folly he shall stagger.
My son, if thou hast become surety for another, If thou hast stricken hands for another,
If thou hast become ensnared by the words of thy mouth, If thou hast been caught by the words of thy mouth,
Do this now, my son, and rescue thyself,—Since thou hast fallen into the hands of thy neighbor,—Go, prostrate thyself, and be urgent with thy neighbor!
Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids;
Rescue thyself, as a roe from the hand, And as a bird from the hand of the fowler.
Go to the ant, O sluggard! Consider her ways, and be wise!
She hath no governor, Nor overseer, nor ruler;
Yet she prepareth in the summer her food, She gathereth in the harvest her meat.
How long wilt thou lie in bed, O sluggard? When wilt thou arise from thy sleep?
“A little sleep,—a little slumber,—A little folding of the hands to rest:”
So shall thy poverty come upon thee like a robber, Yea, thy want, as an armed man!
A worthless wretch is the unrighteous man, Who walketh with a deceitful mouth;
Who winketh with his eyes, Speaketh with his feet, And teacheth with his fingers.
Fraud is in his heart; He deviseth mischief continually; He scattereth contentions.
Therefore shall calamity come upon him suddenly; In a moment shall he be destroyed, and that without remedy;
These six things doth the LORD hate; Yea, seven are an abomination to him:
Lofty eyes, a false tongue, And hands which shed innocent blood;
A heart that contriveth wicked devices; Feet that are swift in running to mischief,
A false witness, that uttereth lies, And him that soweth discord among brethren.
Keep, O my son! the commandment of thy father, And forsake not the precepts of thy mother!
Bind them continually to thy heart, Tie them around thy neck!
When thou goest forth, they shall guide thee; When thou sleepest, they shall watch over thee; And, when thou awakest, they shall talk with thee.
For the commandment is a lamp, and instruction a light; Yea, the rebukes of correction lead to life.
They shall guard thee from the evil woman, From the smooth tongue of the unchaste woman.
Desire not her beauty in thy heart, Nor let her catch thee with her eyelids;
For by a harlot a man is brought to a morsel of bread, And the adulteress layeth snares for the precious life.
Can a man take fire into his bosom, And his clothes not be burned?
Can one walk upon burning coals, And his feet not be scorched?
So is it with him who goeth in to his neighbor's wife; Whoever toucheth her shall not go unpunished.
Men do not overlook a thief, Though he steal to satisfy his appetite, when he is hungry;
If found, he must repay sevenfold, And give up all the substance of his house.
Whoso committeth adultery with a woman lacketh understanding; He that doeth it destroyeth himself;
Blows and dishonor shall he get, And his reproach shall not be wiped away.
For jealousy is the fury of a man; He will not spare in the day of vengeance;
And he will not pay regard to any ransom, Nor be content, though thou offer many gifts.
My son, keep my words, And treasure up my commandments with thee!
Keep my commandments and live! Yea, my teaching, as the apple of thine eye!
Bind them upon thy fingers, Write them upon the tablet of thy heart!
Say unto wisdom, “Thou art my sister!” And call understanding thy near acquaintance;
That they may keep thee from the wife of another, From the stranger, that useth smooth words.
For through the window of my house, Through the lattice I was looking forth,
And I saw among the simple ones, I discerned among the youths, A young man void of understanding.
He was passing through the street near her corner, And was going the way to her house,
At twilight, in the evening, At midnight, yea, in the thick darkness.
And, behold, a woman met him, In the attire of a harlot, and subtle of heart,—
One noisy and unruly, Whose feet abide not in her house;
Who is now in the streets, now in the broad places, And lurketh near every corner.
She caught hold of him and kissed him, And with a shameless face said to him,
“Thank-offerings have been upon me, And this day have I performed my vows;
Therefore came I forth to meet thee,—Diligently to seek thy face, and I have found thee!
I have spread my bed with coverlets, With tapestry of the thread of Egypt.
I have sprinkled my bed With myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.
Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning; Let us solace ourselves with caresses.
For the good-man is not at home; He is gone a long journey;
He hath taken a purse of money with him; At the day of the full moon he will return.”
By her much fair speech she seduced him; By the smoothness of her lips she drew him away.
He goeth after her straightway, As an ox goeth to the slaughter, Or as one in fetters to the chastisement of the fool,
Till an arrow strike through his liver;—As a bird hasteneth into the snare, And knoweth not that it is laid for its life.
Now, therefore, ye children, hearken to me, And attend to the words of my mouth!
Let not thy heart turn aside to her ways; Go not astray in her paths!
For many are the wounded which she hath cast down; Yea, countless is the number of those slain by her.
Her house is the way to the under-world, Leading down to the chambers of death.
Doth not wisdom cry aloud, And understanding put forth her voice?
Upon the top of the high places, By the wayside, In the cross-ways, She taketh her station.
By the side of the gates, In the entrance of the city, In the approaches to the doors, she crieth aloud.
“To you, O men! do I call, And my voice is to the sons of men!
O ye simple ones! learn wisdom, And ye fools, be ye of an understanding heart!
Hear, for I speak excellent things, And my lips utter that which is right.
For my mouth speaketh truth, And wickedness is an abomination to my lips.
All the words of my mouth are in uprightness; There is nothing crooked or deceitful in them;
They are all plain to the man of understanding, And right to those who find knowledge.
Receive my instruction, and not silver. And knowledge rather than choice gold!
For wisdom is better than pearls, And no precious things are to be compared with her.
“I, wisdom, dwell with prudence, And find out the knowledge of sagacious counsels.
The fear of the LORD is to hate evil; Pride, and arrogance, and the evil way, And the deceitful mouth, do I hate.
Counsel is mine, and sound reason; I am understanding; I have strength.
By me kings reign, And princes decree justice.
By me princes rule, And nobles, even all the judges of the earth.
I love them that love me, And they who seek me early shall find me.
Riches and honor are with me; Yea, durable riches and prosperity.
My fruit is better than gold, yea, than fine gold. And my revenue than choice silver.
I walk in the way of righteousness, In the midst of the paths of equity.
I cause those who love me to possess substance; Yea, I fill their treasuries.
“The LORD created me, the firstling of his course, Before his works, of old;
I was anointed from everlasting, From the beginning, even before the earth was made.
When as yet there were no deeps, I was brought forth. When there were no springs, abounding with water.
Before the mountains were settled, Yea, before the hills, I was brought forth;
Ere yet he had made the land and the wastes, And the first of the clods of the earth.
When he framed the heavens, I was there; When he drew a circle upon the face of the deep;
When he made firm the sky above, And the fountains of the deep rushed forth;
When he gave to the sea its bounds, that the waters should not pass their border; When he marked out the foundations of the earth,—
Then was I by him as a master-builder; I was his delight day by day, Exulting before him at all times;
Exulting in the habitable part of his earth, And my delight was with the sons of men.
“Now, therefore, ye children, hearken to me! For happy are they who keep my ways!
Hear instruction, and be wise! Yea, reject it not!
Happy the man who hearkeneth to me, Who watcheth day by day at my gates, Who waiteth at the posts of my doors;
For he that findeth me findeth life, And obtaineth favor from the LORD;
But he who misseth me doeth violence to himself; All they who hate me love death.”
Wisdom hath builded her house; She hath hewn out her seven pillars.
She hath killed her fatlings; She hath mingled her wine; Yea, she hath furnished her table.
She hath sent forth her maidens; She crieth aloud upon the highest places of the city:
“Whoever is simple, let him turn in hither!” To him that is void of understanding she saith,
“Come, eat of my bread, And drink of the wine which I have mingled!
Forsake folly, and live! And go forward in the way of understanding!
“He who correcteth a scoffer Bringeth shame upon himself; And he who rebuketh the wicked Bringeth upon himself a stain.
Rebuke not a scoffer, lest he hate thee; Rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee.
Give instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser; Teach a righteous man, and he will increase his learning.
The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom, And the knowledge of the Most Holy is understanding.
Yea, through me thy days shall be multiplied, And the years of thy life shall be increased.
If thou art wise, thou art wise for thyself; And if thou art a scoffer, thou alone must bear it.”
The foolish woman is clamorous; She is very simple, and careth for nothing.
She sitteth at the door of her house, Upon a seat in the high places of the city,
To call aloud to those that pass by, Who go straight forward in their ways,
“Whoever is simple, let him turn in hither!” And to him that is void of understanding she saith,
“Stolen water is sweet, And bread eaten in secret is pleasant.”
But he considereth not that the dead are there, That in the vales of the under-world are her guests.
The Proverbs of Solomon. A wise son maketh a glad father, But a foolish son is the grief of his mother.
Treasures of wickedness do not profit; But righteousness delivereth from death.
The LORD will not suffer the righteous to famish; But he disappointeth the craving of the wicked.
He that worketh with a slack hand becometh poor; But the hand of the diligent maketh rich.
He that gathereth in summer is a wise son; But he that sleepeth in harvest is a son causing shame.
Blessings are upon the head of the just; But the mouth of the wicked concealeth violence.
The memory of the righteous man shall be blessed; But the name of the wicked shall rot.
He who is wise in heart receiveth precepts; But the foolish talker falleth headlong.
He that walketh uprightly walketh securely; But he that perverteth his ways shall be punished.
He that winketh with the eye causeth sorrow; And a foolish talker falleth headlong.
The mouth of the righteous is a fountain of life; But the mouth of the wicked concealeth violence.
Hatred stirreth up strife; But love covereth all offences.
Upon the lips of a man of understanding wisdom is found; But a rod is for the back of him that lacketh understanding.
Wise men treasure up knowledge; But the mouth of the foolish is destruction close at hand.
The rich man's wealth is his strong city; The destruction of the poor is their poverty.
The earnings of the righteous minister to life; The revenues of the wicked, to sin.
He that keepeth instruction is in the path of life; But he that refuseth reproof goeth astray.
He that hideth hatred hath lying lips; And he that uttereth slander is a fool.
In the multitude of words there wanteth not offence; But he who restraineth his lips is wise.
The tongue of the righteous is as choice silver; The understanding of the wicked is of little worth.
The lips of the righteous feed many; But fools die through want of wisdom.
It is the blessing of the LORD that maketh rich, And he addeth no sorrow with it.
It is as sport to a fool to do mischief; But a man of understanding hath wisdom.
The fear of the wicked shall come upon him; But the desire of the righteous shall be granted.
When the whirlwind passeth by, the wicked is no more; But the righteous is an everlasting foundation.
As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, So is the sluggard to them that send him.
The fear of the LORD prolongeth life; But the years of the wicked shall be shortened.
The hope of the righteous shall be gladness: But the expectation of the wicked shall come to nothing.
The way of the LORD is a stronghold for the upright, But destruction for those who do iniquity.
The righteous shall never be moved; But the wicked shall not dwell in the land.
The mouth of the righteous man yieldeth wisdom; But the perverse tongue shall be cut off.
The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable; But the mouth of the wicked what is perverse.
False scales are an abomination to the LORD; But a perfect weight is his delight.
When pride cometh, then cometh disgrace; But with the humble is wisdom.
The integrity of the upright shall guide them; But the perverseness of transgressors shall destroy them.
Riches do not profit in the day of wrath; But righteousness delivereth from death.
The righteousness of the good man maketh his way plain; But the wicked falleth through his wickedness.
The righteousness of the upright delivereth them; But transgressors are ensnared in their own mischief.
When the wicked man dieth, his hope cometh to an end; Yea, the expectation of the unjust cometh to an end.
The righteous man is delivered from trouble, And the wicked cometh into it in his stead.
By his mouth the vile man destroyeth his neighbor; But by the knowledge of the righteous are men delivered.
When it goeth well with the righteous, the city rejoiceth; And when the wicked perish, there is shouting.
By the blessing of the upright the city is exalted; But it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.
He who despiseth his neighbor is void of understanding; A man of discernment holdeth his peace.
He who goeth about as a tale-bearer revealeth secrets; But he who is of a faithful spirit concealeth a matter.
Where there is no counsel, the people fall; But in a multitude of counsellors there is safety.
He that is surety for another shall smart for it; But he that hateth suretyship is sure.
A graceful woman obtaineth honor, Even as strong men obtain riches.
He that doeth good to himself is a man of kindness; But he that tormenteth his own flesh is cruel.
The wicked toileth for deceitful wages; But he who soweth righteousness shall have a sure reward.
As righteousness tendeth to life, So he who pursueth evil pursueth it to his death.
The perverse in heart are the abomination of the LORD; But the upright in their way are his delight.
From generation to generation the wicked shall not go unpunished; But the posterity of the righteous shall be delivered.
As a jewel of gold in a swine's snout, So is a beautiful woman who is without discretion.
The desire of the righteous is only good; But the expectation of the wicked is wrath.
There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; And there is that withholdeth more than is right, yet he cometh to want.
The bountiful man shall be enriched, And he that watereth shall himself be watered.
Him that keepeth back corn the people curse; But blessing shall be upon the head of him that selleth it.
He, who earnestly seeketh good, seeketh favor; But he that seeketh mischief, it shall come upon him.
He who trusteth in his riches shall fall; But the righteous shall flourish as a leaf.
He that harasseth his household shall inherit wind; And the fool shall be the servant of the wise.
The fruit of a righteous man is a tree of life; And the wise man winneth souls.
Behold, the righteous man is requited on the earth; Much more the wicked man and the sinner!
He who loveth correction loveth knowledge; But he who hateth rebuke remaineth stupid.
The good man obtaineth favor from the LORD; But the man of wicked devices he condemneth.
A man shall not be established by wickedness; But the root of the righteous shall not be moved.
A virtuous woman is a crown to her husband; But she who causeth shame is as rottenness in his bones.
The purposes of the righteous are just; The designs of the wicked are deceitful.
The words of the wicked lie in wait for men's blood; But the mouth of the upright delivereth them.
The wicked are overthrown, and are no more; But the house of the righteous shall stand.
A man will be commended according to his wisdom; But he that is of a perverse heart shall be despised.
Better is he that demeaneth himself, and hath a servant, Than he that exalteth himself, and hath no bread.
The righteous man careth for the life of his beast; But the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.
He who tilleth his own land shall be satisfied with bread; But he who followeth worthless persons is void of understanding.
The wicked man longeth after the prey of evil-doers; But the root of the righteous yieldeth fruit.
In the transgression of the lips is a dangerous snare; But the righteous man shall escape from trouble.
By the fruit of a man's mouth he shall be filled with good, And the recompense of a man's hands shall be rendered unto him.
The way of a fool is right in his own eyes; But he that hearkeneth to counsel is wise.
A fool's wrath is instantly known; But he that hideth insult is wise.
He that speaketh truth testifieth what is right; But a false witness, deceit.
There is who babbleth like the piercing of a sword; But the tongue of the wise is health.
The lip of truth shall be established for ever; But the tongue of falsehood, but for a moment.
Deceit is in the heart of those who contrive evil; But to the counsellors of peace shall be joy.
No evil shall happen to the righteous; But the wicked shall be filled with calamity.
False lips are the abomination of the LORD; But they who deal truly are his delight.
A prudent man concealeth his knowledge; Bur the heart of fools proclaimeth their foolishness.
The hand of the diligent shall bear rule; But the slothful shall be under tribute.
Anxiety in the heart of a man boweth it down; But a kind word maketh it glad.
The righteous showeth the way to his neighbor; But the way of the wicked leadeth them astray.
The slothful man shall not roast his game; But a precious treasure to any man is he that is diligent.
In the path of righteousness is life, And in her pathway there is no death.
A wise son listeneth to the instruction of his father; But a scoffer listeneth not to rebuke.
By the fruit of a man's mouth he shall eat good; But the appetite of transgressors shall be sated with violence.
He who keepeth his mouth keepeth his life; But destruction shall be to him who openeth wide his lips.
The appetite of the sluggard longeth, and hath nothing; But the appetite of the diligent is fully satisfied.
A righteous man hateth words of falsehood; But a wicked man causeth disgrace and shame.
Righteousness preserveth him who is upright in his way; But wickedness overthroweth the sinner.
There is who maketh himself rich, yet hath nothing, Who maketh himself poor, yet hath great riches.
A man's wealth is the ransom of his life; But the poor man heareth no threatenings.
The light of the righteous shall rejoice; But the lamp of the wicked shall be put out.
By pride cometh only contention; But with the well-advised is wisdom.
Wealth gotten by vanity will become small; But he who gathereth it into the hand increaseth it.
Hope deferred maketh the heart sick; But the desire accomplished is a tree of life.
He that despiseth the word shall be destroyed; But he who revereth the commandment shall be rewarded.
The instruction of the wise is a fountain of life; By it men escape from the snares of death.
A good understanding winneth favor; But the way of transgressors is hard.
Every prudent man acteth with knowledge; But a fool spreadeth abroad his folly.
A wicked messenger falleth into trouble; But a faithful ambassador is health.
Poverty and shame are for him who rejecteth instruction; But he that regardeth reproof shall come to honor.
The desire accomplished is sweet to the soul; But it is an abomination to fools to depart from evil.
He who walketh with wise men shall be wise; But the companion of fools shall be destroyed.
Calamity pursueth the wicked; But the righteous is rewarded with good.
The good man leaveth his substance to his children's children; But the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just.
There is much food from the fallow-ground of the poor; But there is who is brought low for want of uprightness.
He that spareth the rod hateth his son; But he who loveth him chasteneth him early.
The righteous man eateth to the satisfying of his desire; But the stomach of the wicked suffereth want.
The wise woman buildeth her house; But the foolish teareth it down with her hands.
He who walketh in uprightness feareth the LORD; But he who is perverse in his ways despiseth him.
In the mouth of the foolish pride is a scourge; But the lips of the wise preserve them.
Where there are no oxen, the crib is clean; But there is great increase by the strength of the ox.
A faithful witness doth not lie; But a false witness poureth forth lies.
The scoffer seeketh wisdom, and findeth it not; But knowledge is easy to the man of understanding.
Go from the presence of a foolish man; For thou hast not perceived in him the lips of knowledge.
The wisdom of the prudent is in giving heed to his way; But the folly of fools is deceit.
Fools make a mock at sin; But with the upright is favor.
The heart knoweth its own bitterness. And a stranger cannot intermeddle with its joy.
The house of the wicked shall be destroyed; But the tent of the upright shall flourish.
There is a way which seemeth right to a man, But its end is the way to death.
Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, And the end of joy is grief.
The perverse in heart shall be filled with his own ways; And from himself shall the good man be satisfied.
The simple man believeth every word; But the prudent looketh well to his steps.
The wise man feareth, and departeth from evil; But the fool is haughty and confident.
He who is hasty in his anger will commit folly; And the man of wicked devices will be hated.
The simple inherit folly; But the prudent are crowned with knowledge.
The evil bow before the good; Yea, the wicked at the gates of the righteous.
The poor is hated even by his own neighbor; But the rich hath many friends.
He who despiseth his neighbor sinneth; But happy is he who hath mercy on the poor.
Do not they who devise evil fail of their end? But they who devise good meet with kindness and truth.
In all labor there is profit; But the talk of the lips tendeth only to penury.
Riches are a crown to the wise; But the promotion of fools is folly.
A true witness saveth lives; But a deceitful witness poureth forth lies.
In the fear of the LORD is strong confidence; Yea, to his children he will be a refuge.
The fear of the LORD is a fountain of life; By it men escape from the snares of death.
In a numerous people is the glory of a king; But the want of people is the destruction of a prince.
He who is slow to anger is of great understanding. But he who is of a hasty spirit setteth folly on high.
A quiet heart is the life of the flesh; But the ferment of passion is rottenness to the bones.
He who oppresseth the poor reproacheth his Maker; But he who hath mercy on the poor honoreth him.
By his wickedness the wicked is thrust down; But the righteous hath hope even in death.
Wisdom resteth quietly in the heart of the wise; But in the breast of fools it will be made known.
Righteousness exalteth a people; But the reproach of nations is sin.
The king's favor is toward a wise servant; But his wrath is against him that causeth shame.
A soft answer turneth away wrath; But harsh words stir up anger.
The tongue of the wise maketh knowledge pleasing; But the mouth of fools poureth forth folly.
The eyes of the LORD are in every place; They behold the evil and the good.
A mild tongue is a tree of life; But perverseness therein is a wound in the spirit.
The fool despiseth the correction of his father; But he that regardeth reproof is prudent.
In the house of the righteous is much wealth; But in the revenues of the wicked there is trouble.
The lips of the wise spread abroad knowledge; But the heart of the foolish is not sound.
The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the LORD; But the prayer of the righteous is his delight.
The way of the wicked is an abomination to the LORD; But him who followeth after righteousness he loveth.
Sore chastisement shall be to him that forsaketh the way; He that hateth reproof shall die.
The underworld, yea, the region of death, is before the LORD; How much more the hearts of the sons of men!
The scoffer loveth not his reprover; He will not resort to the wise.
A joyous heart maketh a bright countenance; But by sorrow of the heart the spirit is broken.
The heart of the man of understanding seeketh knowledge; But the mouth of fools feedeth on folly.
The days of the afflicted are all evil; But he that hath a cheerful heart hath a continual feast.
Better is a little, with the fear of the LORD, Than much treasure, and trouble therewith.
Better is a dinner of herbs, where there is love, Than a fatted ox, and hatred therewith.
The passionate man stirreth up strife; But he who is slow to anger appeaseth strife.
The way of the slothful is as a hedge of thorns; But the way of the righteous is a highway.
A wise son maketh a glad father; But a foolish man despiseth his mother.
Folly is joy to him who lacketh wisdom; But the man of understanding walketh uprightly.
Without counsel, plans come to nought; But with a multitude of counsellors they are established.
A man hath joy by the answer of his mouth; And a word in due season, how good it is!
The path of life is upward for the wise, So that he turneth away from the underworld beneath.
The LORD destroyeth the house of the proud; But he will establish the border of the widow.
Evil devices are an abomination to the LORD; But pleasant words are pure.
He who is greedy of gain troubleth his own house; But he who hateth bribes shall live.
The heart of the righteous meditateth on his answer; But the mouth of the wicked poureth out evil things.
The LORD is far from the wicked: But he heareth the prayer of the righteous.
The light of the eyes rejoiceth the heart, And good tidings make the bones fat.
The ear that hearkeneth to the reproof of life Shall dwell among the wise.
He that refuseth instruction despiseth his own life; But he that hearkeneth to rebuke getteth understanding.
The fear of the LORD guideth to wisdom, And before honor is humility.
To man belongeth the preparation of the heart; But the answer of the tongue is from the LORD.
All the ways of a man are pure in his own eyes; But the LORD weigheth the spirit.
Commit thy doings to the LORD, And thy purposes shall be established.
The LORD hath ordained every thing for its end; Yea, even the wicked for the day of evil.
Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the LORD; From generation to generation he shall not be unpunished.
Through kindness and truth, iniquity is expiated; And, through the fear of the LORD, men depart from evil.
When a man's ways please the LORD, He maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him.
Better is a little with righteousness, Than great revenues without right.
The heart of man deviseth his way, But the LORD establisheth his steps.
A divine sentence is upon the lips of a king; His mouth transgresseth not in judgment.
A just balance and scales are the appointment of the LORD; All the weights of the bag are his work.
The doing of wickedness is an abomination to kings; For by righteousness is the throne established.
Righteous lips are the delight of kings, And they love him who speaketh right things.
The wrath of a king is messengers of death; But a wise man will pacify it.
In the light of the king's countenance is life, And his favor is a like a cloud bringing the latter rain.
How much better is it to get wisdom than gold! Yea, to get understanding is rather to be chosen than silver.
It is the highway of the upright to depart from evil; He that taketh heed to his way preserveth his life.
Pride goeth before destruction, And a haughty spirit before a fall.
Better is it to be of a humble spirit with the lowly, Than to share the spoil with the proud.
He who giveth heed to the word shall find good; And he who trusteth in the LORD, happy is he!
The wise in heart shall be called intelligent, And sweetness of the lips increaseth learning.
Understanding is a wellspring of life to him that hath it. And the chastisement of fools is their folly.
The heart of the wise man instructeth his mouth, And addeth learning to his lips.
Pleasant words are like a honeycomb, Sweet to the taste, and health to the bones.
There is a way that seemeth right to a man, But the end thereof is the way to death.
The hunger of the laborer laboreth for him; For his mouth urgeth him on.
A worthless man diggeth mischief, And on his lips there is, as it were, a burning fire.
A deceitful man stirreth up strife, And a whisperer separateth friends.
A man of violence enticeth his neighbor, And leadeth him into a way which is not good.
He who shutteth his eyes to devise fraud, He who compresseth his lips, hath accomplished mischief!
The hoary head is a crown of glory, If it be found in the way of righteousness.
He who is slow to anger is better than the mighty; And he who ruleth his spirit, than he that taketh a city.
The lot is cast into the lap; But the whole decision thereof is from the LORD.
Better is a dry morsel, and quietness therewith, Than a house full of flesh-banquets with strife.
A prudent servant shall rule over a son who causeth shame; Yea, with brothers he shall share the inheritance.
The refining-pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold; But the LORD trieth hearts.
An evil-doer listeneth to mischievous lips; And a liar giveth ear to a destructive tongue.
Whoso mocketh the poor reproacheth his Maker; He that is glad at calamities shall not go unpunished.
Children's children are the crown of the aged, And their fathers the glory of sons.
Excellent speech becometh not the base; How much less lying lips the noble!
A gift is a precious stone in the eyes of him who taketh it; Whithersoever it turneth it hath success.
He who covereth an offence seeketh love; But he who recurreth to a matter removeth a friend.
A reproof will penetrate deeper into a wise man Than a hundred stripes into a fool.
An evil man seeketh only rebellion; Therefore shall a cruel messenger be sent against him.
Let a man meet a bear robbed of her whelps, Rather than a fool in his folly.
Whoso returneth evil for good, Evil shall not depart from his house.
The beginning of strife is as when one letteth out water; Therefore leave off contention before it rolleth onward.
He that justifieth the wicked, And he that condemneth the just, Both alike are an abomination to the LORD.
Why should a price be in the hand of a fool To get wisdom, seeing he hath no sense?
A friend loveth at all times; But in adversity he is born a brother.
A man who lacketh understanding striketh hands, And becometh surety in the presence of his friend.
He who loveth strife loveth transgression; He who raiseth high his gate seeketh ruin.
He that is of a deceitful heart shall find no good; And he that turneth about with his tongue shall fall into mischief.
Whoso begetteth a fool doeth it to his sorrow; Yea, the father of the fool hath no joy.
A merry heart doeth good to the body; But a broken spirit drieth up the bones.
The wicked man taketh a gift out of the bosom, To pervert the ways of judgment.
Wisdom is before the face of him that hath understanding; But the eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth.
A foolish son is a grief to his father, And bitterness to her that bore him.
Moreover, to punish the righteous is not good, Nor to smite the noble for their equity.
He that spareth his words is imbued with knowledge; And he that is of a cool spirit is a man of understanding.
Even a fool, when he is silent, is accounted wise; He that shutteth his lips is a man of understanding.
He who separateth himself seeketh his own desire; Against all sound discretion he rusheth on.
The fool hath no delight in understanding, But rather in revealing his own mind.
When the wicked cometh, then cometh also contempt; And with baseness, shame.
The words of a man's mouth are deep waters, And the wellspring of wisdom is an overflowing brook.
It is not good to be partial to the wicked, So as to overthrow the righteous in judgment.
The lips of a fool enter into strife, And his mouth calleth for blows.
A fool's mouth is his destruction, And his lips are a snare for his life.
The words of a talebearer are like sweet morsels; For they go down to the innermost parts of the body.
Moreover, he that is slothful in his work Is brother to him that is a great waster.
The name of the LORD is a strong tower; The righteous runneth to it, and is safe.
The rich man's wealth is his strong city, And as a high wall, in his own conceit.
Before destruction the heart of a man is haughty, And before honor is humility.
He who answereth a matter before he hath heard it, It is folly and shame to him.
The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity; But a wounded spirit who can bear?
The heart of the intelligent will acquire knowledge, And the ear of the wise will seek knowledge.
A gift maketh room for a man, And bringeth him into the presence of the great.
He that first pleadeth his cause appeareth just; But his opponent cometh, and searcheth him through.
The lot causeth contentions to cease, And parteth asunder the mighty.
A brother offended is harder to be won than a strong city; Yea, their contentions are like the bars of a castle.
With the fruit of a man's mouth shall his stomach be filled; He shall be filled with the produce of his lips.
Death and life are in the power of the tongue; They that love it shall eat its fruit.
He that findeth a wife findeth a blessing, And obtaineth favor from the LORD.
The poor useth entreaties; But the rich answereth roughly.
A man of many friends will show himself false; Yet there is a friend who sticketh closer than a brother.
Better is the poor man who walketh in his integrity, Than he who is of false lips and a fool.
Moreover, that the soul be without knowledge is not good, And he that hasteth with is feet stumbleth.
The folly of man destroyeth his way, And then his heart fretteth against the LORD.
Wealth maketh many friends; But the poor is separated from his neighbor.
A false witness shall not be unpunished, And he that speaketh lies shall not escape.
Many are they who caress the noble, And every one is the friend of him who giveth gifts.
All the brethren of the poor man hate him; How much more do his friends go far from him! He runneth after their words,—they are gone!
He that getteth wisdom loveth himself; He that keepeth understanding shall find good.
A false witness shall not be unpunished, And he that speaketh lies shall perish.
Luxury is not seemly for a fool; Much less should a servant have rule over princes.
A man of understanding is slow to anger; Yea, it is his glory to pass over an offence.
The wrath of a king is like the roaring of a lion; But his favor, like dew upon the grass.
A foolish son is a calamity to his father, And the contentions of a wife are a continual dropping.
Houses and riches are an inheritance from fathers; But a prudent wife is from the LORD.
Slothfulness casteth into a deep sleep, And the idle person shall suffer hunger.
He that keepeth the commandment keepeth his life; But he that neglecteth his ways shall die.
He who hath pity on the poor lendeth to the LORD, And that which he giveth will he repay him.
Chasten thy son because there is hope, But let not thy soul desire to slay him.
A man of great wrath will suffer punishment; For if thou deliver him, yet must thou do it again.
Listen to counsel and receive instruction, That thou mayst be wise in thy latter years.
Many are the devices in the heart of a man; But the purpose of the LORD, that shall stand.
The charm of a man is his kindness; And better is a poor man than a liar.
The fear of the LORD tendeth to life, And he that hath it shall abide satisfied; He shall not be visited with evil.
The slothful man dippeth his hand into the dish: He doth not bring it back even to his mouth.
Strike the scoffer, and the simple will become prudent; Reprove a man of understanding, and he will discern knowledge.
The son that causeth shame and disgrace doeth violence to his father, And chaseth away his mother.
Cease, my son, to listen to the instruction That causeth thee to wander from the words of knowledge!
A worthless witness scoffeth at justice, And the mouth of the wicked swalloweth down iniquity.
Punishments are prepared for scoffers, And stripes for the back of fools.
Wine is a mocker, strong drink a brawler, And he that reeleth with it is not wise.
The terror of a king is like the roaring of a lion; He who provoketh him sinneth against himself.
It is an honor to a man to cease from strife; Bur every fool rusheth into it.
The sluggard will not plough by reason of the cold; Therefore shall he beg in harvest, and have nothing.
A design in the heart of a man is like deep waters; But a man of understanding draweth it out.
Many will proclaim their own kindness; But a faithful man who can find?
He who walketh in his integrity is a righteous man; Happy will be his children after him!
The king, sitting upon the throne of judgment, Scattereth with his eyes all the wicked like chaff.
Who can say, “I have kept my heart clean; I am free from my sin?”
Divers weights and divers measures,—Both of them are an abomination to the LORD.
Even in childhood one maketh himself known by his doings, Whether his actions will be pure and right.
The ear that heareth, and the eye that seeth,—The LORD made them both.
Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty; Open thine eyes, and thou shalt be satisfied with bread.
“Bad! bad!” saith the buyer; But when he hath gone his way, then he boasteth.
There is gold and abundance of pearls; But the lips of knowledge are a precious vase.
Take his garment who is surety for another; Yea, take a pledge of him who is bound for a stranger.
The bread of falsehood is sweet to a man; But afterwards his mouth is filled with gravel.
Purposes are established by counsel; Therefore with good advice make war.
He who goeth about as a tale-bearer revealeth secrets; Therefore associate not with him who keepeth open his lips.
Whoso curseth his father or his mother, His lamp shall be put out in midnight darkness.
A possession may be gotten hastily in the beginning, But in the end it will not be blessed.
Say not thou, “I will repay evil;” Wait on the LORD, and he will help thee.
Divers weights are an abomination to the LORD, And a false balance is not good.
A man's steps are from the LORD; How, then, can a man understand his way?
It is a snare to a man to utter a vow rashly, And after vows to consider.
A wise king scattereth the wicked like chaff, And bringeth over them the wheel.
The spirit of a man is the lamp of the LORD, Which searcheth all the inner chambers of his body.
Mercy and truth preserve the king; Yea, his throne is upholden by mercy.
The glory of young men is their strength, And the beauty of old men is the gray head.
Wounding stripes are the remedy for a bad man; Yea, stripes which reach to the inner chambers of the body.
As streams of water, So is the heart of the king in the hand of the LORD; He turneth it whithersoever he will.
All the ways of a man are right in his own eyes; But the LORD weigheth the heart.
To do justice and equity Is more acceptable to the LORD than sacrifice.
The lofty look, the proud heart, The lamp of the wicked, is ruin.
The plans of the diligent tend only to plenty; But the hasty hasteneth only to want.
The getting of treasures by a false tongue Is the fleeting breath of them that seek death.
The rapine of the wicked shall snatch them away, Because they refuse to do justice.
The way of the guilty man is crooked; But he that is pure, his doings are right.
Better is it to dwell in a corner of the housetop Than with a brawling woman in a large house.
The soul of the wicked longeth to do evil; His neighbor findeth no compassion in his eyes.
When the scoffer is punished, the simple is made wise; When the wise man is taught, he receiveth knowledge.
The righteous man hath regard to the house of the wicked; He casteth the wicked headlong into ruin.
Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, He also shall cry aloud, but shall not be heard.
A gift in secret pacifieth anger; And a present in the bosom, strong wrath.
To do justice shall be joy to the righteous; But destruction is for them that do iniquity.
A man who wandereth from the way of discretion Shall rest in the assembly of the dead.
He that loveth pleasure will be a poor man; He that loveth wine and oil will not be rich.
The wicked shall be a ransom for the righteous! And in the room of the upright shall be the transgressor.
It is better to dwell in a desert land Than with a contentious and fretful woman.
Precious treasure and oil are in the dwelling of the wise; But the foolish man swalloweth them up.
He who followeth after righteousness and mercy Shall find life, prosperity, and honor.
A wise man scaleth the city of the mighty, And bringeth down the strength in which it trusted.
Whoso keepeth his mouth and his tongue Keepeth his soul from trouble.
The proud and haughty,—scoffer is his name; He acteth with haughty arrogance.
The desire of the sluggard will destroy him; For his hands refuse to labor.
The covetous man coveteth all the day long; But the righteous man giveth, and doth not withhold.
The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination; How much more when he bringeth it with an evil design!
A false witness shall perish; But a man that hearkeneth shall speak forever.
The wicked man hardeneth his face; But the upright directeth his way.
Wisdom is nothing, and understanding is nothing, And devices are nothing, against the LORD.
The horse is prepared for the day of battle; But victory is from the LORD.
A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches; And better is good-will than silver and gold.
The rich and the poor meet together; The LORD is the Maker of them all.
The prudent man seeth the evil, and hideth himself; But the simple rush on, and are punished.
By humility and the fear of the LORD Are riches and honor and life.
Thorns and snares are in the way of the deceitful; He that will preserve his life will be far from them.
Train up a child in accordance with his way, And when he is old he will not depart from it.
The rich ruleth over the poor, And the borrower is servant to the lender.
He who soweth iniquity shall reap calamity, And the rod of his punishment is prepared.
He who hath a bountiful eye shall be blessed, Because he giveth of his bread to the poor.
Cast out the scoffer, and contention will go out; Yea, strife and reproach will cease.
He who loveth purity of heart, Grace is upon his lips, and the king will be his friend.
The eyes of the LORD watch over knowledge; But he overthroweth the words of the treacherous.
The slothful man saith, “There is a lion without; I shall be slain in the streets.”
The mouth of strange women is a deep pit; He with whom the LORD is angry shall fall therein.
Folly is bound to the heart of a child; But the rod of correction will drive it far from him.
He that oppresseth the poor to increase his wealth, And he that giveth to the rich, shall surely come to want.
Incline thine ear, and hear the words of the wise, And give heed to my instruction!
For it will be a pleasant thing, if thou keep them in thy bosom, When they are altogether established upon thy lips.
That thy trust may be in the LORD, I have this day given to thee instruction, yea, to thee.
Behold, I have written to thee excellent things Concerning counsel and knowledge;
That I may make thee know rectitude, and words of truth; That thou mayst bring back words of truth to them that send thee.
Rob not the poor man, because he is poor, Nor crush thou the destitute at the gate;
For the LORD will maintain their cause, And despoil their spoilers of life.
Make no friendship with a passionate man, Nor be the companion of a man prone to wrath;
Lest thou learn his ways, And take to thyself a snare.
Be not thou one of those who strike hands, Of those who are sureties for debts.
When thou hast nothing to pay, Why should thy bed be taken from under thee?
Remove not the ancient landmark, Which thy fathers have made.
Seest thou a man diligent in his business? He shall be the minister of kings; He shall not serve obscure men.
When thou sittest to eat with a ruler, Consider well what is before thee;
For thou wilt put a knife to thy throat, If thou art a man given to appetite!
Long not for his dainties. For they are deceitful meat.
Toil not to become rich; Cease from this, thy wisdom.
Wilt thou let thine eyes fly toward them? They are gone! For riches truly make to themselves wings; They fly away like the eagle toward heaven.
Eat not the bread of him that hath an evil eye, And long not for his dainties;
For as he thinketh in his heart, so is he. “Eat and drink!” saith he to thee; But his heart is not with thee.
The morsel, which thou hast eaten, thou shalt vomit up; And thou wilt have thrown away thy sweet words.
Speak not in the ears of a fool; For he will despise the wisdom of thy words.
Remove not the ancient landmark, And enter not into the fields of the fatherless!
For their avenger is mighty; He will maintain their cause against thee.
Apply thy heart to instruction, And thine ears to the words of knowledge.
Withhold not correction from a child; If thou beat him with the rod, he will not die.
Beat him thyself with the rod, And thou shalt rescue him from the underworld.
My son, if thy heart be wise, My heart shall rejoice, even mine;
Yea, my reins shall exult, When thy lips speak right things.
Let not thy heart envy sinners, But continue thou in the fear of the LORD all the day long;
For surely there shall be a reward, And thine expectation shall not be cut off.
Hear thou, my son, and be wise; And let thy heart go forward in the way!
Be not thou among winebibbers, And riotous eaters of flesh;
For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty, And drowsiness will clothe a man with rags.
Hearken to thy father, who begat thee, And despise not thy mother when she is old.
Buy the truth, and sell it not; Buy wisdom and instruction and understanding.
The father of a righteous man shall greatly rejoice; Yea, he who begetteth a wise child shall have joy in him.
Let thy father and thy mother have joy; Yea, let her that bore thee rejoice!
My son, give me thy heart, And let thine eyes observe my ways!
For a harlot is a deep ditch; Yea, a strange woman is a narrow pit.
Like a robber she lieth in wait, And increaseth the treacherous among men.
Who hath woe? Who hath sorrow? Who contentions? Who anxiety? Who wounds without cause? Who dimness of eyes?
They that tarry long at the wine; They that go in to seek mixed wine.
Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, When it sparkleth in the cup, When it goeth down smoothly.
At the last it biteth like a serpent, And stingeth like an adder.
Thine eyes will look upon strange women, And thy heart will utter perverse things.
Yea, thou shalt be as one that lieth down in the midst of the sea, And as one that lieth down upon the top of a mast.
They have stricken me [[shalt thou say]],—I suffered no pain! They have beaten me,—I felt it not! When shall I awake? I will seek it yet again.
Be not thou envious of wicked men, And desire not to be with them!
For their heart studieth destruction, And their lips speak mischief.
Through wisdom is a house builded, And by understanding is it established;
Yea, by knowledge are the chambers filled With all precious and goodly substance.
The wise man is strong; Yea, the man of understanding establisheth his strength.
For by wise counsel shalt thou make war, And by the multitude of counsellors cometh success.
Wisdom is too high for the fool; He openeth not his mouth at the gate.
He that deviseth to do evil Shall be called mischief-master.
The purpose of folly is sin; And a scoffer is an abomination to men.
If thy spirit faint in the day of adversity, Faint will be thy strength.
Deliver thou those who are dragged to death, And those who totter to the slaughter,—O keep them back!
If thou sayst, “Behold, we knew it not!” Doth not he that weigheth the heart observe it? Yea, he that keepeth thy soul knoweth it. And he will render to every man according to his works.
Eat honey, my son, for it is good, And the honeycomb, which is sweet to thy taste;
So learn thou wisdom for thy soul! When thou hast found it, there shall be a reward, And thy expectation shall not be cut off.
Plot not, O wicked man! against the habitation of the righteous; Spoil not his resting-place!
For though the righteous fall seven times, yet shall he rise up again; But the wicked shall fall into mischief.
Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, And let not thy heart be glad when he stumbleth;
Lest the LORD see, and it displease him, And he turn away his anger from him.
Fret not thyself on account of evil men, Neither be thou envious of the wicked;
For there shall be no posterity to the evil man; The lamp of the wicked shall be put out.
My son, fear thou the LORD and the king; And mingle not with them that are given to change!
For their calamity shall rise up suddenly, And their ruin, coming from them both, in a moment.
These also are words of the wise. It is not good to have respect of persons in judgment.
He that saith to the wicked, “Thou art righteous,” Him shall the people curse; Nations shall abhor him.
But it shall be well with them that punish him, And the blessing of prosperity shall come upon them.
He that giveth a right answer Kisseth the lips.
Arrange thy work without, And prepare it in thy field: Afterwards thou mayst build thy house.
Be not a witness without cause against thy neighbor, And deceive not with thy lips.
Say not, “As he hath done to me, So will I do to him; I will render to the man according to his doings.”
I passed by the field of the slothful, And by the vineyard of the man void of understanding,
And, lo! it was all overgrown with thorns, And the face thereof was covered with nettles, And the stone wall thereof was broken down.
Then I saw, and considered it well; I looked upon it. and received instruction.
“A little sleep, a little slumber! A little folding of the hands to rest!”
So shall poverty come upon thee like a highwayman; Yea, want like an armed man.
These also are proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah, king of Judah, collected.
It is the glory of God to conceal a thing; But it is the glory of kings to search out a matter.
As the heavens for their height, And as the earth for its depth, So is the heart of kings unsearchable!
Take away the dross from the silver, And there will come forth a vessel for the founder;
Take away the wicked man from the presence of the king, And his throne will be established by righteousness.
Put not thyself forth in the presence of the king, Nor set thyself in the place of the great;
For better is it that one should say to thee, “Come up hither!” Than that he should put thee in a lower place, In the presence of the prince whom thine eyes behold.
Go not forth hastily to engage in a suit, Lest thou know not what to do in the end of it, When thine adversary hath put thee to shame.
Maintain thy cause with thine adversary, But reveal not another's secret;
Lest he that heareth it put thee to shame, And thy infamy depart not from thee.
A word spoken in season Is like apples of gold in figured-work of silver.
As a ring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, So is a wise reprover to an attentive ear.
As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, So is a faithful messenger to them that send him; For he refresheth the spirit of his masters.
As clouds and wind without rain, So is the man that boasteth falsely of giving.
By long forbearing is a prince appeased; And a soft tongue breaketh bones.
Hast thou found honey? eat what is sufficient for thee, Lest thou be surfeited with it, and vomit it up.
Let thy foot be seldom in the house of thy friend, Lest he be surfeited with thee and hate thee.
A battle-hammer, and a sword, and a sharp arrow, Is the man who beareth false witness against his neighbor.
As a broken tooth, and a wavering foot, So is trust in an unfaithful man in time of trouble.
As he that taketh off a garment on a cold day, As vinegar upon nitre, So is he that singeth songs to a heavy heart.
If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat; And if he be thirsty, give him water to drink;
For thou wilt heap coals of fire upon his head, And the LORD will reward thee.
As the north wind bringeth forth rain, So a backbiting tongue maketh an angry countenance.
Better is it to dwell in a corner of the housetop, Than with a quarrelsome woman in a large house.
As cold water to the thirsty, So is good news from a far country.
As a troubled fountain, and as a corrupted spring, So is a righteous man falling before the wicked.
To eat much honey is not good; So the search of high things is weariness.
As a city broken through and without a wall, So is he that hath no rule over his spirit.
As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, So honor is not becoming to a fool.
As the sparrow wandereth, and the swallow flieth away, So the curse without cause shall not come.
A whip for the horse, a bridle for the ass, And a rod for the back of the fool.
Answer not a fool according to his folly, Lest thou also become like to him.
Answer a fool according to his folly, Lest he be wise in his own conceit.
He cutteth off the feet, and drinketh damage, Who sendeth a message by the hand of a fool.
The legs of a lame man hang loose; So is it with a proverb in the mouth of fools.
As he who bindeth a stone in a sling, So is he that giveth honor to a fool.
As a thorn lifted up by the hand of a drunkard, So is a proverb in the mouth of fools.
As an archer who woundeth every one, So is he who hireth fools and hireth wayfarers.
As a dog returneth to that which he hath vomited, So a fool repeateth his folly.
Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit? There is more hope of a fool than of him.
The slothful man saith, “There is a lion in the way; There is a lion in the streets.”
As a door turneth upon its hinges, So doth the sluggard upon his bed.
The sluggard dippeth his hand into the dish; It grieveth him to bring it again to his mouth.
The sluggard is wiser in his own conceit Than seven men who can render a reason.
As one that taketh a dog by the ears, So is he who, passing by, is enraged on account of the quarrel of another.
As a madman That casteth about darts, arrows, and death,
So is the man who deceiveth his neighbor, And saith, “Was I not in sport?”
Where there is no wood, the fire goeth out; So, where there is no talebearer, contention ceaseth.
As coal is for heat, and as wood for fire, So is a contentious man for kindling strife.
The words of a talebearer are like dainties; For they go down to the innermost parts of the body.
As drossy silver spread over an earthen vessel, So are warm lips and an evil heart.
The hater dissembleth with his lips, And layeth up deceit within him.
When he speaketh fair, believe him not! For there are seven abominations in his heart.
His hatred is covered by deceit; His wickedness shall be revealed in the great assembly.
He that diggeth a pit shall fall therein; And he that rolleth a stone, it shall return upon him.
A lying tongue hateth those whom it woundeth, And a flattering mouth worketh ruin.
Boast not thyself of to-morrow; For thou knowest not what a day may bring forth!
Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth; A stranger, and not thine own lips.
A stone is heavy and sand is weighty; But a fool's wrath is heavier than both.
Wrath is cruel, and anger overwhelming; But who is able to stand before jealousy?
Better is open rebuke Than love kept concealed.
Faithful are the wounds of a friend; But the kisses of an enemy are deceitful.
He who is fed to the full loatheth the honeycomb; But to the hungry any bitter thing is sweet.
As a bird that wandereth from its nest, So is a man who wandereth from his place.
Oil and perfume gladden the heart; Sweet also is one's friend by hearty counsel.
Thine own friend and thy father's friend forsake not; And go not into thy brother's house in the day of thy calamity. Better is a neighbor that is near, than a brother far off.
Be wise, my son, and make my heart glad, That I may give an answer to him that reproacheth me.
A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hideth himself; The simple pass on, and are punished.
Take his garment who is surety for another; Yea, take a pledge of him who is bound for a stranger.
He who blesseth his neighbor with a loud voice, rising early for it, It shall be accounted to him as a curse.
A continual dropping in a very rainy day And a quarrelsome wife are alike.
He who restraineth her restraineth the wind; And his right hand layeth hold of oil.
Iron sharpeneth iron; So one man sharpeneth the face of another.
He that watcheth the fig-tree shall eat its fruit; So he that is careful for his master shall come to honor.
As in water face answereth to face, So doth the heart of man to man.
The realms of the dead are never full; So the eyes of man are never satisfied.
The refining-pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold; So let a man be to the mouth that giveth him praise.
Though thou shouldst beat a fool in a mortar, Among bruised wheat, with a pestle, Yet will not his folly depart from him.
Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks, And look well to thy herds!
For riches last not for ever; Not even a crown endureth from generation to generation.
The hay disappeareth, and the tender grass showeth itself, And the herbage of the mountains is gathered in.
The lambs are thy clothing, And the goats the price of thy field.
There is goat's milk enough for thy food, For the food of thy household, And for the sustenance of thy maidens.
The wicked flee when no one pursueth; But the righteous is as bold as a lion.
Through the transgression of a land many are its rulers; But through men of prudence and understanding the prince shall live long.
A poor man who oppresseth the needy Is a sweeping rain which leaveth no food.
They who forsake the law praise the wicked; But they who keep the law contend with them.
Wicked men understand not equity; But they who seek the LORD understand all things.
Better is a poor man who walketh in uprightness, Than he who is perverse in his ways, though he be rich.
He that keepeth the law is a wise son; But he that is the companion of prodigals bringeth shame on his father.
He that increaseth his substance by usurious gain Gathereth it for him who will pity the poor.
He that turneth away his ear from hearing the law, Even his prayer shall be an abomination.
He that causeth the righteous to go astray in an evil way Shall himself fall into his own pit; But the upright shall have good things in possession.
The rich man is wise in his own conceit; But the poor man, who hath understanding, will search him through.
When the righteous rejoice, there is great glorying; But, when the wicked are exalted, men hide themselves.
He that covereth his sins shall not prosper; But he that confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy.
Happy the man who feareth always! But he who hardeneth his heart shall fall into mischief.
As a roaring lion and a hungry bear, So is a wicked ruler over a needy people.
The prince who is weak in understanding is great in oppression; But he who hateth unjust gain shall prolong his days.
A man who is burdened with life-blood—Let him flee to the pit! let no man stay him!
He who walketh uprightly shall be safe; But he who is perverse in his ways shall fall at once.
He who tilleth his land shall have bread enough; And he that followeth after worthless persons shall have poverty enough.
A faithful man shall abound with blessings; But he that maketh haste to be rich shall not go unpunished.
To have respect to persons is not good; Since for a piece of bread that man will transgress.
He who hath an evil eye hasteth after wealth, And considereth not that poverty will come upon him.
He who rebuketh a man shall afterwards find favor More than he who flattereth with his tongue.
Whoso stealeth from his father or his mother, And saith, “It is no transgression,” The same is the companion of a robber.
He who is of a proud heart stirreth up strife; But he that trusteth in the LORD shall be rich.
He who trusteth in his own understanding is a fool; But he who walketh wisely shall be delivered.
He who giveth to the poor shall not want; But he that hideth his eyes shall have many a curse.
When the wicked are exalted, men hide themselves; But, when they perish, the righteous increase.
He who, being often reproved, hardeneth his neck, Shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.
When the righteous are powerful, the people rejoice; But when the wicked beareth rule, the people mourn.
He who loveth wisdom rejoiceth his father; But he who is a companion of harlots destroyeth his substance.
A king by equity establisheth a land; But he who receiveth gifts overthroweth it.
A man who flattereth his neighbor Spreadeth a net for his feet.
In the transgression of a wicked man there is a snare; But the righteous shall sing and rejoice.
A righteous man careth for the cause of the poor; A wicked man discerneth not knowledge.
Scoffers kindle a city into a flame; But wise men pacify wrath.
If a wise man contend in a cause with a fool, Whether he rage or laugh, there will be no rest.
The bloodthirsty man hateth the upright; But the righteous seek to preserve his life.
A fool letteth all his anger come out; But a wise man keepeth it back.
If a ruler listen to words of falsehood, All his servants become wicked.
The poor man and the oppressor meet together: The LORD giveth light to the eyes of them both.
The king that judgeth the poor with uprightness, His throne shall be established for ever.
The rod and reproof give wisdom; But a child left to himself bringeth shame to his mother.
When the wicked are powerful, transgression increaseth; But the righteous shall see their fall.
Chastise thy son, and he will give thee rest; Yea, he will give delight to thy soul.
Where there is no vision, the people become unruly; But he that keepeth the law, happy is he.
A servant will not be corrected by words; For, though he understand, he will not obey.
Seest thou a man hasty in his words? There is more hope of a fool than of him.
He that bringeth up his servant delicately from childhood Shall have him become a son at the last.
An angry man stirreth up strife, And a passionate man aboundeth in transgression.
A man's pride will bring him low; But he that is of a humble spirit shall obtain honor.
He who shareth with a thief hateth himself: He heareth the curse, but maketh no discovery.
The fear of man bringeth a snare; But whoso putteth his trust in the LORD shall be safe.
Many are they who seek the ruler's favor; But every man's judgment cometh from the LORD.
As the unjust man is an abomination to the righteous, So the upright in his way is an abomination to the wicked.
The words of Agur, the son of Jakeh, even his prophecy; the inspired utterance of the man to Ithiel, even to Ithiel and Ucal.
Truly I am more stupid than any man; There is not in me the understanding of a man.
I have not learned wisdom, Nor have I gained the knowledge of the Most Holy.
Who hath gone up into heaven and come down? Who hath gathered the wind in his fists? Who hath bound up the waters in a garment? Who hath established all the ends of the earth? What is his name, and what his son's name, if thou knowest?
Every word of God is pure; A shield is he to them that put their trust in him.
Add not to his words, Lest he rebuke thee, and thou be found a liar.
Two things do I ask of thee; Withhold them not from me, before I die!
Remove far from me falsehood and lies; Give me neither poverty nor riches; Feed me with the food which is needful for me;
Lest I be full, and deny thee, And say, “Who is the LORD?” Or lest I be poor, and steal, And violate the name of my God.
Talk not against a servant to his master, Lest he curse thee, and thou suffer for it.
There is a class of men that curse their fathers, And do not bless their mothers.
There is a class who are pure in their own eyes, And yet are not washed from their filthiness.
There is a class,—O how lofty are their eyes, And how are their eyelids lifted up!
There is a class, whose teeth are swords, And their jaw-teeth knives, To devour the poor from off the earth, And the needy from among men.
The vampire hath two daughters; “Give! give!” [[is their cry.]] There are three things which are never satisfied; Yea, four which say not, “Enough!”
The underworld, and the barren womb; The earth, which is not satiated with water, And fire, which never saith, “It is enough!”
The eye that mocketh at a father, And scorneth to obey a mother, The ravens of the valley shall pick it out, And the young eagles shall eat it.
These three things are too wonderful for me; Yea, there are four which I understand not:
The track of an eagle in the air, The track of a serpent upon a rock, The track of a ship in the midst of the sea, And the track of a man with a maid.
Such is the way of an adulterous woman; She eateth, and wipeth her mouth, And saith, “I have done nothing wrong.”
Under three things is the earth disquieted; Yea, under four it cannot bear up:
Under a servant when he becometh a king, And a fool when he is filled with bread;
Under an odious woman when she becometh a wife, And a handmaid when she becometh heir to her mistress.
There are four things which are small upon the earth, Yet are they wise, instructed in wisdom.
The ants are a people not strong, Yet they prepare in the summer their food.
The conies are a feeble people, Yet do they make their houses in the rocks.
The locusts have no king, Yet do they all go forth in bands.
The lizard seizeth with its hands, And is in king's palaces.
These three have a graceful step; Yea, four are graceful in their walk:
The lion, the hero among beasts, Which turneth not back for any;
The loin-girded war-horse, the he-goat, And a king who cannot be withstood.
If thou hast been foolish in lifting thyself up, And hast meditated evil, Put thy hand on thy mouth!
For, as the pressing of milk bringeth forth cheese, And as the pressing of the nose bringeth forth blood, So the pressing of anger bringeth forth strife.
The words given to King Lemuel; the prophecy which his mother taught him.
What, O my son! and what, O son of my womb! Yea, what, O son of my vows! [[shall I say to thee?]]
Give not thy strength to women, Nor thy ways to that which destroyeth kings!
It is not for kings, O Lemuel! It is not for kings to drink wine, Nor for princes to desire strong drink;
Lest they drink, and forget the law, And pervert the rights of any of the afflicted.
Give strong drink to him who is ready to perish, And wine to him that hath a heavy heart;
Let him drink and forget his poverty, And remember his misery no more!
Open thy mouth for the dumb, In the cause of every orphan!
Open thy mouth, judge righteously, And maintain the cause of the poor and needy!
Who can find a capable woman? Her worth is far above pearls.
The heart of her husband trusteth in her, And he is in no want of gain.
She doeth him good, and not evil, All the days of her life.
She seeketh wool and flax, And worketh willingly with her hands.
She is like the merchants' ships; She bringeth her food from afar.
She riseth while it is yet night, And giveth food to her family, And a task to her maidens.
She layeth a plan for a field, and buyeth it; With the fruit of her hands she planteth a vineyard.
She girdeth her loins with strength, And maketh strong her arms.
She perceiveth how pleasant is her gain, And her lamp is not extinguished in the night.
She putteth forth her hands to the distaff, And her hands take hold of the spindle.
She spreadeth out her hand to the poor, Yea, she reacheth forth her hands to the needy.
She hath no fear for her household on account of the snow, For all her household are clothed with crimson.
She maketh for herself coverlets; Her clothing is of fine linen and purple.
Her husband is known in the gates, When he sitteth with the elders of the land.
She maketh linen garments and selleth them, And delivereth girdles to the merchant.
Strength and honor are her clothing; And she laugheth at the days to come.
She openeth her mouth with wisdom, And kind instruction is upon her tongue.
She looketh well to the ways of her household, And eateth not the bread of idleness.
Her children rise up, and extol her; Her husband, and praiseth her, [[saving,]]
“Many daughters have done, virtuously, But thou excellest them all.”
Grace is deceitful, and beauty vain; But the woman that feareth the LORD, she shall be praised.
Give ye her of the fruit of her hands, And let her works praise her in the gates.
The words of the Preacher, the son of David, king in Jerusalem.
Vanity of vanities, saith the Preacher, vanity of vanities, all is vanity.
What profit hath a man by all his labor with which he wearieth himself under the sun?
One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh; while the earth abideth for ever.
The sun riseth, and the sun goeth down, and hasteneth to the place whence it arose.
The wind goeth toward the south, and turneth about to the north; round and round goeth the wind, and returneth to its circuits.
All the rivers run into the sea, yet the sea is not full; to the place whence the rivers come, thither they return.
All words become weary; man cannot express it; the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing.
The thing that hath been is that which shall be, and that which hath been done is that which shall be done; and there is no new thing under the sun.
Is there any thing of which one may say, “Behold, this is new”? It was long ago, in the times which were before us.
There is no remembrance of former things, and of things that are to come there shall be no remembrance to those who live afterwards.
I, the Preacher, was king over Israel at Jerusalem.
And I gave my mind to seek and to search out with wisdom concerning all things which are done under heaven; an evil business, which God hath given to the sons of men, in which to employ themselves.
I saw all the things which are done under the sun; and, behold, it was all vanity, and striving after wind.
That which is crooked cannot be made straight, and that which is wanting cannot be numbered.
I communed with my heart, saying, “Behold, I have gained more and greater wisdom than all who have been before me at Jerusalem; yea, my mind hath seen much wisdom and knowledge.”
And I gave my mind to know wisdom, and to know senselessness and folly; I perceived that this also is striving after wind.
For in much wisdom is much vexation, and he that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow.
I said in my heart, “Come, now, I will try thee with mirth; therefore enjoy pleasure!” But, lo! this also was vanity.
I said of laughter, “It is mad;” and of mirth, “What availeth it?”
I thought in my heart to strengthen my body with wine, and, while my heart cleaved to wisdom, to lay hold on folly, till I should see what was good for the sons of men, which they should do under heaven all the days of their life.
I made me great works. I builded me houses; I planted me vineyards.
I made me gardens and parks, and planted in them fruit-trees of every kind.
I made me pools of water, with which to water the grove shooting up trees.
I got me men-servants and maid-servants, and had servants born in my house. I had also great possessions of herds and flocks, more than all who were in Jerusalem before me.
I heaped me up also silver and gold, and the wealth of kings and of provinces. I got me men-singers and women-singers, and the delight of the sons of men, a chosen woman and chosen women.
So I became greater than all that were before me in Jerusalem. My wisdom also remained with me.
And whatever mine eyes desired I kept not from them; I withheld not my heart from any joy. For my heart rejoiced by means of all my labor, and this was my portion from all my labor.
Then I looked upon all the works which my hands had wrought, and upon all the labor which I had toiled in performing; and, behold, it was all vanity, and striving after wind, and there was no profit under the sun.
Then I turned myself to behold wisdom and senselessness and folly. For what can the man do that cometh after the king? even that which hath been already done.
I saw, indeed, that wisdom excelleth folly, as far as light excelleth darkness.
The wise man's eyes are in his head, but the fool walketh in darkness; yet I perceived also that one event happeneth to them all.
Then I said in my heart, “As it happeneth to the fool, so it happeneth to me. Why, then, became I wiser than others?” Then I said in my heart, “This also is vanity.”
For there is no remembrance of the wise man more than of the fool for ever; for in the days to come shall all have long been forgotten; and, alas! the wise man dieth, as well as the fool.
Therefore I hated life, because what is done under the sun appeared evil to me. For all is vanity, and striving after wind.
Yea, I hated all my labor which I had performed under the sun, because I must leave it to the man that shall be after me.
And who knoweth whether he shall be a wise man or a fool? Yet shall he be lord of all the labor with which I have wearied myself, and in which I have shown myself wise under the sun. This also is vanity.
Therefore I turned to give up my heart to despair in regard to all the labor with which I had wearied myself under the sun.
For there is a man whose labor has been with wisdom and knowledge and skill; yet to a man who hath not labored for it must he leave it as his portion. This also is vanity and a great evil.
For what hath man of all his labor, and the striving of his spirit, with which he wearieth himself under the sun?
For all his days are grief, and his occupation trouble; even in the night his heart taketh no rest. This also is vanity.
There is nothing better for a man than to eat and drink, and let his soul enjoy good in his labor. But this, as I have seen, cometh from the hand of God.
For who can eat, or hasten thereunto more than I?
For to a man who is good in his sight God giveth wisdom and knowledge and joy; but to the sinner he giveth the wearisome business of gathering and heaping up, to give it to him who is good before God. This also is vanity, and striving after wind.
For every thing there is a fixed period, and an appointed time to every thing under heaven:—
A time to be born, and a time to die. A time to plant, and a time to pluck up what is planted.
A time to kill, and a time to heal. A time to breaking down, and a time to build up.
A time to weep, and a time to laugh. A time to mourn, and a time to dance.
A time to cast stones asunder, and a time to gather stones together. A time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing.
A time to seek, and a time to lose. A time to keep, and a time to cast away.
A time to rend, and a time to sew. A time to keep silence, and a time to speak.
A time to love, and a time to hate. A time of war, and a time of peace.—
What profit hath he who laboreth from that with which he wearieth himself?
I have seen the business which God hath given to the sons of men to exercise themselves therewith.
God maketh every thing good in its time; but he hath put the world into the heart of man, so that he understandeth not the work which God doeth, from the beginning to the end.
I know that there is nothing better for a man than that he should rejoice and enjoy good his life long.
But when a man eateth and drinketh, and enjoyeth good through all his labor, this is the gift of God.
I know that whatever God doeth, that shall be for ever. Nothing can be added to it, and nothing taken from it; and God doeth it that men may fear before him.
That which is, was long ago; and that which is to be, hath already been; and God recalleth that which is past.
Moreover, I saw under the sun that in the place of justice there was iniquity; and in the place of righteousness, iniquity.
Then said I in my heart, “God will judge the righteous and the wicked.” For there shall be a time for every matter and for every work.
I said in my heart concerning the sons of men, that God will prove them, in order that they may see that they are like the beasts.
For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts: one lot befalleth both. As the one dieth, so dieth the other. Yea, there is one spirit in them, and a man hath no pre-eminence above a beast; for all is vanity.
All go to one place; all are from the dust, and all turn to dust again.
Who knoweth the spirit of man, whether it goeth upward, and the spirit of a beast, whether it goeth downward to the earth?
And so I saw that there is nothing better than that a man should rejoice in his labors; for that is his portion. For who shall bring him to see what shall be after him?
Then I turned and saw all the oppressions which take place under the sun; and, behold, there were the tears of the oppressed, and they had no comforter; and from the hand of their oppressors there was violence, and they had no comforter.
Therefore I praised the dead, who have been long ago dead, more than the living, who are yet alive.
Yea, better than both of them is he who hath not yet been, who hath not seen the evil work which is done under the sun.
And I saw all labor, and all success in work, that for this a man is envied by his neighbor. This also is vanity, and striving after wind.
The fool foldeth his hands together and eateth his own flesh.
Better is a hand full of quietness, than both hands full of weariness and striving after wind.
Then I turned and saw other vanity under the sun.
There is one who is alone, and no one with him; yea, he hath neither son nor brother; yet is there no end to all his labor, and his eye is not satisfied with riches. “For whom, then [[saith he]], do I labor and deprive myself of good?” This also is vanity; yea, it is an evil thing!
Two are better than one, because they have a good reward for their labor.
For if they fall, the one will lift his fellow up; but woe to him who is alone when he falleth, and hath not another to help him up!
Again, if two lie together, then they have heat; but how can one be warm alone?
And if an enemy prevail against one, two shall withstand him; and a threefold cord is not quickly broken.
Better is a child poor but wise, than a king old and foolish, who will no more be admonished.
For out of prison cometh forth such a one to reign; for in his own kingdom he was born a poor man.
I saw that all the living, who walk under the sun, were with the child who stood up in his stead.
There was no end to all the people before whom he went forth; yet they that come afterwards shall not rejoice in him. This also is vanity, and striving after wind.
Look well to thy feet, when thou goest to the house of God, and draw nigh to hear, rather than to offer sacrifice as fools. For they consider not that they do evil.
Be not hasty with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be swift to utter any thing before God. For God is in heaven, and thou upon earth. Therefore let thy words be few.
For a dream cometh with much bustle, and a fool's voice with a multitude of words.
When thou vowest a vow to God, delay not to pay it; for he hath no pleasure in fools. Pay that which thou hast vowed.
Better is it that thou shouldst not vow than that thou shouldst vow and not pay.
Suffer not thy mouth to bring punishment on thy flesh, and say not before the angel, “It was a mistake.” Wherefore should God be angry on account of thy voice, and destroy the work of thy hands?
For in a multitude of dreams is a multitude of vanities; so also in a multitude of words; but fear thou God!
If thou seest oppression of the poor, and justice and equity perverted in a province, be not alarmed at the matter. For over the high there is a higher, who watcheth, and there is one higher than they all.
An advantage to a land in all respects is a king over cultivated ground.
He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver; and he that loveth riches shall have no profit from them. This also is vanity.
When goods increase, they are increased that eat them; and what advantage hath the owner thereof, save the beholding of them with his eyes?
Sweet is the sleep of a laboring man, whether he have eaten little or much; but the repletion of the rich will not suffer him to sleep.
There is a sore evil which I have seen under the sun, — riches kept by the owner thereof to his hurt.
For those riches perish by some calamity, and, if he have a son, there is nothing in his hand.
As he came forth from his mother's womb naked, so shall he go away again, as he came, and shall take away nothing of his labor which he may carry in his hand.
This is also a sore evil, that, in all points as he came, so shall he go. And what profit is there to him who toileth for wind?
Also all his days he ate in darkness, and had much grief and anxiety and vexation.
Behold, what I have seen is, that it is good and proper for one to eat and drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labor which he taketh under the sun all the days of his life, which God giveth him; for it is his portion.
To whatever man also God hath given riches and wealth, and hath given him to enjoy them, and to take his portion, and to rejoice in his labor; this is the gift of God.
For he will not much remember the days of his life; for God answereth him with the joy of his heart.
There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, and it lieth heavy upon men;
a man to whom God hath given riches, wealth, and honor, and nothing is wanting to him of all which he desireth, yet God giveth him not to taste thereof; but a stranger enjoyeth it. This is vanity, yea, a grievous evil.
Though a man have a hundred children, and live many years, and though the days of his years be many, if his soul be not satisfied with good, and he have no burial, I say that an untimely birth is better than he.
This, indeed, cometh in nothingness, and goeth down into darkness, and its name is covered with darkness;
it hath not seen the sun, nor known it; yet hath it rest rather than the other.
Yea, though he live a thousand years twice told, and see no good, — do not all go to one place?
All the labor of man is for his mouth, and yet his desires are not satisfied.
For what advantage hath the wise man over the fool? What advantage hath the poor, who knoweth how to walk before the living?
Better is the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the desire. This also is vanity, and striving after wind.
That which is was long ago called by name; and it was known that he is a man, and that he cannot contend with Him who is mightier than he.
Seeing there are many things which increase vanity, what advantage hath man [[from them]]?
For who knoweth what is good for man in life, in all the days of his vain life, which he spendeth as a shadow? For who can tell a man what shall be after him under the sun?
A good name is better than precious perfume, and the day of one's death than the day of his birth.
It is better to go to the house of mourning than to go to the house of feasting; for that is the end of all men; and the living will lay it to heart.
Sorrow is better than laughter; for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better.
The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning; but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth.
It is better for a man to hear the rebuke of the wise than to hear the song of fools.
For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of a fool. This also is vanity.
Surely the gain of oppression maketh a wise man foolish, and a gift corrupteth the understanding.
Better is the end of a thing than its beginning. Better is the patient in spirit than the proud in spirit.
Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry; for anger resteth in the bosom of fools.
Say not, “What is the cause that the former days were better than these?” For thou dost not inquire wisely concerning this.
Wisdom is as good as an estate? yea, it hath an advantage over it for them that see the sun.
For wisdom is a defence, and money is a defence. But knowledge hath the advantage. For wisdom giveth life to them that have it.
Consider the work of God! Who can make straight that which he hath made crooked?
In the day of prosperity be joyful; but look for a day of adversity! for this also, as well as the other, hath God appointed, to the end that a man should not find out any thing which shall be after him.
All this have I seen in my days of vanity. There are righteous men who perish in their righteousness, and there are wicked men who live long in their wickedness.
Be not righteous overmuch; neither make thyself over-wise! Why shouldest thou destroy thyself?
Be not overmuch wicked; neither be thou a fool! Why shouldst thou die before thy time?
It is good that thou shouldst take hold of this; yea, also, from that withdraw not thy hand. For he that feareth God shall escape all those things.
Wisdom strengtheneth the wise more than ten mighty men who are in the city.
Truly there is not a righteous man upon the earth who doeth good and sinneth not.
Give no heed to all the words which are spoken, lest thou hear thy servant curse thee!
For many times thine own heart knoweth also that even thou thyself hast cursed others.
All this have I tried by wisdom. I said, “I will be wise;” but it was far from me.
That which is far off and exceeding deep, who can find it out?
I applied my mind earnestly to know, and to search, and to seek out wisdom and intelligence, and to know wickedness and folly, yea, foolishness and madness.
And I found more bitter than death the woman whose heart is snares and nets, and her hands bands. He that pleaseth God shall escape from her; but the sinner shall be caught by her.
Behold, this have I found, saith the Preacher, putting one thing to another to find knowledge.
That which my soul hath hitherto sought, and I have not found, is this: a man among a thousand I have found, but a woman among a thousand have I not found.
Lo, this only have I found, that God made man upright, but they have sought out many devices.
Who is like the wise man, and who knoweth the explanation of a thing? A man's wisdom brighteneth his countenance, and the harshness of his face is changed.
I counsel thee to keep the king's commandment, and that on account of the oath of God.
Be not in haste to depart from his presence; persist not in an evil thing; for whatever pleaseth him, that he doeth.
For the word of the king is powerful; and who can say to him, “What doest thou?”
He that keepeth the commandment shall experience no evil; and the heart of the wise man hath regard to time and judgment.
For to every thing there is a time and judgment. For the misery of man is great upon him.
For no one knoweth what shall be; for who can tell him how it shall be?
No man hath power over the spirit to retain the spirit, and no man hath power over the day of death; and there is no discharge in that war; and wickedness shall not deliver those that are guilty of it.
All this have I seen, and I have given heed to all things that are done under the sun. There is a time when man ruleth over man to his hurt.
And so I saw the wicked buried, while the righteous came and went from the holy place, and were forgotten in the city. This also is vanity.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore doth the heart of the sons of men become bold within them to do evil.
But though a sinner do evil a hundred times, and have his days prolonged, yet surely I know that it shall be well with them that fear God, that fear before him.
But it shall not be well with the wicked: he shall be like a shadow, and shall not prolong his days, because he feareth not before God.
There is a vanity which taketh place upon the earth, that there are righteous men to whom it happeneth according to the work of the wicked, and that there are wicked men to whom it happeneth according to the work of the righteous. I said, “This also is vanity!”
Then I commended joy; because nothing is good for a man under the sun, except to eat and to drink and to be joyful; for it is this that abideth with him for his labor during the days of his life which God giveth him under the sun.
When I applied my mind to know wisdom, and to see the business which is done upon the earth,—that one seeth no sleep with his eyes by day or by night,—
then I saw the whole work of God, that a man cannot comprehend that which is done under the sun; how much soever he labor to search it out, yet shall he not comprehend it; yea, though a wise man resolve to know it, yet shall he not be able to comprehend it.
For I gave my mind to all this, even to search out all this, that the righteous and the wise and their works are in the hand of God, and yet neither his love nor hatred doth any man know. All is before them.
All [[cometh to them]] as to all. There is one event to the righteous and to the wicked; to the good, to the clean, and to the unclean; to him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not; as is the good, so is the sinner; he that sweareth, as he that feareth an oath.
This is an evil among all things which take place under the sun, that there is one event to all; therefore also the heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and madness is in their heart while they live, and afterward they go down to the dead.
For who is there that is excepted? With all the living there is hope; for a living dog is better than a dead lion.
For the living know that they shall die; but the dead know not any thing, and there is no more to them any advantage, for their memory is forgotten.
Their love also, and their hatred, and their envy, is now perished; neither have they a portion any more for ever in any thing which taketh place under the sun.
Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a cheerful heart; for long since hath God been pleased with thy works.
Let thy garments be always white, and let not fragrant oil be wanting upon thy head.
Enjoy life with the wife whom thou lovest, all the days of thy vain life which he hath given thee under the sun, all thy vain days. For this is thy portion in life, and in thy labor with which thou weariest thyself under the sun.
Whatever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might! For there is no work nor device nor knowledge nor wisdom in the under-world, whither thou goest.
I turned and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor yet bread to the wise, nor riches to men of understanding, nor favor to men of knowledge; but time and chance happen to them all.
For man knoweth not his time. As fishes that are taken in a destructive net, and as birds that are caught in a snare, so are the sons of men snared in a time of distress, when it falleth suddenly upon them.
This also have I seen; even wisdom under the sun, and it seemed great to me.
There was a little city, and few men within it; and a great king came against it, and besieged it, and built great bulwarks against it.
Now there was found within it a wise poor man; and he, by his wisdom, delivered the city; yet no man remembered that same poor man.
Then said I, “Wisdom is better than strength;” and yet the poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard.
The quiet words of the wise are sooner heard than the shouting of a foolish ruler.
Wisdom is better than weapons of war. But one offender destroyeth much good.
Dead flies make the oil of the perfumer loathsome and corrupt; thus doth a little folly weigh down wisdom and honor.
A wise man's mind is at his right hand; but a fool's mind is at his left.
Yea, even when the fool walketh in the way, his understanding faileth him, and he saith to every one that he is a fool.
If the anger of a ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy place! for gentleness pacifieth great offences.
There is an evil which I have seen under the sun; an error which proceedeth from a ruler.
Folly is set in many high stations, and the noble sit in a low place.
I have seen servants upon horses, and princes walking as servants on foot.
He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it; and whoso breaketh down a wall, a serpent shall bite him.
Whoso removeth stones shall be hurt therewith, and he that cleaveth wood shall be endangered thereby.
If the iron be blunt, and one do not whet the edge, then must he put forth more strength; but an advantage for giving success hath wisdom.
If a serpent bite before he is charmed, then there is no advantage to the charmer.
The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious; but the lips of a fool are his destruction.
The beginning of the words of his mouth is folly, and the end of his talk is mischievous madness.
A fool also multiplieth words, though no man knoweth what shall be; and who can tell him what shall be after him?
The labor of the foolish man wearieth him, because he knoweth not how to go to the city.
Woe to thee, O land, when thy king is a child, and thy princes feast in the morning!
Happy thou, O land, when thy king is a noble, and thy princes eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness!
By much slothfulness the building decayeth; and by the slackness of the hands the house leaketh.
A feast is made for laughter, and wine makes merry; but money answereth all things.
Curse not the king; no, not in thy thought; and curse not the rich in thy bed-chamber! for a bird of the air shall carry the voice; and that which hath wings shall tell the matter.
Cast thy bread upon the waters; for after many days thou shalt find it.
Give a portion to seven, yea, to eight; for thou knowest not what evil shall be upon the earth.
When the clouds are full of rain, they empty upon the earth; and when a tree falleth to the south or the north, in the place where the tree falleth, there it shall be.
He that watcheth the wind will not sow, and he that gazeth upon the clouds will not reap.
As thou knowest not the way of the wind, nor how the bones are formed in the womb of her that is with child, so thou canst not know the work of God, who doeth all things.
In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thy hand! For thou knowest not whether this shall prosper, or that, or whether both of them shall be alike good.
Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the sun.
Yea, though a man live many years, let him rejoice in them all, and let him think of the days of darkness; for they shall be many. All that cometh is vanity.
Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes! but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment.
Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart, and put away evil from thy body! for childhood and youth are vanity.
Remember, also, thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before the evil days come, and the years draw nigh, of which thou shalt say, “I have no pleasure in them;”
before the sun, and the light, and the moon, and the stars become dark, and the clouds return after the rain;
at the time when the keepers of the house tremble, and the strong men bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they are few, and those that look out of the windows are darkened;
when the doors are shut in the streets, while the sound of the mill is low; when they rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters of music are brought low;
when also they are afraid of that which is high, and terrors are in the way, and the almond is despised, and the locust is a burden, and the caper-berry is powerless; since man goeth to his eternal home, and the mourners go about the streets;—
before the silver cord be snapped asunder, and the golden bowl be crushed, or the bucket broken at the fountain, or the wheel shattered at the well,
and the dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit return to God who gave it.
Vanity of vanities, saith the Preacher; all is vanity!
Moreover, because the Preacher was wise, he still taught the people knowledge; yea, he considered, and sought out, and set in order, many proverbs.
The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words, and to write correctly words of truth.
The words of the wise are as goads; yea, as nails driven in are the words of members of assemblies, given by one shepherd.
And, moreover, by these, my son, be warned! To the multiplying of books there is no end, and much study wearieth the flesh.
Let us hear the end of the whole discourse! Fear God and keep his commandments! For this is the duty of every man.
For God will bring every work into the judgment which there is upon every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.
The Song of Songs, which is by Solomon.
[[M.]] O that he would kiss me with one of the kisses of his mouth! For thy love is better than wine.
Because of the savor of thy precious perfumes, (Thy name is like fragrant oil poured forth,) Therefore do the virgins love thee.
Draw me after thee; let us run! The king hath led me to his chambers! We will be glad and rejoice in thee; We will praise thy love more than wine. Justly do they love thee!
I am black, but comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, As the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon.
Gaze not upon me because I am black, Because the sun hath looked upon me! My mother's sons were angry with me; They made me keeper of the vineyards; My vineyard, my own, have I not kept.
Tell me, thou whom my soul loveth, where thou feedest thy flock, Where thou leadest it to rest at noon; For why should I be like a veiled one by the flocks of thy companions?
[[Lad.]] If thou know not, O thou fairest among women, Trace thou thy way by the tracks of the flock, And feed thy kids beside the shepherds' tents!
[[Lov.]] To the horses in the chariots of Pharaoh Do I compare thee, my love!
Comely are thy cheeks with rows of jewels, Thy neck with strings of pearls.
Golden chains will we make for thee, With studs of silver.
[[M.]] While the king reclineth at his table, My spikenard sendeth forth its fragrance.
A bunch of myrrh is my beloved to me; He shall abide between my breasts.
My beloved is to me a cluster of henna-flowers From the gardens of Engedi.
[[Lov.]] Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair! Thine eyes are doves.
[[M.]] Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yea, lovely; And green is our bed.
The cedars are the beams of our house, And its roof the cypresses.
I am a rose of Sharon, A lily of the valleys.
[[Lov.]] As the lily among thorns, So is my love among the daughters.
[[M.]] As the apple-tree among the trees of the forest, So is my beloved among the sons. In his shadow I love to sit down, And his fruit is sweet to my taste.
He hath brought me to his banqueting-house, And his banner over me is love. Strengthen me with raisins,
Refresh me with apples! For I am sick with love.
His left hand is under my head, And his right hand embraceth me!
[[Lov.]] I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, By the gazelles, and by the hinds of the field, That ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till she please!
[[M.]] The voice of my beloved! Behold, he cometh, Leaping upon the mountains, Bounding upon the hills.
Like a gazelle is my beloved, Or a young hind. Behold, he standeth behind our wall; He is looking through the windows; He glanceth through the lattice.
My beloved speaketh, and saith to me, “Rise up, my love, my fair one, and come away!
For, lo, the winter is past, The rain is over and gone;
The flowers appear on the earth; The time of the singing of birds is come, And the voice of the turtle is heard in our land;
The fig-tree is spicing its green fruit; The vines in blossom give forth fragrance. Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away!
O my dove, that art in the recesses of the rock, In the hiding-places of the steep craggy mountain, Let me see thy face, Let me hear thy voice! For sweet is thy voice, And thy face lovely.”
Take ye for us the foxes, The little foxes that spoil the vines; For our vines are now in blossom.
My beloved is mine, and I am his; He feedeth among the lilies.
When the day breathes, and the shadows flee away, Come again, my beloved, like a gazelle, or a young hind, Upon the craggy mountains.
[[M.]] Upon my bed, in the night, I sought him whom my soul loveth; I sought him, but found him not.
I will arise now [[said I]], and go about the city; In the streets and the broad ways will I seek him whom my soul loveth; I sought him, but found him not.
The watchmen who go about the city found me; “Have you seen [[said I]] him whom my soul loveth?”
I had but just passed them, When I found him whom my soul loveth; I held him, and would not let him go, Till I had brought him into my mother's house, Into the apartment of her that bore me.
[[Lov.]] I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem! By the gazelles, and by the hinds of the field, That ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till she please.
Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness, Like pillars of smoke, Perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, With all the powders of the merchant?
Behold, the carriage of Solomon! Threescore valiant men are around it, Of the valiant men of Israel.
They all wear swords, Being skilled in war. Every one hath his sword girt upon his thigh, On account of danger in the night.
King Solomon made for himself a carriage Of the wood of Lebanon.
The pillars thereof he made of silver, The railing of gold, The seat of purple, Its interior curiously wrought by a lovely one of the daughters of Jerusalem.
Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion! And behold King Solomon In the crown with which his mother crowned him, In the day of his espousals, In the day of the gladness of his heart.
[[Lov.]] Behold, thou art fair, my love! behold, thou art fair! Thine eyes are doves behind thy veil; Thy locks are like a flock of goats Which lie down on mount Gilead;
Thy teeth are like a flock of shorn sheep, Which come up from the washing-place, Of which every one beareth twins, And none is barren among them;
Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, And thy mouth comely; Thy cheeks are like a divided pomegranate behind thy veil;
Thy neck is like the tower of David, Built for an armory, In which there hang a thousand bucklers, All shields of mighty men;
Thy two breasts are like two young twin gazelles, That feed among the lilies.
When the day breathes, and the shadows flee away, I will betake me to the mountain of myrrh And the hill of frankincense.
Thou art all fair, my love; There is no spot in thee!
Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse, With me from Lebanon! Look from the top of Amana, From the top of Senir and Hermon, From the dens of the lions, From the mountains of the leopards.
Thou hast taken captive my heart, my sister, my spouse; Thou hast taken captive my heart with one of thine eyes, With one chain of thy neck.
How sweet is thy love, my sister, my spouse! How much more precious thy caresses than wine, And the fragrance of thy perfumes than all spices!
Thy lips, O my spouse! drop the honeycomb; Honey and milk are under thy tongue, And the fragrance of thy garments is as the fragrance of Lebanon.
A garden inclosed is my sister, my spouse; A spring shut up, a fountain sealed;
Thy plants are an orchard of pomegranates, with choicest fruits, Henna and spikenard,
Spikenard and saffron, Sweet cane and cinnamon, With all trees of frankincense; Myrrh and aloes, With all the chief spices;
A fountain of the gardens, A well of living water, A stream that floweth from Lebanon!
[[M.]] Awake, O north wind, and come, thou south! Blow upon my garden, That its spices may flow out! May my beloved come to his garden, And eat his pleasant fruits.
[[Lov.]] I am come to my garden, my sister, my spouse! I gather my myrrh with my balsam, I eat my honeycomb with my honey, I drink my wine with my milk. Eat, O friends! Drink, yea, drink abundantly, my loved companions!
[[M.]] I slept, but my heart was awake; It was the voice of my beloved, who was knocking: “Open to me, my sister, my love, My dove, my perfect one! For my head is filled with dew, And my locks with the drops of the night.”
“I have taken off my vest [[said I]]; How shall I put it on? I have washed my feet; How shall I soil them?”
My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, And my heart was moved for him.
I rose up to open to my beloved, And my hands dropped with myrrh, And my fingers with self-flowing myrrh, upon the handles of the bolt.
I opened to my beloved; But my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone. I was not in my senses while he spake with me! I sought him, but could not find him; I called him, but he gave me no answer.
The watchmen that go about the city found me; They smote me, they wounded me; The keepers of the walls took away from me my veil.
I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem! If ye should find my beloved,—What will ye tell him? That I am sick with love.
[[Lad.]] What is thy beloved more than another beloved, O thou fairest among women! What is thy beloved more than another beloved, That thus thou dost charge us?
[[M.]] My beloved is white and ruddy, The chief among ten thousand.
His head is as the most fine gold; His locks waving palm-branches, Black as a raven;
His eyes are doves by streams of water, Washed with milk, dwelling in fulness;
His cheeks are like a bed of balsam, Like beds of spices; His lips are lilies Dropping self-flowing myrrh;
His hands are gold rings set with chrysolite; His body is wrought-work of ivory, overlaid with sapphires;
His legs are marble pillars, resting on pedestals of fine gold; His aspect is like Lebanon, Majestic like the cedars;
His mouth is sweetness; His whole being, loveliness. This is my beloved, This my friend, O ye daughters of Jerusalem!
[[Lad.]] Whither is thy beloved gone, thou fairest among women? Whither hath thy beloved betaken himself? That we may seek him with thee.
[[M.]] My beloved is gone down to his garden, To the beds of balsam, To feed in the gardens, And to gather lilies.
I am my beloved's, and my beloved is mine; He feedeth among the lilies.
Beautiful art thou, my love, as Tirzah, Lovely as Jerusalem; But terrible as an army with banners.
Turn away thine eyes from me! They overpower me! Thy locks are like a flock of goats, Which lie down upon Gilead.
Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep, Which come up from the washing-place, Of which every one hath twins, And none is barren among them.
As a divided pomegranate Are thy cheeks behind thy veil.
Threescore are the queens, and fourscore the concubines, And the maidens without number.
But my dove, my undefiled, is the one; She is the incomparable one of her mother, The darling of her that bore her. The daughters saw her, and blessed her; The queens and concubines, and they praised her.
[[Lov.]] Who is this that looketh forth like the morning, Fair as the moon, bright as the sun, And terrible as an army with banners?
[[M.]] I went down into the garden of nuts, To see the green plants of the valley, To see whether the vine blossomed, And the pomegranates budded.
Or ever I was aware, My soul had made me like the chariots of the prince's train.
[[Lad.]] Return, return, O Shulamite! Return, return, that we may look upon thee! [[M.]] Why should ye look upon the Shulamite, As upon a dance of the hosts?
[[Lov.]] How beautiful are thy feet in sandals, O prince's daughter! The roundings of thy hips are like neck ornaments, The work of the hands of the artificer;
Thy navel is like a round goblet, that wanteth not the spiced wine; Thy belly like a heap of wheat, inclosed with lilies;
Thy two breasts are like two young twin gazelles;
Thy neck is as a tower of ivory; Thine eyes are like the pools at Heshbon, by the gate of Bath-rabbim; Thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon, which looketh toward Damascus;
Thy head upon thee is like Carmel, And the hair of thy head like purple; The king is captivated by thy locks.
How fair, how pleasant art thou, love, in delights!
This thy stature is like the palm-tree, And thy breasts like clusters of dates.
I will go up, say I to myself, upon the palm-tree; I will take hold of its boughs, And thy breasts shall be as clusters of the vine, And the fragrance of thy nose like apples,
And thy mouth like the best wine— [[M.]] — that goeth down smoothly for my beloved, Flowing over the lips of them that sleep.
I am my beloved's, And his desire is toward me.
Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the country; Let us lodge in the villages!
Then will we go early to the vineyards, To see whether the vine putteth forth, Whether its blossom openeth, And the pomegranates bud forth; There will I give thee my love!
The love-apples give forth fragrance; And at our doors are all kinds of precious fruits, new and old: I have kept them for thee, my beloved!
O that thou wert as my brother, That sucked the breast of my mother! When I found thee abroad, I might kiss thee; And for it no one would deride me.
I will lead thee, and bring thee into my mother's house, that thou mayst teach me; I will give thee spiced wine to drink, and the juice of my pomegranates.
His left hand is under my head, And his right hand embraceth me.
[[Lov.]] I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem! That ye stir not up, nor awake my love, Till she please!
[[Lad.]] Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness, Leaning upon her beloved? [[M.]] Under the apple-tree I awakened thee; There thy mother brought thee forth; There she that bore thee brought thee forth!
O set me as a seal upon thy heart, As a seal upon thine arm! For love is strong as death; True love is firm as the grave: Its flames are flames of fire, The fire of Jehovah.
Many waters cannot quench love, Nor can floods drown it. Would a man give all the wealth of his house for love, It would be utterly contemned.
[[Br.]] We have a sister who is yet young; She is yet without breasts. What shall we do with our sister, When she shall be spoken for?
If she be a wall, We will build upon it a silver tower; If she be an open gate, We will inclose her with planks of cedar.
[[Sis.]] I am a wall, and my breasts like towers; Therefore am I become in his eyes as one that findeth peace.
Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-hamon; He let out the vineyard to keepers; Every one was to bring a thousand shekels of silver for its fruit.
My vineyard is before my eyes. Be thine the thousand, O Solomon! And two hundred to the keepers of its fruit!
[[Lov.]] Thou that dwellest in the gardens! Friends listen to thy voice; Let me hear thee!
Fly, my beloved! like a gazelle, or a young hind, Upon the mountains of spices.
The visions of Isaiah, the son of Amoz, which he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah.
Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth! For Jehovah speaketh: “I have nourished and brought up children, And they have rebelled against me.
The ox knoweth his owner, And the ass his master's crib; But Israel doth not know; My people do not consider.”
Ah, sinful nation! a people laden with iniquity! A race of evil-doers! degenerate children! They have forsaken Jehovah; they have despised the Holy One of Israel; They have gone backward.
Where can ye be smitten again, Since ye renew your rebellion? The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint;
From the sole of the foot even to the head, there is no soundness in it; It is all bruises, and stripes, and flesh wounds, Neither pressed, nor bound up, nor softened with ointment.
Your country is desolate; Your cities are burnt with fire; Your ground, strangers devour it before your eyes; It is become desolate, destroyed by an enemy.
And the daughter of Zion is left as a shed in a vineyard, As a hut in a garden of cucumbers, As a besieged city.
Had not Jehovah of hosts left us a small remnant, We had soon become as Sodom; We had been like to Gomorrah.
Hear ye the word of Jehovah, ye princes of Sodom! Give ear to the instruction of our God, ye people of Gomorrah!
What to me is the multitude of your sacrifices? saith Jehovah; I am satiated with burnt-offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts; In the blood of bullocks and of lambs and of goats I have no delight.
When ye come to appear before me, Who hath required this of you, to tread my courts?
Bring no more false oblations! Incense is an abomination to me, The new moon also, and the sabbath, and the calling of the assembly; Iniquity and festivals I cannot endure.
Your new moons and your feasts my soul hateth; They are a burden to me; I am weary of bearing them.
When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; Yea, when ye multiply prayers, I will not hear: Your hands are full of blood!
Wash you; make you clean; Put away your evil doings from before mine eyes;
Cease to do evil; Learn to do well; Seek justice; relieve the oppressed; Defend the fatherless; plead for the widow!
Come, now, and let us argue together, saith Jehovah. Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; Though they be red as crimson, they shall be like wool.
If ye be willing and obedient, Ye shall consume the good of the land.
But if ye refuse, and be rebellious, The sword shall consume you; For the mouth of Jehovah hath said it.
How is the faithful city become a harlot, She that was full of equity! Once justice dwelt in her, but now murderers!
Thy silver is become dross; Thy wine is adulterated with water.
Thy princes are faithless, companions of thieves; Every one of them loveth gifts, and seeketh rewards; They render not justice to the fatherless, And the cause of the widow cometh not before them.
Wherefore, thus saith the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, the Mighty One of Israel: Ha! I will ease me of mine adversaries, And avenge me of mine enemies.
And I will again turn my hand toward thee, And wholly purge away thy dross, And take away all thy alloy.
And I will restore thee judges, as at the first, And counsellors, as at the beginning. Then shalt thou be called the city of righteousness, the faithful city.
Through justice shall Zion be delivered, And her reformed sons through righteousness.
But destruction shall fall at once on the rebels and sinners; Yea, they that forsake Jehovah shall be consumed.
For ye shall be ashamed of the terebinths in which ye delighted; Ye shall blush for the gardens which ye loved;
And ye shall be as a terebinth-tree whose leaves are withered, And as a garden in which is no water.
The strong shall become tow, And his work a spark of fire; Both shall burn together, And none shall quench them.
The word, which was revealed to Isaiah, the son of Amoz, concerning Judah and Jerusalem.
It shall come to pass in the last days, That the mountain of the house of Jehovah shall be established at the head of the mountains, And exalted above the hills; And all nations shall flow unto it.
And many kingdoms shall go, and shall say, “Come, let us go to the mountain of Jehovah, To the house of the God of Jacob, That he may teach us his ways, And that we may walk in his paths!” For from Zion shall go forth a law, And the word of Jehovah from Jerusalem.
He shall be a judge of the nations, And an umpire of many kingdoms; And they shall beat their swords into ploughshares, And their spears into pruning-hooks; Nation shall not lift up the sword against nation, Neither shall they learn war any more.
O house of Jacob, come ye, And let us walk in the light of Jehovah!
For thou hast forsaken thy people, the house of Jacob, Because they are full of the East, And are sorcerers, like the Philistines, And strike hands with a foreign race!
Their land is full of silver and gold, And there is no end to their treasures; Their land is full of horses, And there is no end to their chariots;
Their land is full of idols; They bow down to the work of their own hands, To that which their own fingers have made.
Therefore shall the mean man be bowed down, And the great man be brought low; And thou wilt not forgive them!
Go into the rock, hide yourselves in the dust, From the terror of Jehovah, and the glory of his majesty!
The proud looks of man shall be humbled, And the loftiness of mortals shall be brought low; Jehovah alone shall be exalted in that day.
For Jehovah of hosts holdeth a day of judgment Against all that is proud and lofty; Against all that is exalted, and it shall be brought low;
Against all the cedars of Lebanon, the high and the exalted, And against all the oaks of Bashan;
Against all the lofty mountains, And against all the high hills;
Against every lofty tower, And against every high wall;
Against all the ships of Tarshish, And against all their beautiful flags.
The pride of man shall be humbled; The loftiness of mortals shall be brought low; Jehovah alone shall be exalted in that day.
The idols shall wholly pass away;
And men shall go into clefts of the rocks, and caves of the earth, From the terror of Jehovah, and the glory of his majesty, When he ariseth to make the earth tremble.
At that time shall men cast away their idols of silver and their idols of gold, Which they have made to worship, To the moles and the bats;
Fleeing into caves of the rocks, and clefts of the craggy rocks, From the terror of Jehovah, and the glory of his majesty, When he ariseth to make the earth tremble.
Trust, then, no more in man, Whose breath is in his nostrils! For what account is to be made of him!
For behold, the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, Taketh away from Jerusalem and from Judah every stay and support; The whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water;
The mighty man, and the warrior, The judge, the prophet, the diviner, and the sage,
The captain of fifty, and the honorable man, The counsellor, the expert in arts, and the skilful in charms.
And I will make boys their princes, And children shall rule over them.
And the people shall oppress one another, Man striving against man, and neighbor against neighbor; The boy shall behave himself insolently toward the aged, And the base toward the honorable.
Then shall a man take hold of his brother in his father's house, [[and say,]] Thou hast yet clothing, Be thou our ruler, And take this ruin into thy hands!
But in that day shall he lift up his hand, and say: I am no healer; In my house is neither bread nor raiment; Make not me ruler of the people!
For Jerusalem tottereth, and Judah falleth, Because their tongues and their deeds are against Jehovah, To provoke his holy eyes.
Their very countenance witnesseth against them; They publish their sin like Sodom; they hide it not; Woe to them, for they bring evil upon themselves!
Say ye of the righteous that it shall be well with him, For he shall eat the fruit of his doings.
Woe to the wicked, it shall be ill with him, For the work of his hands shall be repaid him!
As for my people, children are their oppressors, And women rule over them. O my people, thy leaders cause thee to err, And destroy the way in which thou walkest!
Jehovah standeth up to maintain his cause; He standeth up to judge his people.
Jehovah entereth into judgment with the elders of his people, and their princes: “So then ye have consumed the vineyard; The plunder of the poor is in your houses!
What mean ye, that ye crush my people, And grind the faces of the poor?” Saith Jehovah, the Lord of hosts.
Thus, also, saith Jehovah: Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, And walk with outstretched necks, And glance their eyes wantonly, Mincing their steps as they go, And tinkling with their foot-clasps,
Therefore will the Lord make their heads bald, And Jehovah will expose their nakedness.
In that day shall the Lord take from them The ornaments of the foot-clasps, and the net-works, and the crescents;
The ear-rings, and the bracelets, and the veils;
The turbans, and the ankle-chains, and the belts; The perfume-boxes, and the amulets;
The finger-rings, and the nose-jewels;
The embroidered robes, and the tunics, and the cloaks, and the purses;
The mirrors, and the linen shifts, and the head-bands, and the large veils.
And instead of perfume there shall be corruption; Instead of a belt, a rope; Instead of curled locks, baldness; Instead of a wide mantle, a covering of sackcloth; Fire-scars instead of beauty.
Thy men shall fall by the sword, Yea, thy mighty men in battle;
Her gates shall lament and mourn, And she, being desolate, shall sit upon the ground.
In that day shall seven women lay hold of one man saying: We will eat our own bread, And wear our own garments, Only let us be called by thy name, And take away our reproach!
In that day shall the increase of Jehovah be glorious and honorable, And the fruit of the land excellent and beautiful, For them that have escaped of Israel.
All that remain in Zion, And all that are left in Jerusalem, Shall be called holy; Every one that is written down for life in Jerusalem.
When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, And have removed the blood of Jerusalem from the midst of her, By a spirit of judgment and a spirit of destruction,
Then shall Jehovah create upon the whole extent of mount Zion, and upon her places of assembly, A cloud and smoke by day, And the brightness of a flaming fire by night; Yea, for all that is glorious there shall be a shelter;
There shall be a tent by day for a shadow from the heat, And for a refuge and shelter from the storm and rain.
Let me sing now a song respecting my friend, A song respecting my friend touching his vineyard. My friend had a vineyard On a very fruitful hill;
He digged it, and cleared it of stones, And planted it with the choicest vine, And built a tower in the midst of it, And hewed out a wine-press therein; Then he looked that it should bring forth its grapes, But it brought forth sour grapes.
And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, Judge ye between me and my vineyard!
What could have been done for my vineyard That I have not done for it? Why, then, when I looked that it should bring forth its grapes, Brought it forth sour grapes?
But come now, and I will tell you What I mean to do with my vineyard. I will take away its hedge, and it shall be eaten up; I will break down its wall, and it shall be trodden down!
And I will make it a waste; It shall not be pruned, nor digged, But shall grow up into thorns and briers; I will also command the clouds That they shed no rain upon it.
The vineyard of Jehovah of hosts is the house of Israel, And the men of Judah the plant of his delight. He looked for justice, and behold, bloodshed! For righteousness, and behold, outcry!
Woe to them that join house to house, That add field to field, Till there is no place left, And they dwell alone in the land.
To mine ear hath Jehovah of hosts revealed it: Surely many houses shall become a desolation, The great and the fair ones, without an inhabitant.
Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield a single bath of wine, And a homer of seed shall produce but an ephah.
Woe to them that rise early in the morning to follow strong drink,—Who sit late in the night that wine may inflame them!
And the lyre and the harp, the tabret and the pipe, and wine, are at their feasts, But they regard not the work of Jehovah, Nor attend to the operation of his hands.
Therefore shall my people be led captive, when they think not of it; Their honorable men shall be famished with hunger, And their rich men parched with thirst.
Therefore doth the under-world enlarge its greedy throat, And stretch open its mouth without measure, And down go her nobility and her wealth, Her busy throng, and all that was joyful within her.
The mean man shall be bowed down, And the great man shall be brought low, And the eyes of the haughty shall be humbled;
Jehovah of hosts shall be exalted through judgment; Yea, God, the Holy One, shall be sanctified through righteousness.
Then shall the lambs feed, as in their own pasture, And the deserted fields of the rich shall strangers consume.
Woe to them that draw calamity with cords of wickedness, And punishment as with wagon-traces,—
Who say, Let him make speed, let him hasten his work that we may see it! Let the purpose of the Holy One of Israel draw near and be fulfilled, that we may know it!
Woe to them that call evil good, and good evil, That put darkness for light, and light for darkness, That put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!
Woe to them that are wise in their own eyes, And prudent in their own conceit!
Woe to them that are valiant to drink wine, And men of might to mingle strong drink!
That clear the guilty for a reward, And take away from the righteous his right!
Therefore, as fire devours stubble, And as the withered grass sinks into the flame, So their root shall become rottenness, And their blossom shall fly up like dust. For they have despised the law of Jehovah of hosts, And contemned the word of the Holy One of Israel.
Therefore is the anger of Jehovah kindled against his people; He stretcheth forth his hand against them, and smiteth them, so that the mountains tremble, And their carcasses are as dung in the midst of the streets; For all this his anger is not turned away, But his hand is stretched out still.
He lifteth up a banner for the nations afar off, He whistleth for them from the ends of the earth, And behold, they haste, and come swiftly.
None among them is weary, and none stumbleth; None slumbereth nor sleepeth; The girdle of their loins is not loosed, Nor the latchet of their shoes broken.
Their arrows are sharp, And all their bows bent; The hoofs of their horses are like flint, And their wheels like a whirlwind.
Their roaring is like the roaring of the lion; They roar like young lions; They roar, and seize the prey; They bear it away, and none can rescue it.
Yea, in that day shall they roar against them like the roaring of the sea; And if one look to the land, behold darkness and sorrow, And the light is darkened by its clouds.
In the year in which King Uzziah died, I saw the Lord sitting on a throne high and lifted up, and the train of his robe filled the temple.
Around him stood seraphs; each one of them had six wings; with two he covered his face, with two he covered his feet, and with two he did fly.
And one called to another, and said: Holy, holy, holy is Jehovah of hosts; The whole earth is full of his glory.
And the foundations of the thresholds were shaken with the voice of their cry. And the temple was filled with smoke.
Then I said, Alas for me! I am undone! For I am a man of unclean lips, and dwell among a people of unclean lips, and mine eyes have seen the King, Jehovah of hosts.
Then flew one of the seraphs to me, having in his hands a glowing stone, which he had taken with the tongs from the altar.
And he touched my mouth, and said, Behold, this toucheth thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin is expiated.
And I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? And I said: Behold, here am I; send me!
And he said: Go, and say thou to this people, Hear ye, indeed, but understand not; See ye, indeed, but perceive not!
Make the heart of this people gross; Make their ears dull, and blind their eyes; That they may not see with their eyes, nor hear with their ears, Nor perceive with their hearts, and turn, and be healed.
Then said I, How long, Lord? He said: Until the cities be laid waste, so that there be no inhabitant, And the houses, so that there be no man, And the land be left utterly desolate;
Until Jehovah have removed the men far away, And there be great desolation in the land.
And though there be a tenth part remaining in it, Even this shall again be destroyed; Yet as when the terebinth and the oak are cut down, Their stem remaineth alive, So shall a holy race be the stem of the nation.
In the time of Ahaz, the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, Rezin, king of Syria, and Pekah, the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, came up against Jerusalem to besiege it; but he could not prevail against it.
And when it was told the house of David, that the Syrians had encamped in Ephraim, his heart was moved, and the hearts of his people, as the trees of the forest are moved with the wind.
Then said Jehovah to Isaiah, Go forth to meet Ahaz, thou and Shear-Jashub thy son, at the end of the aqueduct of the upper pool, in the way to the fuller's field;
and say to him: Take heed, and be quiet! Fear not, neither let thy heart he faint On account of the two tails of these smoking firebrands, On account of the fierce wrath of Rezin with the Syrians, and of the son of Remaliah,
Because Syria deviseth evil against thee, Ephraim and the son of Remaliah, saying,
“Let us go up against Judah, and besiege the city, And take it, And set a king in the midst of it, Even the son of Tabeal.”
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: “It shall not stand, neither shall it be;
But the head of Syria shall still be Damascus, And the head of Damascus, Rezin; [[And within threescore and five years shall Ephraim be broken, that he be no more a people.]]
And the head of Ephraim shall still be Samaria, And the head of Samaria, the son of Remaliah. If ye will not believe, neither shall ye thrive.”
Jehovah spake also again to Ahaz:
“Ask thee a sign of Jehovah, thy God; Ask it from below, or in the height above!”
And Ahaz said, I will not ask; I will not tempt Jehovah!
Then he said, Hear ye now, O house of David! Is it too small a thing for you to weary men, That ye should weary my God also?
Therefore shall Jehovah himself give you a sign: Behold, the damsel shall conceive, and bear a son, And she shall call his name Immanuel.
Milk and honey shall he eat, Until he learn to refuse the evil, and choose the good;
For before this child shall have learned to refuse the evil and choose the good, The land shall become desolate, On account of whose two kings thou art in terror.
Yet Jehovah shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon thy father's house, Days such as have not been Since Ephraim revolted from Judah. [[Even the king of Assyria.]]
And it shall come to pass in that day That Jehovah shall whistle for the fly that is at the end of the streams of Egypt, And the bee that is in the land of Assyria,
And they shall come, and light all of them In the desolate valleys, and fissures of the rocks, And upon all hedges, and upon all pastures.
In that day shall Jehovah shave, with a razor hired beyond the river, [[with the king of Assyria,]] The head, and the hair of the feet; Yea, even the beard shall he take away.
And it shall come to pass in that day, That a man shall keep a young cow, and two sheep;
And for the abundance of milk which they produce, shall he eat cheese; For milk and honey shall all eat Who are left in the land,
And it shall come to pass in that day, That every place where stood a thousand vines, worth a thousand shekels of silver, Shall be covered with briers and thorns.
With arrows and with bows shall men go thither; For all the land shall become briers and thorns.
All the hills that were digged with the mattock Shall no one approach through fear of briers and thorns; They shall be for the pasturage of oxen, And the trampling of sheep.
And Jehovah said to me, Take thee a great tablet, and with a man's writing-instrument write on it, Hasteth-the-prey, Speedeth-the-spoil.
And I took with me faithful witnesses, Uriah the priest, and Zechariah, the son of Berechiah.
I went in to the prophetess, and she conceived and bore a son. Then said Jehovah to me, Call his name, Hasteth-the-prey, Speedeth-the-spoil.
For before the child shall learn to say, My father, and My mother, the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria shall be borne away before the king of Assyria.
Moreover, Jehovah spake to me again, saying:
Because this people despiseth The soft-flowing waters of Siloah, And rejoiceth in Rezin, and the son of Remaliah,
Therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth upon them the strong and mighty waters of the river; [[The king of Assyria and all his glory.]] He shall rise above all his channels, And go over all his banks.
And he shall pass through Judah, overflowing and spreading; Even to the neck shall he reach, And his stretched-out wings shall fill the whole breadth of thy land, O Immanuel!
Rage, ye nations, and despair! Give ear, all ye distant parts of the earth! Gird yourselves, and despair! Gird yourselves, and despair!
Form your plan, and it shall come to naught; Give the command, and it shall not stand; For God is with us.
For thus spake Jehovah to me with a strong hand, Instructing me not to walk in the way of this people:
Call not everything a confederacy which this people calleth a confederacy; Fear ye not what they fear, Neither be afraid!
Jehovah of hosts, sanctify ye him; Let him be your fear, and let him be your dread!
And he shall be to you a sanctuary; But a stone of stumbling, and a rock to strike against, To the two houses of Israel, A trap and a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
And many among them shall stumble; They shall fall, and be broken; They shall be ensnared and taken.
Bind up the revelation, Seal the word, with my disciples!
I will, therefore, wait for Jehovah, Who now hideth his face from the house of Jacob; Yet will I look for him.
Behold, I, and the children which Jehovah hath given me, Are signs and tokens in Israel From Jehovah of hosts, who dwelleth upon mount Zion.
And when they shall say to you, “Inquire of the necromancers and the wizards, That chirp, and that murmur,” [[Then say ye,]] “Should not a people inquire of their God? Should they inquire of the dead for the living?”
To the word, to the revelation! If they speak not according to this, For them no bright morning shall arise.
They shall pass through the land distressed and famished; And when they are famished, they shall be enraged, and curse their king and their God, And look upward.
And if they look to the earth, Behold distress and darkness, fearful darkness! And into darkness shall they be driven.
But the darkness shall not remain where now is distress; Of old he brought the land of Zebulon and the land of Naphtali into contempt; In future times shall he bring the land of the sea beyond Jordan, the circle of the gentiles, into honor.
The people that walk in darkness behold a great light; They who dwell in the land of death-like shade, Upon them a light shineth.
Thou enlargest the nation; Thou increasest their joy; They rejoice before thee with the joy of harvest, With the joy of those who divide the spoil.
For thou breakest their heavy yoke, And the rod that smote their backs, And the scourge of the taskmaster, As in the day of Midian.
For every greave of the warrior in battle, And the war-garment rolled in blood, Shall be burned; yea, it shall be food for the fire.
For to us a child is born, To us a son is given, And the government shall be upon his shoulder, And he shall be called Wonderful, counsellor, mighty potentate, Everlasting father, prince of peace;
His dominion shall be great, And peace without end shall be upon the throne of David and his kingdom, To fix and establish it Through justice and equity, Henceforth and forever. The zeal of Jehovah of hosts will do this.
The Lord sendeth a word against Jacob; It cometh down to Israel.
His whole people shall feel it, Ephraim, and the inhabitants of Samaria, Who say in pride and arrogance of heart,
“The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones; The sycamores are cut down, but we will replace them with cedars.”
Jehovah will raise up the enemies of Rezin against them, And will arm their adversaries;
The Syrians before, the Philistines behind, Who shall devour Israel with wide jaws. For all this his anger is not turned away, But his hand is stretched out still.
The people turn not to him that smiteth them; Neither do they seek Jehovah of hosts.
Therefore shall Jehovah cut off from Israel the head and the tail, The palm-branch and the rush, in one day.
[[The aged and the honorable are the head, And the prophet that speaketh falsehood is the tail.]]
For the leaders of this people lead them astray, And they that are led by them go to destruction.
Therefore shall the Lord have no joy in their young men, And on their orphans and widows he shall have no compassion; For they are all profane, and evil-doers; Every mouth speaketh folly. For all this his anger is not turned away, But his hand is stretched out still.
For wickedness burneth like a fire, It consumeth the briers and thorns, And it kindleth the thicket of the forest, So that it goeth up in columns of smoke.
Through the wrath of Jehovah of hosts is the land burned, And the people are food for the fire; No one spareth another.
They consume on the right hand, and yet are hungry; They devour on the left, and are not satisfied; Every one devoureth the flesh of his arm.
Manasseh is against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh, And both together against Judah. For all this his anger is not turned away, But his hand is stretched out still.
Woe to them that make unrighteous decrees, That write oppressive decisions,
To turn away the needy from judgment, And rob the poor of my people of their right; That the widows may become their prey, And that they may plunder the orphans.
What will ye do in the day of visitation, And in the desolation which cometh from afar? To whom will ye flee for help, And where will ye leave your glory?
Forsaken by me, they shall sink down among the prisoners, And fall among the slain. For all this his anger is not turned away, But his hand is stretched out still.
Woe to the Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, The staff in whose hands is the instrument of my indignation!
Against an impious nation I will send him, And against a people under my wrath I will give him a charge To gather the spoil, and seize the prey, And to trample them under foot like the mire of the streets.
But he doth not so purpose, And his heart doth not so intend; But to destroy is in his heart, And to cut off a multitude of nations.
For he saith, “Are not my princes altogether kings?
Is not Calno as Carchemish? Is not Hamath as Arpad? Is not Samaria as Damascus?
As my hand hath seized the kingdoms of the idols, Whose graven images were more numerous than those of Jerusalem and Samaria,
Behold! as I have done to Samaria and her idols, So will I do to Jerusalem and her images.”
But when the Lord hath accomplished his whole work upon Mount Zion and Jerusalem, Then will he punish the fruit of the proud heart of the king of Assyria, And the arrogance of his lofty eyes.
For he hath said: “By the strength of my hand I have done it, And by my wisdom; for I am wise; I have removed the bounds of nations, I have plundered their treasures; As a hero have I brought down them that sat upon thrones.
The riches of the nations hath my hand seized, as a nest; As one gathereth eggs that have been left, So have I gathered the whole world. And there was none that moved the wing, Or that opened the beak, or that chirped.”
Shall the axe boast itself against him that heweth with it? Or shall the saw magnify itself against him that moveth it? As if the rod should wield him that lifteth it! As if the staff should lift up him that is not wood!
Wherefore the Lord, the Lord of hosts, shall send upon his fat ones leanness, And under his glory shall he kindle a burning, like the burning of a fire.
The light of Israel shall be a fire, And his Holy One a flame, Which shall burn and devour his thorns and briers in one day.
The glory of his forest and of his fruitful field From the spirit even to the flesh shall he consume; It shall be with them as when a sick man fainteth.
The remaining trees of the forest shall be few, So that a child may write them down.
In that day shall the remnant of Israel, and they that have escaped of the house of Jacob, no more lean upon him that smote them; They shall lean upon Jehovah, the Holy One of Israel, in truth.
The remnant shall return, the remnant of Jacob, to the mighty Potentate;
For though thy people, O Israel, be as the sand of the sea, Only a remnant of them shall return. The devastation is decreed; It shall overflow with righteousness.
For devastation and punishment doth the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, execute in the midst of the whole land,
Yet thus saith the Lord, Jehovah of hosts: Fear not, O my people, that dwellest in Zion, because of the Assyrian! With his rod indeed shall he smite thee, And lift up his staff against thee in the manner of Egypt;
But yet a very little while, and my indignation shall have past, And my anger shall destroy them.
Jehovah of hosts shall raise up against him a scourge, As he smote Midian at the rock of Horeb, And as he lifted up the rod against the sea; Yea, he shall lift it up, as in Egypt.
In that day shall his burden be removed from thy shoulder, And his yoke from thy neck; Yea, thy yoke shall be broken, as that of a fat steer.
He is come to Aiath; he passeth through Migron; In Michmash he leaveth his baggage;
They pass the strait; At Geba they make their night-quarters; Ramah trembleth; Gibeah of Saul fleeth.
Cry aloud, O daughter of Gallim! Hear, O Laish! Alas, poor Anathoth!
Madmenah hasteth away; The inhabitants of Gebim take to flight.
Yet one day shall he rest at Nob, Then shall he shake his hand against the mount of the daughter of Zion, The hill of Jerusalem.
But behold! the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, shall lop the branches with fearful force, And the high of stature shall be cut down, And the lofty shall be brought low.
He shall hew the thickets of the forest with iron, And Lebanon shall fall by a mighty hand.
Then shall spring forth a shoot from the stem of Jesse, And a sprout grow up from his roots.
The spirit of Jehovah shall rest upon him, The spirit of wisdom and understanding, The spirit of counsel and might, The spirit of the knowledge and of the fear of Jehovah,
He shall take delight in the fear of Jehovah; He shall not judge by the sight of his eyes, Nor decide by the hearing of his ears.
But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, And decide with equity for the afflicted of the land; He shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth; With the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.
Righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, And faithfulness the girdle of his reins.
Then shall the wolf dwell with the lamb, And the leopard shall lie down with the kid; The calf, and the young lion, and the fatling shall be together, And a little child shall lead them.
The cow and the bear shall feed together, Together shall their young lie down, And the lion shall eat straw like the ox.
The suckling shall play upon the hole of the asp, And the near-weaned child lay his hand on the hiding-place of the basilisk.
They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain; For the land shall be full of the knowledge of Jehovah, As the waters cover the depths of the sea.
In that day shall the shoot of Jesse stand as a banner to the nations, And to him shall the gentiles repair, And his dwelling-place shall be glorious.
In that day shall Jehovah the second time stretch forth his hand To recover the remnant of his people, That remaineth, from Assyria, and from Egypt, And from Pathros, and from Ethiopia, and from Elam, And from Shinar, and from Hamath, And from the islands of the sea.
He shall set up a banner to the nations, And gather the outcasts of Israel, And bring together the dispersed of Judah, From the four extremities of the earth.
Then shall the jealousy of Ephraim depart, And the enmity in Judah be at an end; Ephraim shall not be jealous of Judah, And Judah shall not contend with Ephraim.
But they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines at the sea; Together shall they plunder the children of the East; On Edom and Moab shall they lay their hand, And the sons of Ammon shall be subject to them.
Then will Jehovah utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea, And shake his hand over the river with a mighty wind, And smite it into seven streams, So that men may go over it dry-shod.
And it shall be a highway for the remnant of the people, Which shall remain, from Assyria, As there was to Israel, When he came up from the land of Egypt.
In that day shalt thou say, “I will praise thee, O Jehovah, for, though thou hast been angry with me, Thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortest me.
Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and will not be afraid; For Jehovah is my glory, and my song; It is he who was my salvation.”
Ye shall draw waters with joy from the fountains of salvation;
And in that day ye shall say, “Give thanks to Jehovah; call upon his name; Make known his deeds among the people; Give praises, for his name is exalted!
Sing to Jehovah, for he hath done glorious things; Be this known in all the earth!
Cry aloud, shout for joy, O inhabitant of Zion, For great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee!”
A prophecy concerning Babylon, which Isaiah, the son of Amoz, saw.
Upon the bare mountain lift up a banner; Cry aloud to them, wave the hand, That they may enter the gates of the tyrants!
I have given orders to my consecrated ones, Yea, I have called upon my mighty ones to execute mine anger, My proud exulters!
The noise of a multitude upon the mountains, like that of a great people! The tumultuous noise of kingdoms, of nations gathered together! Jehovah of hosts mustereth his army for battle.
They come from a distant country, From the end of Heaven, Jehovah and the instruments of his indignation. To lay waste the whole land.
Howl ye, for the day of Jehovah is at hand! Like a destruction from the Almighty, it cometh;
Therefore shall all hands hang down, And every heart of man shall melt.
They shall be in consternation; Distress and anguish shall lay hold of them; As a woman in travail shall they writhe; They shall look upon one another with amazement: Their faces shall glow like flames.
Behold! the day of Jehovah cometh, Terrible, full of wrath and burning indignation, To make the land a waste, And to destroy the sinners out of it.
For the stars of heaven, and the constellations thereof, Shall not give their light; The sun shall be darkened at his going forth, And the moon shall withhold her light.
For I will punish the world for its guilt, And the wicked for their iniquity. I will put an end to the arrogance of the proud, And I will bring down the haughtiness of the tyrants.
I will make men scarcer than gold; Yea, men than the gold of Ophir.
Therefore I will make the heavens tremble, And the earth shall be shaken out of her place, In the anger of Jehovah of hosts, In the day of his burning indignation.
Then shall they be like a chased doe; Like a flock, which no one gathereth together; Every one shall turn to his own people, And every one flee to his own land.
Every one that is overtaken shall be thrust through, And every one that is caught shall fall by the sword.
Their children shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes; Their houses shall be plundered, and their wives ravished.
Behold, I stir up against them the Medes, Who make no account of silver, And as to gold, they do not regard it.
Their bows shall strike down the young men, And on the fruit of the womb they shall have no compassion; Their eye shall not pity the children.
So shall Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, The proud ornament of the Chaldeans, Be like Sodom and Gomorrah, which God overthrew,
It shall never more be inhabited; Nor shall it be dwelt in through all generations. Nor shall the Arabian pitch his tent there, Nor shall shepherds make their folds there.
But there shall the wild beasts of the desert lodge, And owls shall fill their houses; And ostriches shall dwell there, And satyrs shall dance there.
Wolves shall howl in their palaces, And jackals in their pleasant edifices. Her time is near, And her days shall not be prolonged.
For Jehovah will have compassion upon Jacob, And will again set his love upon Israel, And cause them to rest in his own land. And strangers shall join themselves to them, And cleave to the house of Jacob.
The nations shall take them and bring them to their own place; And the house of Israel shall possess them, in the land of Jehovah, As servants and as handmaids; They shall take captive their captors, And they shall rule over their oppressors.
So when Jehovah shall have given thee rest From thy sorrow and thy distress, And from the hard bondage Which was laid upon thee,
Then shall thou utter this song over the king of Babylon, and say, “How hath the tyrant fallen, The oppression ceased!
Jehovah hath broken the staff of the wicked, The rod of the tyrants,
That smote the people in anger, With a continual stroke, That lorded it over the nations in wrath With unremitted oppression.
The whole earth is at rest, is quiet; They break forth into singing.
Even the cypress-trees exult over thee, And the cedars of Lebanon: 'Since thou art fallen, No feller cometh up against us.'
The under-world is in commotion on account of thee, To meet thee at thy coming; It stirreth up before thee the shades, all the mighty of the earth; It arouseth from their thrones all the kings of the nations;
They all accost thee, and say, 'Art thou, too, become weak as we? Art thou become like us?'
Thy pomp is brought down to the grave, And the sound of thy harps. Vermin have become thy couch, And worms thy covering.
How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! How art thou cast down to the ground, Thou that didst trample upon the nations!
Thou saidst in thy heart, 'I will ascend to heaven, Above the stars of God will I exalt my throne; I will sit upon the mount of assembly in the recesses of the north.
I will ascend above the height of the clouds; I will be like the Most High.'
But thou art brought down to the grave, To the depths of the pit.
They that see thee gaze upon thee, and view thee attentively, (and say,) 'Is this the man that made the earth tremble, That shook kingdoms,
That made the world a wilderness, And laid waste its cities, And sent not his captives to their homes?'
All the kings of the nations, yea, all of them, Lie down in glory, each in his own sepulchre;
But thou art cast forth without a grave, Like a worthless branch; Covered with the slain, who are pierced by the sword, Who go down to the stones of the pit, Like a carcass trampled under foot.
Thou shalt not be joined with them in the grave, Because thou hast destroyed thy country, And slain thy people; The race of evil-doers shall nevermore be named.
Prepare ye slaughter for his children, For the iniquity of their fathers, That they may no more arise, and possess the earth, And fill the world with enemies!”
For I will arise against them, saith Jehovah of hosts, And I will cut off from Babylon the name and remnant, Posterity and offspring, saith Jehovah.
I will make her the possession of the porcupine, and pools of water; Yea, I will sweep her away with the besom of destruction, saith Jehovah of hosts.
Jehovah of hosts hath sworn, saying, Surely, as I have devised, so shall it come to pass, The purpose which I have formed, that shall stand,
To crush the Assyrian in my land, And to trample him on my mountains. Then shall his yoke depart from them, And his burden be removed from their shoulders.
This is the purpose which is formed concerning all the earth, And this the hand which is stretched out over all the nations.
For Jehovah of hosts hath decreed, and who shall disannul it? And his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?
In the year in which Ahaz the king died came this prophecy.
Rejoice not, all Philistia, Because the rod that smote thee is broken, For from the root of a serpent shall come forth a basilisk, And his fruit shall be a flying, fiery serpent.
Then shall the most wretched of the poor feed quietly, And the needy shall lie down in security; For I will kill thy root with famine, And thy remnant shall be slain.
Howl, O gate! cry aloud, O city! O Philistia, thou meltest away in terror! For from the north cometh a smoke, And there is no straggler in their hosts.
What answer shall be given to the messengers of the nations? That Jehovah hath founded Zion, And in her shall the poor of his people find refuge.
The prophecy concerning Moab. Yea! in the night of assault was Ar of Moab a ruin! In the night of assault was Kir of Moab a ruin!
They go up to the temple, and to Dibon, to weep upon the high places; Upon Nebo and upon Medeba doth Moab howl; On every head is baldness, And every beard is shorn.
In their streets they gird themselves with sackcloth; On the tops of their houses and in their public walks every one howleth, And melteth away with weeping.
Heshbon and Elealah utter a cry; Even to Jahaz is their voice heard; Therefore the warriors of Moab shriek aloud; Their hearts tremble within them.
My heart crieth out for Moab, Whose fugitives wander to Zoar, to Eglath-shelishijah; For they ascend the heights of Luhith weeping, And in the way of Horonaim they raise the cry of destruction.
For the waters of Nimrim are desolate; The grass is withered; the tender plant faileth; There is no green thing left.
Wherefore the remnant of their substance and their wealth They shall carry to the brook of willows.
For the cry encompasseth the borders of Moab; Even to Eglaim reacheth her wailing, To Beer-Elim her howling.
For the waters of Dimon are full of blood; For I bring new evils upon Dimon; Upon him that escapeth of Moab will I send a lion, Even upon him that remaineth in the land.
Send ye the lambs to the ruler of the land, From Selah through the wilderness To the mount of the daughter of Zion!
For as a wandering bird, As a forthdriven nest, So shall be the daughters of Moab At the fords of Arnon; [[saying,]]
“Offer counsel; give decision, Make thy shadow at noonday like the darkness of night. Hide the outcasts; Betray not the fugitives.
Let my outcasts dwell with thee, [[O Zion!]] Be thou to them a covert from the spoiler! For the extortion is at an end, The spoiling ceaseth. The oppressors are consumed from the land.
Then shall your throne be established through mercy, And upon it shall sit in the house of David A judge searching for justice, and prompt in equity.”
“We have beard of the pride of Moab; he is very proud; His haughtiness, and his pride, and his insolence, His vain boastings.”
Therefore shall Moab howl for Moab; Every one shall howl; For the ruins of Kir-hares shall ye mourn, In deep affliction.
For the fields of Heshbon languish, The lords of the nations break down the choicest shoots of the vine of Sibmah, They reached even to Jazer; they wandered into the desert; Her branches were spread out; they crossed the sea.
Therefore I will weep, like Jazer, for the vine of Sibmah; I will water thee with my tears, O Heshbon and Elealah, For upon thy summer fruits, and thy harvest, the war-shout is fallen.
Gladness and joy are driven from the fruitful field, And in the vineyards is no singing nor shouting; The treaders tread out no wine in their vats; I have made the vintage-shouting to cease.
Therefore shall my bowels sound like a harp for Moab, And my inward parts for Kir-hares.
And it shall come to pass that though Moab present himself, Though he weary himself upon his high places, And go up to his sanctuary to pray, Yet shall he not prevail.
This is the word which Jehovah spake concerning Moab of old.
But now saith Jehovah: Within three years, like the years of a hireling, The glory of Moab shall be put to shame, With all his great multitude; And the remnant shall be very small, and without strength.
The prophecy concerning Damascus. Behold, Damascus shall be no more a city; It shall become a heap of ruins.
The cities of Aroer shall be forsaken; They shall be pastures for flocks, Which shall lie down, and none shall make them afraid.
The fortress shall cease from Ephraim, And the kingdom from Damascus, and the rest of Syria; It shall be with them as with the glory of the children of Israel, Saith Jehovah of hosts.
In that day shall the glory of Jacob sink away, And the fatness of his flesh become leanness.
And it shall be as when the harvest-man gathereth the corn, And reapeth the ears with his arm; Yea, as when one gleaneth ears in the valley of Rephaim.
There shall be left in it only a gleaning, as in the olive-harvest, Two or three berries on the top of the highest bough, Four or five on the fruitful branches, Saith Jehovah, the God of Israel.
In that day shall a man have regard to his Maker, And his eyes shall look to the Holy One of Israel.
He shall not look to the altars, the work of his hands, Nor have respect to that which his fingers have made, The images of Astarte and the Sun-pillars.
In that day shall his fortified cities be like ruins in the forests, or on the mountain tops, Which the enemy left, in flight from the children of Israel; And the land shall be a desolation.
For thou hast forgotten the God of thy salvation, And hast not been mindful of the rock of thy strength; Therefore though thou plant beautiful plants, And set shoots from a foreign soil,
When thou hast planted them, though thou hedge them in, And in the morning bring thy plants to the blossom, Yet shall the harvest flee away, In the day of pain and desperate sorrow.
Alas! a tumult of many nations! They rage with the raging of the sea. Alas! a roaring of kingdoms! They roar with the roaring of mighty waters.
Like the roaring of mighty waters do the nations roar; He rebuketh them, and they flee away, Driven like the chaff of the mountains before the wind, Like stubble before the whirlwind.
At the time of evening, behold, terror! Before morning, behold, they are no more! This is the portion of them that spoil us, And the lot of them that plunder us.
Ho! thou land of rustling wings, Beyond the rivers of Ethiopia!
That sendest thy messengers upon the sea, In reed-boats upon the face of the waters: Go, ye swift messengers, to a nation tall and fair, To a people terrible from the first and onward, To a mighty, victorious people, Whose land is divided by rivers!
All ye inhabitants of the world, ye that dwell on the earth, When the standard is lifted up on the mountains, behold! When the trumpet is sounded, hear!
For thus hath Jehovah said to me: “I will sit still, and look on from my dwelling-place, Like a serene heat when the sun shineth, Like a dewy cloud in the heat of harvest.”
But before the vintage, when the bud is gone, And the blossom is ripening into a swelling grape, He shall cut off the shoots with pruning-hooks, And the branches he shall take away and cut down.
They shall be left together to the ravenous birds of the mountains, And to the wild beasts of the earth. The ravenous birds shall summer upon it, And every wild beast of the earth shall winter upon it.
At that time shall gifts be brought to Jehovah of hosts From a nation tall and fair, From a people terrible from the first and onward, A mighty, victorious people, Whose land is divided by rivers, To the dwelling-place of Jehovah of hosts, to mount Zion.
The prophecy concerning Egypt. Behold, Jehovah rideth upon a swift cloud, And cometh to Egypt; The gods of Egypt tremble at his presence, And the heart of Egypt melteth within her.
“I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians; Brother shall fight against brother, And neighbor against neighbor; City against city, And kingdom against kingdom.
The spirit of Egypt shall fail within her, And her devices I will bring to naught. Then shall they consult the idols, and the sorcerers, And the necromancers, and the wizards.
But I will give up the Egyptians to the hands of a cruel lord, And a fierce king shall rule over them,” Saith the Lord, Jehovah of hosts.
Then shall the waters fail from the river, Yea, the river shall be wasted and dried up.
The streams shall become putrid; The canals of Egypt shall be emptied and dried up; The reed and the rush shall wither.
The meadows by the river, by the borders of the river, And all that groweth by the river, Shall wither, be blasted, and be no more.
Then shall the fishermen mourn; All they that cast the hook into the river shall lament, And they that spread nets upon the face of the waters shall languish.
They, also, that work in flax, And they that weave white linen, shall be confounded.
Her pillars are broken down, And all who labor for hire are grieved in heart.
Surely the princes of Zoan are fools; The wise counsellors of Pharaoh have been stupid in their counsels. How, then, can ye say to Pharaoh, “I am the son of the wise, The son of ancient kings”?
Where are they now, thy wise men? Let them tell thee now, so that men may know it, What Jehovah of hosts hath determined concerning Egypt!
The princes of Zoan are become fools; The princes of Noph are deceived, Even the chiefs of her tribes have caused Egypt to err.
Jehovah hath mingled within her a spirit of perverseness, And they have caused Egypt to err in all her works, As a drunkard staggereth in his vomit.
There shall be nothing which can be done by Egypt, By the head, or the tail, the palm-branch, or the rush.
In that day shall the Egyptians be like women; They shall tremble and fear On account of the shaking of the hand of Jehovah of hosts, Which he shall shake against them.
The land of Judah shall be a terror to Egypt; Every one to whom it is mentioned shall tremble On account of the purpose of Jehovah of hosts, Which he hath determined against them.
In that day there shall be five cities in the land of Egypt Speaking the language of Canaan, And swearing by Jehovah of hosts; One of them shall be called the City of the Sun.
In that day there shall be an altar to Jehovah in the midst of the land of Egypt, And in the border of it a pillar to Jehovah,
Which shall be a sign and a witness For Jehovah of hosts in the land of Egypt, That they cried to Jehovah on account of their oppressors, And he sent them a saviour, and a defender, who delivered them.
Thus shall Jehovah be made known to Egypt, And the Egyptians shall know Jehovah in that day, And shall offer him sacrifices and oblations; They shall make vows to Jehovah, and perform them.
Thus Jehovah will smite Egypt; he will smite and heal her; They shall return to Jehovah; Therefore will he hear and heal them.
In that day shall there he a highway from Egypt to Assyria, And the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, And the Egyptian into Assyria, And the Egyptians shall worship with the Assyrians.
In that day shall Israel be the third In connection with Egypt and Assyria, A blessing in the midst of the earth.
Jehovah of hosts shall bless them, and say, Blessed be Egypt, my people, And Assyria, the work of my hands, And Israel, my inheritance!
In the year in which Tartan, being sent by Sargon, the king of Assyria, came to Ashdod, and fought against Ashdod, and took it,
at that time spake Jehovah through Isaiah the son of Amoz in this manner: Go, and loose the sackcloth from thy loins, and put off thy shoes from thy feet. And he did so, walking naked and barefoot.
And Jehovah said: As my servant Isaiah hath walked naked and barefoot three years, a sign and a token for Egypt and Ethiopia,
so shall the king of Assyria lead the captives of Egypt, and prisoners of Ethiopia, young and old, naked and barefoot, with their hind parts uncovered, to the shame of the Egyptians.
Then shall they be afraid and ashamed on account of Ethiopia their trust, and of Egypt their glory.
The inhabitant of this coast shall say in that day, “Behold, so is it with them in whom we trusted, and to whom we fled for help, that we might be delivered from the king of Assyria. How then shall we escape?”
The prophecy concerning the desert of the sea. As storms which rush along through the south, So it cometh from the desert, From the terrible land.
A grievous vision was revealed to me; The plunderer plundereth, and the destroyer destroyeth. “Go up, O Elam! Besiege, O Media! All sighing do I make to cease.”
Therefore are my loins full of pain; Pangs have seized me, as the pangs of a woman in travail; For convulsions I cannot hear; For anguish I cannot see.
My heart panteth, Terror hath seized upon me; The evening of my desire is changed into horror.
The table is prepared; the watch is set; They eat; they drink; “Arise, ye princes! Anoint the shield!”
For thus said the Lord unto me: “Go, set a watchman, Who shall declare what he seeth.”
And he saw a troop, horsemen in pairs, Riders on asses, and riders on camels, And he watched with the utmost heed.
Then he cried like a lion: “My Lord, I stand continually upon the watch-tower in the daytime, And keep my post all the night;
And behold, there cometh a troop, Horsemen in pairs.” Again also he lifted up his voice, and said: “Fallen, fallen is Babylon, And all the graven images of her gods are cast broken to the ground.”
O my threshing, and the corn of my floor! What I have heard from Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, That have I declared to you.
The prophecy concerning Dumah. A voice came to me from Seir: “Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night?”
The watchman saith: “Morning cometh, and also night. If ye will inquire, inquire! Return, come!”
The prophecy against the Arabians. In the thickets of Arabia shall ye lodge, O ye caravans of Dedan!
The inhabitants of the land of Tema Bring water to the thirsty; They come to meet the fugitive with bread.
For they flee from swords, From the drawn sword, And from the bent bow, And from the fury of war.
For thus saith the Lord to me: Within one year, according to the years of a hireling, Shall all the glory of Kedar be consumed.
The remainder of the mighty bowmen of the sons of Kedar shall be diminished; For Jehovah, the God of Israel, hath said it.
The prophecy concerning the valley of vision. What aileth thee now, That all thine inhabitants are gone up to the house-tops?
Thou that wast full of noise, A tumultuous city, a joyous city! Thy slain fall not by the sword; They are not slain in battle.
All thy leaders flee together, By the bowmen are they bound; All found within thee are made captive together, Even they who have fled from afar.
Therefore, say I, look away from me, that I may weep bitterly; Strive not to comfort me for the desolation of the daughter of my people!
For a day of trouble, of desolation, and of perplexity cometh From the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, in the valley of vision. They break down the walls; The cry reacheth to the mountains.
Elam beareth the quiver, With chariots full of men, and with horsemen; Kir uncovereth the shield.
Thy fairest valleys, [[O Jerusalem,]] are full of chariots; The horsemen set themselves in array against the gate;
The veil of Judah is torn from her. But in such a day ye look to the armor of the house of the forest;
Ye mark how many are the breaches of the city of David, And collect the waters of the lower pool;
Ye number the houses of Jerusalem, And ye break down the houses to prepare the wall;
Ye make a reservoir between the two walls for the waters of the old pool; But ye look not to Him who hath done this; Ye regard not Him that hath prepared this from afar.
The Lord, Jehovah of hosts, calleth you this day To weeping and to lamentation, To baldness and to girding with sackcloth.
But, behold, joy and gladness, Slaying oxen and killing sheep, Eating flesh and drinking wine! “Let us eat and drink, For to-morrow we die!”
Therefore it hath been revealed in my ears by Jehovah of hosts; “This iniquity shall not be forgiven you, till ye die,” Saith the Lord, Jehovah of hosts.
Thus saith the Lord, Jehovah of hosts: Go in to this steward, To Shebna, who is over the household, and say,
What hast thou here, and whom hast thou here, That thou here hewest thee out a sepulchre,—That thou hewest out thy sepulchre on high, And gravest out a habitation for thyself in the rock?
Behold, Jehovah will cast thee headlong with a mighty thrust;
He will violently roll thee together like a ball; Like a ball will he hurl thee into a wide country. There shalt thou die; And there shall be thy splendid chariots, Thou disgrace of the house of thy lord!
I will drive thee from thy post, And from thy station I will pull thee down.
In that day I will call my servant, Even Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah;
I will clothe him with thy robe, And bind thy girdle around him; Thy government will I commit to his hand, And he shall be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, And to the house of Judah.
I will lay the key of the house of David upon his shoulder; He shall open, and none shall shut, And he shall shut, and none shall open.
I will fasten him as a peg in a sure place, And he shall be a glorious seat for his father's house.
Upon him shall hang all the glory of his father's house, The offspring and the offshoots; Every small vessel, from the goblet even to all the pitchers.
In that day, saith Jehovah of hosts, The peg that was once fastened in a sure place shall be moved; It shall be cut down, and fall, And the burden which was upon it shall come to the ground. For Jehovah hath said it.
The prophecy concerning Tyre. Howl, ye ships of Tarshish! For it is laid waste; No house, no entrance is left! From the land of the Chittaeans were the tidings brought to them.
Be amazed, ye inhabitants of the sea-coast, Which the merchants of Sidon, that pass over the sea, did crowd!
Upon the wide waters, the corn of the Nile, The harvest of the river, was her revenue; She was the mart of the nations.
Be thou ashamed, O Sidon, for the sea hath spoken, The fortress of the sea hath spoken thus: “I have not travailed, nor brought forth children; I have not nourished youths, nor brought up virgins.”
When the tidings shall reach Egypt, They shall be filled with anguish at the tidings concerning Tyre.
Pass ye over to Tarshish; Howl, ye inhabitants of the sea-coast!
Is this your joyous city, Whose antiquity is of ancient days? Now her own feet bear her To sojourn far away.
Who hath purposed this against Tyre, The dispenser of crowns, Whose merchants are princes, Whose traders the nobles of the earth?
Jehovah of hosts hath purposed it, To bring down the pride of all glory, To humble the nobles of the earth.
Go over thy land like the Nile, O daughter of Tarshish! Now thy bonds are broken.
He hath stretched out his hand over the sea, He hath made the kingdoms tremble; Jehovah hath given commandment concerning Canaan To destroy her strong holds.
He hath said, Thou shalt no more rejoice, Thou ravished virgin, daughter of Sidon! Arise, pass over to the Chittaeans; Yet even there shalt thou have no rest.
Behold the land of the Chaldaeans, Who, not long ago, were not a people,—The Assyrian assigned it to the inhabitants of the wilderness,—They raise their watch-towers; They destroy her palaces; They make her a heap of ruins.
Howl, ye ships of Tarshish! For your stronghold is destroyed.
And it shall come to pass in that day, That Tyre shall be forgotten seventy years, According to the days of one king; But at the end of seventy years It shall be with Tyre as in the song of the harlot:
“Take thy lyre, go about the city, O harlot, long forgotten; Make sweet melody; sing many songs, That thou mayst again be remembered!”
At the end of seventy years shall Jehovah show regard to Tyre, And she shall return to her hire, And play the harlot with all the kingdoms of the world, That are upon the face of the earth.
But her gain and her hire shall be holy to Jehovah; It shall not be treasured, nor laid up in store; But it shall be for them that dwell before Jehovah, For abundant food, and for splendid clothing.
Behold, Jehovah emptieth and draineth the land; Yea, he turneth it upside down, and scattereth its inhabitants.
As with the people, so is it with the priest; As with the servant, so with the master; As with the maid, so with the mistress; As with the buyer, so with the seller; As with the borrower, so with the lender; As with the usurer, so with the giver of usury.
The land is utterly emptied and utterly plundered; For Jehovah hath spoken this word.
The land mourneth, and withereth; The world languisheth, and withereth; The nobles of the people of the land do languish.
The land was polluted under its inhabitants, Because they transgressed the law, they violated the statutes, They broke the everlasting covenant.
Therefore a curse devoured the land; Its inhabitants suffered for their guilt; Therefore are the inhabitants of the land consumed with heat, And few of the men are left.
The new wine mourneth; The vine languisheth; All that were of a joyful heart do sigh;
The mirth of tabrets ceaseth; The noise of them that rejoice is at an end; The joy of the harp ceaseth.
No more do they drink wine with the song; Strong drink is bitter to them that use it.
The city of desolation is broken down; Every house is closed, so that none can enter.
There is a cry for wine in the streets; All gladness is departed; The mirth of the land is gone;
Desolation is left in the city, And the gate is smitten into ruins.
Yea, thus shall it be in the land, in the midst of the people, As when the olive-tree has been shaken; As the gleaning, when the vintage is ended.
These shall lift up their voice, and sing; Yea, for the majesty of Jehovah they shall shout from the sea.
Wherefore praise ye Jehovah in the East, The name of Jehovah, the God of Israel, in the isles of the sea!
From the end of the earth we hear songs: “Glory to the righteous!” But I cry, Alas, my wretchedness, my wretchedness! woe is me! The plunderers plunder; the plunderers seize the spoil.
The terror, the pit, and the snare Are upon thee, O inhabitant of the land!
Whoso fleeth from the terror shall fall into the pit, And whoso escapeth from the pit, He shall be taken in the snare; For the floodgates of heaven are opened, And the foundations of the earth tremble.
The earth is utterly broken down; The earth is shattered in pieces; The earth is violently moved from her place.
The earth reeleth like a drunkard, It moveth to and fro like a hammock; For her iniquity lieth heavy upon her, And she shall fall and rise no more.
In that day will Jehovah punish the host of the high ones that are on high, And the kings of the earth upon the earth.
They shall be thrown together bound into the pit, And shall be shut up in the prison, But after many days shall they be visited.
The moon shall be confounded and the sun ashamed, When Jehovah of hosts shall reign in mount Zion and Jerusalem, And his glory shall be before his ancients.
O Jehovah, thou art my God; I will exalt thee; I will praise thy name, For thou hast done wonderful things; Thine ancient purposes are faithfulness and truth.
Thou hast made the city a heap; The fortified city a ruin. The palace of the barbarians is to be no more a city! It shall never be built again.
Therefore shall mighty kingdoms praise thee; The cities of the terrible nations shall honor thee;
For thou hast been a defence to the poor; A defence to the needy in his distress; A refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, When the rage of tyrants was like a storm against a wall.
As heat in a dry land is made to vanish, So thou puttest down the tumult of the barbarians; As heat is allayed by a thick cloud, So the triumph of the tyrants is brought low.
Then in this mountain shall Jehovah of hosts prepare for all nations A feast of fat things, and wines kept on the lees; Of fat things full of marrow, of wines kept on the lees well refined.
He will destroy in this mountain the covering that was cast over all people, And the veil that was spread over all nations.
He will destroy death forever; The Lord Jehovah will wipe away the tears from all faces, And the reproach of his people will he take away from the whole earth; For Jehovah hath said it.
In that day shall men say, “Behold, this is our God; We waited for him, and he hath saved us; This is Jehovah, for whom we waited; Let us rejoice and exult in his salvation.”
For the hand of Jehovah shall rest upon this mountain, And Moab shall be trodden down in his place, As straw is trodden down in a dung-pool.
And he shall stretch out his hands in the midst of it, As the swimmer stretcheth out his hands to swim, But God shall put down his pride, Together with the devices of his hands.
And the high bulwarks of thy walls will he lay low; He will bring them down to the ground; he will lay them in the dust.
In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah: “We have a strong city; His aid doth God appoint for walls and bulwarks.
Open ye the gates, That the righteous nation may enter in, The nation that keepeth the truth.
Him that is of a steadfast mind Thou wilt keep in continual peace, Because he trusteth in thee.
Trust ye in Jehovah forever, For the Lord Jehovah is an everlasting rock.
For he hath brought down the inhabitants of the fortress; The lofty city he hath laid low; He hath laid her low even to the ground; He hath levelled her with the dust.
The foot trampleth upon her, The feet of the poor, the steps of the needy.
The way of the upright is a smooth way; Thou, O most righteous, doth level the path of the upright!
In the way of thy judgments, O Jehovah, we have waited for thee; The desire of our souls is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee.
My soul longeth for thee in the night, And my spirit within me seeketh thee in the morning; For when thy judgments are in the earth, The inhabitants of the world learn righteousness.
Though favor be shown to the wicked, He will not learn righteousness; In the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, And have no regard to the majesty of Jehovah.
Thy hand, O Jehovah, is lifted up, yet do they not see; But they shall see with shame thy zeal for thy people; Yea, fire shall devour thine adversaries.
Thou, O Jehovah, wilt give us peace; For all our works thou doest for us.
O Jehovah, our God, other lords have had dominion over us besides thee; Only through thee do we call upon thy name.
They are dead, they shall not live; They are shades, they shall not rise. For thou hast visited and destroyed them, And caused all the memory of them to perish.
“Thou wilt enlarge the nation, O Jehovah! Thou wilt enlarge the nation; thou wilt glorify thyself; Thou wilt widely extend all the borders of the land.
O Jehovah, in affliction they sought thee; They poured out their prayer, when thy chastisement was upon them.
As a woman with child, when her delivery is near, Is in anguish, and crieth aloud in her pangs, So have we been, far from thy presence, O Jehovah!
We have been with child; we have been in anguish, Yet have, as it were, brought forth wind. To the land we bring no deliverance; Nor are the inhabitants of the land born.
O might thy dead live again, Might the dead bodies of my people arise! Awake, and sing, ye that dwell in the dust! For thy dew is like the dew upon plants, And the earth shall bring forth her dead.”
Come, my people, enter into thy chambers, And shut thy doors behind thee; Hide thyself for a little moment, Until the indignation be overpast!
For behold, Jehovah cometh forth from his place, To punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity; And the earth shall disclose her blood, And shall no longer cover her slain.
In that day will Jehovah punish with his sword, His hard, and great, and strong sword, The leviathan, that fleet serpent, Even the leviathan, that winding serpent; Yea, he will slay the monster, that is in the sea.
In that day, sing ye thus concerning the vineyard:
“I, Jehovah, am its guardian; I will water it every moment; That no one may assault it, I will watch it day and night.
There is no fury in me; But let me find the thorns and thistles in battle. I will go against them, And burn them up together,
Unless they take hold of my protection, And with me make peace, And make peace with me.”
In coming days shall Jacob take root, And Israel flourish and bud forth, And fill the world with fruit.
Did he smite Israel, as he smote those that smote him? Was he slain as those that slew him?
In measure, by sending her away, didst thou punish her, Taking her away in the rough tempest, in the day of the east wind.
By this, therefore, is the iniquity of Jacob expiated, And this is wholly the fruit of the removal of his sin, That He has made the stones of the altar like limestones broken in pieces, And that the images of Astarte and the sun-pillars no more stand.
For the fortified city is desolate, A habitation forsaken, deserted like a wilderness; There doth the calf feed, and there doth he lie down, And consume her branches.
When her boughs are withered, they are broken off; Women come, and burn them; For it was a people of no understanding; Therefore he that made him had not mercy on him, And he that formed him showed him no favor.
But it shall come to pass in that day, That Jehovah shall gather fruit From the stream of the Euphrates to the river of Egypt, And ye shall be gathered, one by one, ye children of Israel!
In that day shall a great trumpet be sounded, And they shall come who are lost in the land of Assyria, And are outcasts in the land of Egypt, And shall worship Jehovah upon the holy mountain in Jerusalem.
Woe to the proud crown of the drunkards of Ephraim, To the fading flower, his glorious beauty, At the head of the rich valley of a people stupefied with wine.
Behold a strong, a mighty one from the Lord Like a storm of hail, like a destructive tempest, Like a flood of mighty, overflowing waters, With violence shall dash it to the ground.
It shall be trodden under foot, The proud crown of the drunkards of Ephraim.
And the fading flower, their glorious beauty, At the head of the rich valley, Shall be as the early fig before the time of harvest, Which whoso seeth plucketh immediately, And swalloweth as soon as it is in his hand.
In that day shall Jehovah of hosts Be a glorious crown, and a beautiful diadem to the residue of his people;
A spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment, And of strength to them that drive back the enemy to their gates.
But even these stagger through wine, And reel through strong drink; The priest and the prophet stagger through strong drink; They are overpowered with wine; They stumble through strong drink; They reel in vision, They stagger in judgment.
For all their tables are full of filthy vomit, So that there is no place clean.
“Whom,” say they, “will he teach knowledge, And to whom will he impart instruction? To the weaned from the milk? To those just taken from the breast?
For it is precept upon precept, precept upon precept, Command upon command, command upon command, A little here, and a little there.”
Yea, with stammering lips and a strange tongue He shall indeed speak to this people;
He that said to them, “This is the way of rest, give rest to the weary; This is the way of safety”; But they would not hear.
Then shall the word of Jehovah be indeed to them “Precept upon precept, precept upon precept, Command upon command, command upon command, A little here, and a little there,” So that they shall go on, and fall backwards, and be broken, And be snared and caught.
Wherefore hear ye the word of Jehovah, Ye scoffers, who rule this people in Jerusalem!
Since ye say, “We have entered into a covenant with death, And with the under-world have we made an agreement, The overflowing scourge, when it passeth through, shall not reach us; For we have made falsehood our refuge, And in deceit we have hidden ourselves.”
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I have laid in Zion as a foundation a stone, A tried stone, a precious corner-stone, a sure foundation; He that trusteth shall not flee away.
I will make justice a line, And righteousness a plummet, And the hail shall sweep away the refuge of falsehood, And the waters shall overwhelm its hiding-place;
And your covenant with death shall be broken, And your agreement with the under-world shall not stand; When the overflowing scourge shall pass through, By it shall ye be beaten down.
As often as it passeth through, it shall bear you away; For every morning shall it pass through, By day and by night; Even to hear the rumor of it shall be terrible.
Yea, the bed is too short for one to stretch himself on it, And the covering too narrow for one to wrap himself in it.
For Jehovah will rise up, as in mount Perazim; He will be moved with anger, as in the valley of Gibeon, To perform his act, his strange act, And to execute his work, his strange work.
Now, therefore, be ye no longer scoffers, Lest your bands become stronger; For destruction and punishment have been revealed to me From Jehovah of hosts concerning the whole land!
Give ear, and listen to my voice, Attend, and hearken to my words!
Is the ploughman always ploughing in order to sow? Is he always opening and harrowing his field?
When he hath made the face thereof even, Doth he not then scatter the dill, and cast abroad the cumin, And sow the wheat in rows, And the barley in its appointed place, And the spelt in his border?
Thus his God rightly instructeth him, And giveth him knowledge.
The dill is not beaten out with the thrashing-sledge, Nor is the wheel of the wain rolled over the cumin; But the dill is beaten out with a staff, And the cumin with a rod.
Bread-corn is beaten out, Yet doth not the husbandman thrash it without limit. He driveth over it the wheels of the wain, And the horses, yet doth he not utterly crush it.
This also proceedeth from Jehovah of hosts; He is wonderful in counsel, Excellent in wisdom.
Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, The city where David dwelt! Add year to year, Let the festivals go round,
Then will I distress Ariel; Mourning and sorrow shall be there; Yet shall she be to me as Ariel [[the lion of God]].
I will encamp against thee round about, And I will lay siege against thee with a mound, And I will raise towers against thee.
Thou shalt be brought down, and speak from the ground, And thy speech shall be low from the dust; Thy voice shall be like that of a spirit under ground, And thy speech shall chirp as from the dust.
Yet shall the multitude of thine enemies be like fine dust; The multitude of the terrible like flying chaff; It shall take place suddenly, in a moment.
From Jehovah of hosts cometh the visitation With thunder, and earthquake, and great noise, With storm and tempest, And flames of devouring fire.
As a dream, a vision of the night, Shall be the multitude of all the nations That fight against Ariel, That fight against her and her fortress, And distress her.
As a hungry man dreameth, and lo! he eateth, But awaketh and is still hungry; And as a thirsty man dreameth, and lo! he drinketh, But awaketh, and lo! he is faint and thirsty; So shall it be with the multitude of all the nations That fight against mount Zion.
Be in amazement and be amazed! Be blinded and be blind! They are drunk, but not with wine; They stagger, but not with strong drink!
For Jehovah hath poured upon you a spirit of slumber; He hath closed your eyes, the prophets, And covered your heads, the seers;
And so every vision is to you as the words of a sealed book, Which is given to a man that is skilled in writing, Saying, “Read this, I pray thee”; But he answereth, “I cannot, for it is sealed.”
Or, if he give it to one that is not skilled in writing, Saying, “Read this, I pray thee,” He answereth, “I am not skilled in writing.”
Therefore saith the Lord, Since this people draweth near to me with their mouth, And honoreth me with their lips, While their heart is far from me, And their worship of me is according to the commandments of men,
Therefore, behold, I will proceed to deal marvellously with this people; Marvellously and wonderfully, For the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, And the prudence of the prudent shall be hid.
Woe to them that hide deep their purposes from Jehovah, Whose work is in darkness; That say, Who seeth us? Who knoweth us?
Alas, your perverseness! Is the potter to be esteemed as the clay, That the work should say of its maker, He made me not? And the thing formed say of him that formed it, He hath no understanding?
Is it not yet a very little while, And Lebanon shall be changed to a fruitful field, And the fruitful field be esteemed a forest.
And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book, And out of mist and darkness shall the eyes of the blind see.
The afflicted shall exceedingly rejoice in Jehovah, And the poor shall exult in the Holy One of Israel.
For the oppressor hath come to naught; the scoffer is destroyed; And all that watched for iniquity are cut off;
Who condemned a man in his cause, And laid snares for him who defended himself in the gate, And with falsehood caused the righteous to fail.
Therefore concerning the house of Jacob thus saith Jehovah, He that redeemed Abraham: No more shall Jacob be ashamed, And no more shall his face grow pale.
For when his children behold the work of my hands in the midst of them, They shall honor my name. They shall honor the Holy One of Jacob, And reverence the God of Israel.
They that erred in spirit shall come to understanding, And the obstinate shall receive instruction.
Woe to the rebellious children, saith Jehovah, Who form plans, and not from me, And make covenants without my spirit, That they may add sin to sin!
Who go down into Egypt, Without inquiring at my mouth, To seek refuge in Pharaoh's protection, And to trust in the shadow of Egypt!
The protection of Pharaoh shall be your shame; Your trust in the shadow of Egypt your confusion.
For their princes are at Zoan, Their ambassadors have arrived at Hanes.
But they are all ashamed of a people that do not profit them; That are no help and no profit, But only a shame and a reproach.
The loaded beasts go southward. Through a land of anguish and distress, Whence come forth the lioness, and the fierce lion, The viper, and the flying fiery serpent; On the shoulders of young asses they carry their wealth, And on the bunches of camels their treasures, To a people that will not profit them!
Vain and empty is the help of Egypt; Wherefore I call her, The Blusterer that sitteth still.
Go now, write this on a tablet before them; Note it down upon a book, That it may remain for future times, A testimony forever!
For this is a rebellious people, false children; Children who will not hear the law of Jehovah;
Who say to the seers, “See not!” And to the prophets, “Prophesy not right things; Speak to us smooth things, Prophesy falsehood!
Turn aside from the way, Depart from the path, Remove from our sight the Holy One of Israel!”
Wherefore thus saith the Holy One of Israel: Since ye despise this word, And trust in oppression and perverseness, And lean thereon,
Therefore shall this iniquity be to you Like a breach ready to give way, That swelleth out in a high wall, Whose fall cometh suddenly, in an instant.
It is broken like a potter's vessel, Which is dashed in pieces and not spared, So that among its fragments not a sherd is found to take up fire from the hearth, Or to dip water from the cistern.
For thus said the Lord Jehovah, the Holy One of Israel: By a return and by rest shall ye be saved; In quietness and confidence is your strength;
But ye would not. Ye said, “No! we will bound along upon horses”; Truly ye shall bound along in flight. “We will ride upon swift coursers”; But they shall be swift that pursue you.
A thousand shall flee at the rebuke of one, And ten thousand at the rebuke of five, Till what remains of you shall be as a beacon on the top of a mountain, As a banner upon a hill.
And yet will Jehovah wait to be gracious to you, And yet will he arise to have mercy upon you; For Jehovah is a righteous God; Happy are all they who wait for him!
For, O people of Zion, that dwellest in Jerusalem, Thou shalt not always weep! He will be very gracious to thee at the voice of thy cry; No sooner shall he hear it, than he will answer thee.
Though Jehovah hath given thee the bread of distress, and the water of affliction, Yet shall thy teachers be hidden from thee no more; But thine eyes shall see thy teachers.
And thine ears shall hear a voice behind thee, Saying, “This is the way, walk ye in it!” When ye turn aside to the right hand, or to the left.
Ye shall treat as defiled the silver coverings of your graven images, And the golden clothing of your molten images, Ye shall cast them away as an unclean thing; Away! shall ye say to them.
Then will he give rain for thy seed, With which thou shalt sow the ground, And the bread-corn, the produce of the land, shall be rich and nourishing; Then shall thy cattle feed in large pastures.
The oxen also, and the young asses, that till the ground, Shall eat well-seasoned provender, Which hath been winnowed with the shovel and the fan.
And on every lofty mountain, And on every high hill, Shall be brooks and streams of water, In the day of the great slaughter, When the towers fall.
Then shall the light of the moon be as the light of the sun, And the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, [[As the light of seven days,]] When Jehovah bindeth up the bruises of his people, And healeth the wound which they have received.
Behold, the name of Jehovah cometh from afar, His anger burneth, and violent is the flame, His lips are full of indignation, And his tongue like a devouring fire.
His breath is like an overflowing torrent, That reacheth even to the neck; He will toss the nation with the winnowing-fan of destruction; He will put a bridle upon the jaws of the people, that shall lead them astray.
But ye shall then sing as in the night of a solemn festival; Your heart shall be glad, like his who marcheth with the sound of the pipe To the mountain of Jehovah, to the rock of Israel.
Jehovah will cause his glorious voice to be heard, And the blow of his arm to be seen, With furious anger, and flames of devouring fire; With flood, and storm, and hailstones.
For by the voice of Jehovah shall the Assyrian be beaten down; He will smite him with the rod.
And as often as the appointed rod shall strike, Which Jehovah shall lay heavily upon him, It shall be accompanied with tabrets and harps; And with fierce battles will he fight against him.
For long hath the burning place been prepared; Yea, for the king hath it been made ready; The pile is made deep and broad; There is fire and wood in abundance; The breath of Jehovah, like a stream of brimstone, kindle it.
Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help, And put their trust in horses, And confide in chariots, because they are many, And in horsemen, because their number is great, But look not to the Holy One of Israel, And resort not to Jehovah.
Yet he, too, is wise; He will bring evil, and not take back his words; He will arise against the house of the evil-doers, And against the help of them that do iniquity.
The Egyptians are men, and not God, And their horses are flesh, and not spirit. When Jehovah shall stretch forth his hand, Then shall the helper fall, and the helped be overthrown; And they shall all perish together.
For thus hath Jehovah said to me: As when the lion and the young lion growl over their prey, And a multitude of shepherds is called forth against him, By their noise he is not terrified, Nor by their tumult disheartened; So shall Jehovah of hosts come down to fight for mount Zion, and her hill.
As birds hover over their young, So shall Jehovah of hosts defend Jerusalem; He will defend and deliver, spare and save.
Turn, O ye children of Israel, To him from whom ye have so deeply revolted! For in that day shall every one cast away his idols of
silver and his idols of gold, Which your hands have made for sin.
The Assyrian shall fall by a sword not of man, Yea, a sword not of mortal shall devour him; He shall flee before the sword, And his young warriors shall be slaves.
Through fear shall he pass beyond his stronghold, And his princes shall be afraid of the standard. Thus saith Jehovah, who hath his fire in Zion, And his furnace in Jerusalem.
Behold! a king shall reign in righteousness, And princes shall rule with equity.
Every one of them shall be a hiding-place from the wind, And a shelter from the tempest; As streams of water in a dry place, As the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.
The eyes of them that see shall no more be blind, And the ears of them that hear shall hearken.
The heart of the rash shall gain wisdom, And the tongue of the stammerer learn to speak plainly.
The vile shall no more be called liberal, Nor the niggard said to be bountiful;
For the vile will still utter villany, And his heart will devise iniquity; He will practise deception, and speak impiety against God; He will take away the food of the hungry, And deprive the thirsty of drink.
The instruments also of the niggard are evil; He plotteth mischievous devices, To destroy the poor with lying words, Even when the cause of the needy is just.
But the liberal deviseth liberal things, And in liberal things will he persevere.
Arise, hear my voice, ye women that are at ease! Give ear to my speech, ye careless daughters!
One year more, and ye shall tremble, ye careless women! For the vintage shall fail; the harvest shall not come.
Tremble, O ye that are at ease! Be in dismay, ye careless ones! Strip you, make you bare, gird ye sackcloth upon your loins!
They shall smite themselves on their breasts, On account of the pleasant fields, On account of the fruitful vine.
Upon the land of my people shall come up thorns and briers; Yea, upon all the houses of joy in the joyous city.
For the palace shall be forsaken; The tumult of the city shall be solitary; The fortified hill and the tower shall be dens forever; The joy of wild-asses, the pasture of flocks;
Until the spirit from on high be poured upon us, And the wilderness become a fruitful field, And the fruitful field be esteemed a forest.
Then shall justice dwell in the wilderness, And righteousness in the fruitful field.
And the effect of righteousness shall be peace, And the fruit of righteousness quiet and security forever.
Then shall my people dwell in peaceful habitations, In secure dwellings, in quiet resting-places.
But the hail shall descend, and the forest shall fall; And the city shall be brought very low.
Happy ye who sow beside all waters; Who send forth thither the feet of the ox and the ass!
Woe to thee, thou spoiler, who hast not been spoiled! Thou plunderer, who hast not been plundered! When thou hast ceased to spoil, thou shalt be spoiled; When thou hast finished plundering, they shall plunder thee.
O Jehovah, have mercy upon us! in thee do we trust; Be thou our strength every morning, Our salvation in the time of trouble.
At the voice of thy thunder the people flee; When thou dost arise, the nations are scattered.
Your spoil shall be gathered, as the locust gathereth; As the locust runneth, so shall they run upon it.
Jehovah is exalted; Yea, he dwelleth on high; He filleth Zion with justice and righteousness.
There shall be security in thy times; Wisdom and knowledge shall be thy store of prosperity, And the fear of Jehovah, this shall be thy treasure!
Behold, the mighty men cry without: The ambassadors of peace weep bitterly.
The highways are desolate; The traveller ceaseth; He breaketh the covenant; he despiseth the cities; Of men he maketh no account.
The land mourneth and languisheth; Lebanon is put to shame, and withered away; Sharon is like a desert, And Bashan and Carmel are stripped of their leaves.
Now will I arise, saith Jehovah, Now will I exalt myself, Now will I lift myself up.
Ye shall conceive chaff, and bring forth stubble; Your own wrath is the fire which shall devour you.
The nations shall be burnt into lime; Like thorns cut down, they shall be consumed with fire.
Hear, ye that are far off, what I have done; Mark, ye that are near, my power!
The sinners in Zion are struck with dread; Terror hath seized upon the unrighteous: “Who among us can dwell in devouring fire? Who among us can dwell in everlasting flames?”
He that walketh in righteousness, And speaketh that which is right, That despiseth the gain of oppression, And shaketh his hands from bribery, That stoppeth his ears, so as not to hear of blood, And shutteth his eyes, so as not to behold iniquity.
He shall dwell on high; The strongholds of rocks shall be his defence; His bread shall be given him; His water shall not fail.
Thine eyes shall see the king in his glory They shall survey a wide-extended land.
Thy heart shall meditate on the past terror: “Where now is the scribe? Where the weigher of tribute? Where he that numbered the towers?”
Thou shalt see no more a fierce people, A people of a dark language, which thou couldst not hear, And of a barbarous tongue, which thou couldst not understand;
Thou shalt see Zion, the city of our solemn feasts; Thine eyes shall behold Jerusalem, as a quiet habitation. A tent that shall never be moved, Whose stakes shall never be taken away, And whose cords shall never be broken.
For there the glorious Jehovah will be to us Instead of rivers and broad streams, Which no oared galley shall pass, And no gallant ship go through.
For Jehovah is our judge; Jehovah is our lawgiver; Jehovah is our king; it is he that will save us.
Thy ropes hang loose; They cannot hold the mast-socket, Nor can they spread the sail. Then shall a great spoil be divided; Even the lame shall take the prey.
No inhabitant shall say, I am sick; The people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity.
Draw near, O ye nations, and hear! Attend, O ye people! Let the earth hear, and all that is therein; The world, and all that springs from it!
For the wrath of Jehovah is kindled against all the nations, And his fury against all their armies; He hath devoted them to destruction; He hath given them up to slaughter.
Their slain shall be cast out; From their carcasses their stench shall ascend, And the mountains shall flow down with their blood.
And all the hosts of heaven shall melt away; And the heavens shall be rolled up like a scroll, And all their host shall fall down, As the withered leaf faileth from the vine, As the blighted fruit from the fig-tree.
For my sword hath become drunk in heaven; Behold, upon Edom shall it descend, Upon the people under my curse, for vengeance.
The sword of Jehovah is full of blood; It is covered with fat, With the blood of lambs and goats, With the fat of the kidneys of rams; For Jehovah holdeth a sacrifice in Bozrah, And a great slaughter in the land of Edom.
The wild buffaloes shall fall down with them. And the bullocks with the bulls; The hind shall be drunk with blood, And the ground enriched with fat.
For Jehovah holdeth a day of vengeance, A year of recompense in the cause of Zion.
Her streams shall be turned into pitch, And her dust into brimstone, And her whole land shall become burning pitch.
Day and night it shall not be quenched; Its smoke shall ascend forever; From generation to generation it shall lie waste; None shall pass through it for ever and ever.
The pelican and the hedgehog shall possess it; The heron and the raven shall dwell in it; Over it will he draw the measuring-line of destruction. And the plummet of desolation.
Her nobles — none are there, who may proclaim a kingdom, And all her princes have come to naught.
Thorns shall spring up in her palaces; Nettles and thistles in her strongholds. She shall become a habitation for jackals, A court for ostriches.
The wild-cats shall fall upon the wolves, And the satyr shall call to his fellow; There also shall the night-spectre light, And find a place of rest.
There also shall the arrow-snake make her nest, and lay her eggs; She shall hatch them, and gather her young under her shadow: There also shall the vultures be gathered together, Every one with her mate.
Search ye the book of Jehovah, and read! Not one of these shall fail; Not one shall want her mate; For His mouth, it shall command, And His spirit, it shall gather them.
He shall cast the lot for them; His hand shall divide it for them with a line; They shall possess it forever; From generation to generation shall they dwell therein.
The wilderness and the parched land shall be glad, And the desert rejoice and blossom as the rose;
It shall blossom abundantly, and exult with joy and singing; The glory of Lebanon shall be given to it; The beauty of Carmel and Sharon; They shall behold the glory of Jehovah, The majesty of our God;
Strengthen ye the weak hands, And confirm the tottering knees!
Say ye to the faint-hearted, “Be ye strong; fear ye not; Behold your God! Vengeance cometh, the retribution of God; He will come and save you!”
Then shall the eyes of the blind be opened, And the ears of the deaf be unstopped.
Then shall the lame leap like the hart, And the tongue of the dumb shall sing; For in the wilderness shall waters break forth, And streams in the desert.
The glowing sands shall become a pool, And the thirsty ground springs of water; In the habitation of jackals, where they lie, Shall be a place for reeds and rushes.
And a path shall be there, and a highway, And it shall be called the holy way; No unclean person shall pass over it; it shall be for them alone; He that therein goeth in this way, though a fool, shall not err therein.
No lion shall be there, Nor shall any ravenous beast go up thereon; It shall not be found there; But the redeemed shall walk there.
Yea, the ransomed of Jehovah shall return; They shall come to Zion with songs: Everlasting joy shall be upon their heads; They shall obtain joy and gladness, And sorrow and sighing shall flee away.
In the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah, Sennacherib, king of Assyria, came up against all the fortified cities of Judah, and took them.
And the king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem, with a great army, against King Hezekiah, and he halted at the aqueduct of the upper pool, in the highway to the fuller's field.
Then came forth to him Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, who was over the palace, and Shebna the scribe, and Josh, the son of Asaph, the annalist.
And Rabshakeh said to them, Say ye to Hezekiah, Thus saith the great king, the king of Assyria: What a confidence is this which thou cherishest!
Thou sayest, (but it is vain talk,) “I have counsel and strength for war.” In whom, then, dost thou trust, that thou rebellest against me?
Behold, thou trustest in that broken reed-staff, Egypt, on which if a man lean, it will pierce his hand, and go through it. Such is Pharaoh, king of Egypt, to all that trust in him.
But if ye say to me, “We trust in Jehovah, our God,”—is it not he whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away, and commanded Judah and Jerusalem to worship before this altar?
Engage, now, with my master, the king of Assyria! and I will give thee two thousand horses, when thou art able to provide for thyself riders for them.
How, then, canst thou resist a single captain, one of the least of the servants of my master? Yet thou trustest in Egypt, on account of her chariots and her horsemen.
And am I now come up without Jehovah against this land to destroy it? Jehovah hath said to me, “Go up against this land and destroy it!”
Then said Eliakim and Shebna and Josh to Rabshakeh: Speak, we beseech thee, to thy servants in the Aramaic language, for we understand it; and speak not to us in the Jewish language, in the hearing of the people that are upon the wall.
But Rabshakeh said, Hath my master sent me to speak these words to thy master and to thee only, and not to the people who sit upon the wall, to eat their own dung, and to drink their own urine with you?
Then Rabshakeh stood and cried with a loud voice in the Jewish language, and said, Hear ye the words of the great king, the king of Assyria.
Thus saith the king: Let not Hezekiah deceive you, for he will not be able to deliver you.
And let not Hezekiah persuade you to trust in Jehovah, saying, “Jehovah will certainly deliver us. This city shall not be delivered into the hands of the king of Assyria.”
Hearken not to Hezekiah; for thus saith the king of Assyria: Make peace with me, and come out to me; and ye shall every one eat of his own vine, and every one of his own fig-tree, and ye shall every one drink the waters of his own cistern,
until I come, and take you to a land like your own land; a land of corn, and of new wine, a land of bread and of vineyards.
Be not persuaded by Hezekiah, when he saith, “Jehovah will deliver us.” Have the gods of the nations delivered every one his own land from the hand of the king of Assyria? Where are the gods of Hamath and of Arphad?
Where are the gods of Sepharvaim? And did the gods deliver Samaria from my hand?
Who is there among all the gods of these lands, that hath delivered his land out of my hand, that Jehovah should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?
But the people held their peace, and answered him not a word; for the king's command was, “Answer him not.”
Then came Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, that was over the palace, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph, the annalist, to Hezekiah, with their clothes rent, and told him the words of Rabshakeh.
And when the king, Hezekiah, heard it, he rent his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house of Jehovah.
And he sent Eliakim, who was over the palace, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz.
And they said to him, Thus saith Hezekiah: This day is a day of distress, of rebuke, and of contempt; for the children have come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.
It may be that Jehovah, thy God, will hear the words of Rabshakeh, whom the king of Assyria, his master, hath sent to reproach the living God, and to revile him with the words which Jehovah, thy God, hath heard. Do thou, therefore, lift up thy prayer for the remnant of the people, that is yet left.
And the servants of King Hezekiah came to Isaiah.
And Isaiah said to them, Thus shall ye say to your master: Thus saith Jehovah: Be not afraid on account of the words which thou hast heard, with which the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me.
Behold, I will put a spirit within him, so that he shall hear a rumor, and return to his own land; and I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.
Then Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria warring against Libnah, for he had heard that he had departed from Lachish.
Then he heard concerning Tirhakah, king of Ethiopia, that it was said, “He is come forth to war against thee.” And when he heard it, he sent messengers to Hezekiah and said,
Thus shall ye say to Hezekiah, the king of Judah: Let not thy God, in whom thou trustest, deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.
Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all the lands; how they have utterly destroyed them. And shalt thou be delivered?
Did the gods of the nations which my father destroyed, deliver them? Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of Eden in Telassar?
Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arphad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, of Henah, and of Ivah?
And Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers, and read it. Then he went up to the house of Jehovah, and spread it before Jehovah.
And Hezekiah prayed before Jehovah, saying,
O Jehovah of hosts, God of Israel, who sittest between the cherubs, thou alone art the God of all the kingdoms of the earth; thou hast made heaven and earth.
Incline thine ear, O Jehovah, and hear; open thine eyes, O Jehovah, and see; and hear all the words of Sennacherib, which he hath sent to reproach the living God.
In truth, O Jehovah, the kings of Assyria have destroyed all the nations, and their lands,
and have cast their gods into the fire; for they were not gods, but the work of men's hands, wood and stone; and they have destroyed them.
But do thou, O Jehovah, our God, save us from his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou alone art Jehovah.
Then Isaiah, the son of Amoz, sent to Hezekiah, saying, Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel: Whereas thou hast prayed to me on account of Sennacherib, the king of Assyria,
This is the word which Jehovah hath spoken against him. The virgin, the daughter of Zion, despiseth thee; she laugheth thee to scorn; The daughter of Jerusalem shaketh her head after thee.
Whom hast thou reproached, and reviled, And against whom hast thou exalted thy voice, And lifted up thine eyes on high? Against the Holy One of Israel.
By thy servants hast thou reproached the Lord, and said: “With the multitude of my chariots have I ascended the heights of the mountains, the extremities of Lebanon; I have cut down its tall cedars, and its choice cypress-trees; I have come to its utmost height, to its garden forest.
I have digged and drunk water, And with the sole of my feet will I dry up all the rivers of Egypt.”
Hast thou not heard, that of old I ordained it, And from ancient times purposed it? Now have I brought it to pass, That thou shouldst convert fortified cities into ruinous heaps.
Therefore were their inhabitants of little strength; They were dismayed and confounded; They were as the grass of the field, and the green herb; As grass upon the house-top, and as corn blasted, before it is grown up.
I know thy sitting down, thy going out, and thy coming in, And thy rage against me.
Because thy rage against me, and thy insolence, is come up into my ears, I will put my ring into thy nose, And my bridle into thy lips, And turn thee back by the way in which thou camest.
And this shall be the sign to thee; Eat this year that which groweth of itself, And in the second year that which groweth of itself, And in the third year ye shall sow and reap, And plant vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof.
And the remnant of the house of Judah, that have escaped, Shall again strike root downward, And bear fruit upward.
For from Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, And they that have escaped from mount Zion. The zeal of Jehovah of hosts will perform this.
Therefore thus saith Jehovah of hosts concerning the king of Assyria; He shall not come into this city, Nor shoot an arrow into it; He shall not present a shield before it, Nor cast up a mound against it.
By the way in which he came, by the same shall he return, And into this city shall he not come, saith Jehovah.
For I will defend this city, and deliver it, For mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake.
Then an angel of Jehovah went forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and eighty-five thousand men; and when the people arose early in the morning, behold they were all dead corpses.
Then Sennacherib, king of Assyria, decamped, and went away, and returned, and dwelt at Nineveh.
And as he was worshipping in the temple of Nisroch, his god, he was slain with the sword by his sons Adrammelech and Sharezer, who escaped into the land of Ararat. And Esarhaddon, his son, reigned in his stead.
In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death; and Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, came to him, and said to him, Set thy house in order, for thou shalt die, and not live.
Then Hezekiah turned his face toward the wall, and made his supplication to Jehovah.
And he said, I beseech thee, O Jehovah, remember now how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thine eyes! And Hezekiah wept bitterly.
Then came the word of Jehovah to Isaiah,
Go in and say to Hezekiah, Thus saith Jehovah, the God of David thy father: I have heard thy prayer; I have seen thy tears. Behold, I will add to thy life fifteen years.
And I will deliver thee and this city from the hand of the king of Assyria, and I will defend this city.
And this shall be the sign to thee from Jehovah, that Jehovah will do that which he hath spoken.
Behold, I will cause the shadow upon the dial, which hath gone down upon the dial of Ahaz with the sun, to go back ten degrees. So the sun went back ten degrees, which degrees it had gone down.
The writing of Hezekiah, king of Judah, when he had been sick, and had recovered from his sickness.
I said: “Now, in the quiet of my days, shall I go down to the gates of the under-world; I am deprived of the residue of my years.”
I said: “No more shall I see Jehovah, Jehovah in the land of the living. I shall behold man no more Among the inhabitants of stillness.
My habitation is torn away and removed from me, Like a shepherd's tent; My life is rolled up as by the weaver; He cutteth me off from the thrum; Between morning and night wilt thou make an end of me!”
I waited till morning, and like a lion Did he crush all my bones; “Between morning and night wilt thou make an end of me!”
Like a swallow or a crane, so did I twitter; I did mourn as a dove; Mine eyes failed with looking upward; “O Lord, I am in distress; O, deliver me!”
What shall I say? He promised it, and he hath done it; I will walk humbly all my life On account of the bitterness of my soul.
Lord, it is thus that men live; From thee alone cometh the life of my spirit; Thou hast restored me, and caused me to live.
Behold, my anguish is changed into ease; In love thou hast delivered me from the pit of destruction; Thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back.
For the under-world cannot praise thee; The realms of death cannot celebrate thee; They that go down to the pit cannot wait for thy faithfulness.
The living, the living praise thee, as I do this day; The father to the children shall make known thy faithfulness.
Jehovah hath saved me; Therefore will we sing our songs with stringed instruments, All the days of our life, In the house of Jehovah.
Now Isaiah had said, let them take a lump of figs, and bruise them, and lay them upon the ulcer, and he shall recover.
Hezekiah also had said, What is the sign that I shall go up to the house of Jehovah?
At that time Merodach Baladan, the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent a letter and a present to Hezekiah, for he had heard that he had been sick and was recovered.
And Hezekiah was delighted with them, and showed the embassy his treasure-house, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the precious oil, and his whole armory, and all that was found in his treasures. There was nothing in his house, nor in all his dominion, which Hezekiah did not show them.
Then came Isaiah the prophet to King Hezekiah, and said to him, What did these men say, and whence did they come to thee? And Hezekiah said, They came to me from a distant country, from Babylon.
Then said he, What have they seen in thy house? And Hezekiah answered: All that is in my house have they seen. There is nothing in my treasures which I have not shown them.
Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, hear the word of Jehovah of hosts,
Behold, the days shall come, when all that is in thy house, and that thy fathers have treasured up to this day, shall be carried away to Babylon. Nothing shall be left, saith Jehovah.
And of thy sons, which shall issue from thee, which thou shalt beget, shall they take away, and they shall he eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.
(39:7) Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, Good is the word of Jehovah, which thou hast spoken. For, said he, there shall be peace and security in my days.
Comfort ye, comfort ye, my people, Saith your God.
Speak ye encouragement to Jerusalem, and declare to her, That her hard service is ended; That her iniquity is expiated; That she hath received from the hand of Jehovah Double for all her sins.
A voice crieth: “Prepare ye in the wilderness the way of Jehovah; Make straight in the desert a highway for our God!
Every valley shall be exalted, And every mountain and hill be made low; The crooked shall become straight, And the rough places plain.
For the glory of Jehovah shall be revealed, And all flesh shall see it together; For the mouth of Jehovah hath spoken it!”
A voice said, Proclaim! And I said, What shall I proclaim? All flesh is grass, And all its comeliness as the flower of the field.
The grass withereth, the flower fadeth, When the breath of Jehovah bloweth upon it. Truly the people is grass.
The grass withereth, the flower fadeth, But the word of our God shall stand forever.
Get thee up on the high mountain, O thou that bringest glad tidings to Zion; Lift up thy voice with strength, thou that bringest glad tidings to Jerusalem; Lift it up; be not afraid; Say to the cities of Judah, Behold your God!
Behold, the Lord Jehovah shall come with might, And his arm shall rule for him; Behold, his reward is with him, And his recompense before him.
He shall feed his flock like a shepherd; He shall gather up the lambs in his arms, And carry them in his bosom, And gently lead the nursing ewes.
Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, And meted out the heavens with his span, And gathered the dust of the earth into a measure, And weighed the mountains in scales, And the hills in a balance?
Who hath searched out the spirit of Jehovah, Or, being his counsellor, hath taught him?
With whom took he counsel, and who instructed him, And taught him the path of justice, And taught him knowledge, And showed him the way of understanding?
Behold, the nations are as a drop from a bucket, And are accounted as the small dust of the balance; Behold, he taketh up the isles as a very little thing,
And Lebanon is not sufficient for fire, Nor its beasts for a burnt-offering.
All the nations are as nothing before him; They are accounted by him as less than nothing, and vanity.
To whom then will ye liken God, And what likeness will ye compare unto him?
The workman casteth an image, And the smith overlayeth it with gold, And casteth for it silver chains.
He that is too poor to make an oblation Chooseth a piece of wood that will not rot; He seeketh for himself a skilful artificer, To prepare an image that shall not be moved.
Do ye not know? Have ye not heard? Hath it not been declared to you from the beginning? Have ye not considered the foundations of the earth?
It is He that sitteth above the circle of the earth, And the inhabitants are to him as grasshoppers; That stretcheth out the heavens as a canopy, And spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in;
That bringeth princes to nothing, And reduceth the rulers of the earth to vanity.
Yea, scarcely are they planted, scarcely are they sown, Scarcely hath their stem taken root in the ground, When He bloweth upon them and they wither, And the whirlwind beareth them away like stubble.
To whom then will ye liken me, And to whom shall I be compared? Saith the Holy One.
Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and behold! Who hath created these? He draweth forth their host by number, He calleth them all by name; Through the greatness of his strength and the mightiness of his power, Not one of them faileth to appear.
Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel, “My way is hidden from Jehovah, My cause passeth by before my God”?
Do ye not know? Have ye not heard? Jehovah is an everlasting God, The creator of the ends of the earth; He fainteth not, nor is he weary; His understanding is unsearchable.
He giveth power to the faint; To the feeble abundant strength.
The youths shall faint and be weary, And the young warriors shall utterly fall.
But they that trust in Jehovah shall renew their strength; They shall mount up with wings like eagles; They shall run and not be weary; They shall walk and not faint.
Keep silence, and hear me, ye distant lands. Ye nations, gather your strength! Let them come near; then let them speak; Let us go together into judgment.
Who hath raised up from the region of the East Him whom victory meeteth in his march? Who hath subdued nations before him, And given him dominion over kings? Who made their swords like dust, And their bows like driven stubble?
He pursued them, and passed in safety, By a path which his foot had never trodden.
Who hath wrought and done it? I, who have called the generations from the beginning, I, Jehovah, the first; And with the last also am I.
Distant nations saw it, and were afraid; The ends of the earth, and trembled; They drew near, and came together.
One helped another, And said to him, “Be of good courage!”
The carpenter encouraged the smith, He that smoothed with the hammer him that smote on the anvil, And said, “The soldering is good,” And he fastened it with nails that it might not fall.
But thou, O Israel, my servant, Thou, Jacob, whom I have chosen, Offspring of Abraham, my friend!
Thou, whom I have led by the hand from the ends of the earth, And called from the extremities thereof, And said to thee, “Thou art my servant, I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away!”
Fear not, for I am with thee; Faint not, for I, thy God, will strengthen thee; I will help thee, and sustain thee, with my right hand of salvation!
Behold, all who are enraged against thee Shall be ashamed and confounded; All that contend with thee Shall come to nothing and perish.
Thou shalt seek and not find Them that contend with thee; They shall come to nothing, and be no more, Who make war against thee.
For I, Jehovah, am thy God, that holdeth thee by the right hand, That saith to thee, “Fear not, I am thy helper!”
Fear not, thou worm Jacob, thou feeble people of Israel! I am thy helper, saith Jehovah; Thy redeemer is the Holy One of Israel.
Behold, I will make thee a thrashing-wain, sharp and new, With double edges; Thou shalt thrash the mountains, and beat them small, And make the hills as chaff.
Thou shalt winnow them, and the wind shall carry them away, And the whirlwind shall scatter them. But thou shalt rejoice in Jehovah, And glory in the Holy One of Israel.
When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, And their tongue is parched with thirst, I, Jehovah, will hear them; I, the God of Israel, will not forsake them.
I will open rivers upon the bare hills, And fountains in the midst of the valleys; I will make the wilderness a pool of water, And the dry land springs of water.
I will plant in the wilderness the cedar and the acacia, The myrtle and the olive-tree; I will place in the desert the cypress, The plane-tree and the larch together.
That they may see, and know, And consider, and understand together, That the hand of Jehovah hath done this, And that the Holy One of Israel hath created it.
Bring forward your cause, saith Jehovah; Produce your strong reasons, saith the king of Jacob.
Let them produce them, and show us what shall happen! Tell us what ye have predicted in times past, That we may consider, and know its fulfilment! Or declare to us things that are to come!
Let us hear what shall happen in future times, That we may know whether ye are gods; Do something, be it good or evil, That we may be astonished, and see it together!
Behold, ye are less than nothing, And your work is less than naught; An abomination is he that chooseth you!
I have raised up one from the north, and he cometh; From the rising of the sun he calleth upon my name; He trampleth upon princes as upon mortar; As the potter treadeth down the clay.
Who hath declared this from the beginning, that we might know it, And long ago, that we might say, It is true? There was not one that foretold it, not one that declared it, Not one that heard your words.
I first said to Zion, Behold! behold them! And I gave to Jerusalem a messenger of glad tidings.
I looked, but there was no man; Even among them, but there was none that gave counsel; I inquired of them that they might give an answer;
But behold, they are all vanity; Their works are nothing; Wind and emptiness are their molten images.
Behold my servant, whom I uphold, My chosen, in whom my soul delighteth, I have put my spirit upon him; He shall cause law to go forth to the nations.
He shall not cry aloud, nor lift up his voice, Nor cause it to be heard in the street.
The bruised reed shall he not break, And the glimmering flax shall he not quench; He shall send forth law according to truth.
He shall not fail, nor become weary, Until he shall have established justice in the earth. And distant nations shall wait for his law.
Thus saith God Jehovah, Who created the heavens and stretched them out, Who spread forth the earth, and that which springeth forth from it, Who gave breath to the people upon it, And spirit to them that walk thereon:
I, Jehovah, have called thee for salvation; I will hold thee by the hand; I will defend thee, and make thee a covenant to the people, A light to the nations;
To open the blind eyes, To bring out the prisoners from the prison, And them that sit in darkness out of the prison-house.
I am Jehovah, that is my name; And my glory will I not give to another, Nor my praise to graven images.
The former things, behold! they are come to pass, And new things do I now declare; Before they spring forth, I make them known to you.
Sing to Jehovah a new song; His praise to the ends of the earth; Ye that go down upon the sea, and all that fill it; Ye distant coasts, and ye that dwell therein!
Let the desert cry aloud, and the cities thereof; The villages, that Kedar inhabiteth; Let the inhabitants of the rock sing; Let them shout from the top of the mountains!
Let them give glory to Jehovah, And proclaim his praise in distant lands!
Jehovah shall march forth like a hero; Like a mighty warrior shall he rouse his indignation, He shall cry aloud; he shall shout the war-cry, And show himself mighty against his enemies.
“I have long held my peace; I have been still and refrained myself; But now will I cry like a woman in travail; I will destroy and swallow up at once.
I will lay waste mountains and hills, And dry up all their herbs. I will make the river solid land, And dry up the pools of water.
Then will I lead the blind in a way which they know not, And in unknown paths will I guide them; I will make darkness light before them, And crooked paths straight; These things will I do for them, and not forsake them.”
Then shall they be turned back, and be put to shame, Who trust in graven images; Who say to molten images, “Ye are our gods!”
Hear, O ye deaf! And look, ye blind, and see!
Who is blind, if not my servant? And who so deaf as my messenger, whom I send? Who so blind as the friend of God, So blind as the servant of Jehovah?
Thou seest many things, but regardest them not; Thou hast thine ears open, but hearest not!
It pleased Jehovah for his goodness' sake To give him a law, great and glorious;
And yet it is a robbed and plundered people; They are all of them bound in prisons, And hid in dungeons; They have become a spoil, and none delivereth; A prey, and none saith, “Restore!”
Who is there among you that will give ear to this, That will listen and attend for the time to come?
Who gave Jacob to be a spoil, And Israel to plunderers? Was it not Jehovah, against whom we sinned, In whose ways we would not walk, And whose laws we would not obey?
Therefore hath he poured out upon Israel the fury of his wrath, and the violence of war; It kindled a flame around about him, yet he did not regard it; It set him on fire, yet he laid it not to heart.
But now thus saith Jehovah, that created thee, O Jacob, That formed thee, O Israel: Fear not, for I have redeemed thee; I have called thee by name; thou art mine!
When thou passest through waters, I will be with thee; And through rivers, they shall not overflow thee; When thou walkest through fire, thou shalt not be burned, And the flame shall not consume thee.
For I am Jehovah, thy God, The Holy One of Israel, thy saviour. I will give Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee;
Because thou art precious in my sight, Because thou art honored, and I love thee, Therefore will I give men for thee, And nations for thy life.
Fear not, for I am with thee! I will bring thy children from the East, And gather thee from the West.
I will say to the North, “Give them up!” And to the South, “Withhold them not! Bring my sons from afar, And my daughters from the ends of the earth;
Every one that is called by my name, That I have created for my glory, That I have formed and made!”
Bring forth the blind people, having eyes, And the deaf, having ears.
Let all the nations be gathered together, And the kingdoms be assembled! Who among them hath declared this, And can show us former predictions? Let them produce their witnesses that they are right; That men may hear, and say, It is true!
Ye are my witnesses, saith Jehovah, And my servant whom I have chosen, That ye may know and believe me, And understand that I am He. Before me was no god formed, And after me there shall be none.
I, I am Jehovah, And besides me there is no saviour.
I have declared and have saved; I made it known, when there was no strange god among you; Ye are my witnesses, saith Jehovah, That I am God.
Even from the beginning of time I have been He, And none can rescue from my hand; I undertake, and who can hinder?
Thus saith Jehovah, Your redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; For your sakes have I sent to Babylon, And caused all her fugitives, And the Chaldeans, to descend to the ships of their delight.
I, Jehovah, am your Holy One, The creator of Israel, your king.
Thus saith Jehovah,—He that made a way in the sea, And a path in the mighty waters,
That caused the chariot and the horse, the army and the forces, to march forth; There they lay down together; they rose no more; They were extinguished; they were quenched like a torch;—
Remember not the former things; The things of old regard no more!
Behold, I do a new thing; Now shall it spring forth; yea, ye shall see it. Behold, I make a way in the wilderness, And streams in the desert;
The beasts of the forest shall honor me, The jackals and the ostriches; For I make rivers in the wilderness And streams in the desert, To give drink to my people, my chosen.
This people, which I have formed for myself Shall make known my praise.
Yet thou hast not called upon me, O Jacob, So as to have wearied thyself for me, O Israel!
Thou hast not brought me thy lambs for a burnt-offering, Nor honored me with thy sacrifices; I have not burdened thee with oblations, Nor wearied thee with incense;
Thou hast bought me no sweet-smelling reed with silver, Neither hast thou satisfied me with the fat of thy sacrifices; With thy sins hast thou burdened me, And wearied me with thine iniquities.
I, I myself, blot out thy transgressions for my own sake, And will not remember thy sins.
Put me in remembrance; let us plead together; Speak that thou mayst justify thyself.
Thy forefathers sinned, And thy teachers were rebellious against me;
Therefore have I profaned the princes of the sanctuary, And given up Jacob to a curse, And Israel to reproach.
Yet now hear, O Jacob, my servant, And Israel, whom I have chosen;
Thus saith Jehovah, thy Creator, He that formed thee, and hath helped thee from thy birth, Fear not, O Jacob, my servant, O Jeshurun, whom I have chosen.
For I will pour water upon the thirsty land, And streams upon the dry ground. I will pour out my spirit on thy children, And my blessing on thine offspring;
And they shall grow up, as among grass; As willows by the water-brooks.
One shall say, “I belong to Jehovah”; Another shall call upon the name of Jacob; Another shall write upon his hand, Jehovah's! And praise the name of Israel.
Thus saith Jehovah, the King of Israel, His redeemer, Jehovah of hosts: I am the first, and I the last, And besides me there is no God.
Who like me hath proclaimed the future,—Let him declare it, and set it in order before me!— Since I established the people of old? Let them make known the future, even that which is to come!
Fear ye not, neither be ye afraid! Have I not declared and made it known to you of old? Ye are my witnesses; Is there a God beside me? Yea, there is no other rock; I know not any.
They that make a graven image are all of them vanity, And their valued works are profitable for nothing; They are their own witnesses; They neither see nor understand, So that they may be ashamed.
Who hath formed a god, And cast a graven image, that is profitable for nothing?
Behold, all his fellows shall be ashamed; The workmen are themselves mortal men; They shall all be assembled; they shall stand up; They shall tremble, and be put to shame together!
The smith prepareth an axe in the coals, And fashioneth it with hammers, And worketh it with his strong arm; He becometh hungry, and his strength faileth; He drinketh no water, and is faint.
The carpenter stretcheth out the line; He marketh out the form of it with the sharp tool; He formeth it with planes; He marketh it with the compass; He maketh it in the figure of a man, With the beauty of a man, To dwell in a house.
He heweth him down cedars; He taketh the ilex and the oak; He chooseth for himself among the trees of the forest; He planteth the ash, and the rain matureth it;
These are fuel for man; He taketh thereof and warmeth himself; He kindleth with it, and baketh bread; A god also he formeth of it, and worshippeth it; A graven image, and falleth down before it.
Half of it he burneth with fire; With half of it he eateth flesh; He roasteth meat, and satisfieth himself; He also warmeth himself, and saith, Aha! I am warm; I feel the fire.
Of the residue he maketh a god, even his graven image; He falleth down before it and worshippeth it, And prayeth to it, and saith, “Deliver me, for thou art my God!”
They know not, neither understand; For their eyes are closed up, that they cannot see, And their hearts, that they cannot understand.
None considereth in his mind, Or hath knowledge and understanding to say: “Half of it I have burned with fire; I have also baked bread on the coals of it; I have roasted flesh and have eaten; And shall I make the remnant an abomination? Shall I fall down before the stock of a tree?”
He toileth for ashes; A deluded heart turneth him aside, So that he cannot deliver himself, and say “Is there not a lie in my right hand?”
Remember these things, O Jacob, O Israel, for thou art my servant! I formed thee; thou art my servant; O Israel, I will not forget thee.
I have caused thy transgressions to vanish like a cloud, And thy sins like a mist; Return to me, for I have redeemed thee!
Sing, O ye heavens, for Jehovah hath done it; Shout, O ye depths of the earth! Break forth into song, ye mountains! Thou forest, and every tree therein! For Jehovah hath redeemed Jacob, And glorified himself in Israel.
Thus saith Jehovah, thy Redeemer, Even he that formed thee from the womb; I am Jehovah, who made all things; Who stretched out the heavens alone; Who spread out the earth by myself;
Who frustrateth the signs of deceivers, And maketh the diviners mad; Who putteth the wise men to shame, And maketh their knowledge folly;
Who establisheth the word of his servant, And performeth the purpose of his messengers; Who saith of Jerusalem, “She shall be inhabited,” And of the cities of Judah, “They shall be built,” And, “Her desolated places I will restore.”
Who saith to the deep, “Be dry! I will dry up thy streams!”
Who saith of Cyrus, “He is my shepherd; He shall perform all my pleasure”; Who saith of Jerusalem, “She shall be built,” And of the temple, “Her foundation shall be laid.”
Thus saith Jehovah to his anointed, To Cyrus, whom I hold by his right hand, To subdue nations before him, And ungird the loins of kings; To open before him the two-leaved gates, And the doors shall not be shut.
I will go before thee, And make the high places plain; I will break in pieces the gates of brass, And cut in sunder the bars of iron.
I will give thee the treasures of darkness, And hidden riches of secret places, That thou mayst know that I am Jehovah Who calleth thee by name, the God of Israel.
For the sake of Jacob, my servant, And Israel, my chosen, I have called thee by thy name; I have spoken to thee as a friend, though thou hast not known me.
I am Jehovah, and none else; There is no God besides me; I have girded thee, though thou hast not known me.
That men may know from the rising of the sun, And from the West, that there is none besides me; I am Jehovah, and none else.
I form the light, and create darkness; I make peace, and create evil; I, Jehovah, do all these things.
Pour forth, ye heavens, from above; Ye clouds, shower down prosperity! Let the earth open, and bring forth salvation; Yea, let righteousness spring up together! I, Jehovah, create it.
Woe to him that contendeth with his Maker! A potsherd of the potsherds of the earth! Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What makest thou? Or thy work say of thee, He hath no hands?
Woe to him that saith to his father, Why dost thou beget? Or to his mother, Why dost thou bring forth?
Thus saith Jehovah, the Holy One of Israel, and his Maker, Ask of me concerning things to come; My children, the work of my hands, leave them to me!
I made the earth, And created man upon it; My hands spread out the heavens, And all their host did I arrange.
I have raised him up for salvation, And I will make all his ways plain; He shall build my city, and release my captives, Not for price, and not for ransom, Saith Jehovah of hosts.
Thus saith Jehovah: The wealth of Egypt and the merchandise of the Ethiopians and Sabeans, men of stature, Shall come over to thee, and be thine; They shall follow thee; in chains shall they pass along; They shall fall down to thee, and make supplication to thee: “In thee alone is God, and there is none else; There is no other God.”
Truly thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the saviour!
They shall all be ashamed and confounded, They shall go to confusion together, That are makers of idols.
But Israel shall be saved by Jehovah with an everlasting salvation; Ye shall never be ashamed, nor confounded.
For thus saith Jehovah, who created the heavens; The God that formed the earth and made it; he that made it firm; He created it not in vain; he formed it to be inhabited: I am Jehovah, and none else.
I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth; I have not said to the race of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain! I, Jehovah, speak truth; I declare that which is right.
Assemble yourselves and come; Gather yourselves together, ye that are escaped of the nations! They are without understanding, who carry about with them the wood of their graven image, And pray to a god that cannot save.
Proclaim ye, and bring them near, And let them take counsel together: Who hath made this known from ancient time? Who hath declared it of old? Is it not I, Jehovah, besides whom there is no God? A God that uttereth truth, and giveth salvation; there is none besides me.
Look to me, and be saved, all ye ends of the earth! For I am God, and there is none else.
By myself have I sworn, The truth hath gone from my mouth, The word, that shall not return, That to me every knee shall bow, That to me every tongue shall swear.
“Only in Jehovah,” shall men say, “Is salvation and strength; To him shall come and be put to shame, All that are incensed against him.”
Through Jehovah shall all the race of Israel be delivered, And in him shall they glory.
Bel sinketh down; Nebo falleth; Their images are laid upon beasts and cattle; Those that ye once bore are packed upon them; A burden to the weary beast!
They sink down; they fall together; They cannot rescue the burden; They themselves go into captivity.
Hearken to me, O house of Jacob, And all the remnant of the house of Israel; Ye that have been borne by me from your birth, That have been carried by me from your earliest breath!
Even to your old age I am the same; Even to hoar hairs I will carry you; I have done it, and I will still bear you; I will carry, and will deliver you.
To whom will ye liken me, and compare me? Yea, to whom will ye compare me, that we may be like?
They lavish gold out of the bag, And weigh silver in the balance; They hire a goldsmith, and he maketh it a god; They fall down, yea, they worship it.
They lift him upon the shoulder, and carry him; They set him in his place, and there he standeth; From his place he moveth not; Yea, one may cry to him, yet doth he not answer, Nor save him out of his distress.
Remember these things, and show yourselves men; Lay them to heart, ye apostates!
Remember the former things in ancient times! For I am God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is none like me.
Declaring the end from the beginning; From ancient times the things that were not yet done; Saying, My purpose shall stand, And I will do all my pleasure;
Calling from the East the eagle, The man that executeth my purpose from a far country; I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass; I have purposed it, I will also do it.
Hearken to me, ye stubborn-hearted, That are far from deliverance!
I have brought near my deliverance; it is not far off; My salvation shall not tarry; I will give to Zion salvation, To Israel, my glory.
Come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin, daughter of Babylon! Sit on the ground without a throne, O daughter of the Chaldaeans! For thou shalt no longer be called the tender and delicate!
Take the mill-stones and grind meal; Raise thy veil, lift up thy train; Make bare the leg, wade through the streams!
Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, And thy shame shall be seen. I will take vengeance; I will make peace with none.
Our Redeemer, Jehovah of hosts is his name, The Holy One of Israel.
Sit thou in silence; go into darkness, O daughter of the Chaldaeans! For thou shalt no more be called the mistress of kingdoms.
I was angry with my people; I profaned my inheritance, And gave them into thy hand; Thou didst show them no mercy; Even upon the aged didst thou lay a very grievous yoke.
Thou saidst, “I shall be mistress forever”; So that thou didst not lay these things to thy heart, Nor consider what would be the end of them.
But hear thou this, thou that art given to pleasure! That sittest in security, And sayest in thy heart, “I am, and there is none besides me; I shall not be a widow, Nor see myself childless!”
Behold, both these things shall come upon thee suddenly, in one day, Loss of children, and widowhood; In full measure shall they come upon thee, In spite of thy many sorceries, And the great abundance of thy enchantments.
Thou didst trust in thy wickedness, and saidst, “No one seeth me”; Thy wisdom and thy knowledge have led thee astray; Thou saidst in thy heart, “I am, and there is none besides me”;
Therefore shall evil come upon thee, of which thou shalt not know the dawn; And mischief shall fall upon thee, which thou shalt not be able to expiate; Suddenly shall desolation come upon thee, when thou thinkest not of it.
Persevere now in thy enchantments; In the multitude of thy sorceries, in which thou hast labored from thy youth; Perhaps thou mayst be profited by them! Perhaps thou mayst make thyself feared!
Art thou wearied with thy many devices? Let them stand up, then, and save thee, The observers of the heavens, the star-gazers, They that prognosticate at every new moon The things that shall come upon thee!
Behold, they shall be like stubble; the fire shall burn them up; They shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame; Not a coal shall be left of them to warm one, Nor a spark of fire to sit by.
Thus shall it be with them with whom thou hast labored; Thus with them with whom thou hast trafficked from thy youth; They shall go every one his own way; None shall help thee.
Hear this, O house of Jacob! Ye that are called by the name of Israel; Ye that have come forth from the fountain of Judah; Ye that swear by the name of Jehovah, And praise the God of Israel, But not in truth and sincerity!
For they call themselves of the holy city, And stay themselves on the God of Israel, Whose name is Jehovah of hosts:—
What hath happened I declared to you long ago; From my mouth it proceeded, and I made it known; On a sudden I effected it, and it came to pass.
Because I knew that thou art obstinate, And that thy neck is a bar of iron, And that thy brow is brass,
I declared it to thee long ago; Before it came to pass, I made it known to thee; Lest thou shouldst say, My idol effected it, And my graven image, and my molten image ordained it.
Thou hast heard it; now see it all! And will ye not confess it? From this time I make you hear a new thing, Even a hidden thing, which thou hast not known.
It is produced now, and not long ago; Before this day thou hast not heard of it, Lest thou shouldst say, Behold, I knew it.
Yea, thou heardest it not; yea, thou knewest it not; Yea, it was not disclosed to thee long ago; For I knew that thou wast wholly faithless, And wast called rebellious from thy birth.
For the sake of my name I will defer my anger, And for the sake of my praise I will restrain it from thee, That I may not utterly cut thee off.
Behold, I have melted thee, and found no silver; I have tried thee in the furnace of affliction.
For mine own sake will I do it; For how would my name be blasphemed? And my glory will I not give to another.
Hearken to me, O Jacob, And Israel, whom I have called! I am He, I am the first, and I the last.
Yea, my hand hath founded the earth, And my right hand hath spread out the heavens; I called them; they stood forth together.
Assemble yourselves, all of you, and hear! Who among you hath declared these things? He whom Jehovah loveth will execute his pleasure upon Babylon, And his power upon the Chaldaeans.
I, even I, have spoken; yea, I have called him; I have brought him, and his way shall be prosperous.
Draw near to me, and hear ye this! I spake not in secret from the beginning; And since it began to be, I have been there; And now hath the Lord Jehovah sent me with his spirit.
Thus saith Jehovah, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; I am Jehovah, thy God, who teacheth thee what will profit thee; Who leadeth thee in the way thou shouldst go.
O that thou wouldst hearken to my commandments! Then shall thy peace be as a river, And thy prosperity as the waves of the sea;
Then shall thy posterity be as the sand, And the fruit of thy body as the offspring of the sea; Thy name shall not be cut off, nor destroyed before me.
Come ye forth from Babylon, flee ye from the land of the Chaldaeans with the voice of joy! Publish ye this, and make it known; Let it resound to the ends of the earth! Say: “Jehovah hath redeemed his servant Jacob;
They thirst not in the deserts through which he leadeth them; Waters from the rock he causeth to flow for them; He cleaveth the rock, and the waters gush forth.
There is no peace, saith Jehovah, for the wicked.”
Listen to me, ye distant lands! Attend, ye nations from afar! Jehovah called me at my birth; In my very childhood he called me by name.
He made my mouth like a sharp sword; In the shadow of his hand did he hide me. He made me a polished shaft; In his quiver did he hide me.
He said to me, Thou art my servant; Israel, in whom I will be glorified.
Then I said, I have labored in vain; For naught, for vanity, have I spent my strength; Yet my cause is with Jehovah, And my reward with my God.
And now thus saith Jehovah, Who formed me from my birth to be his servant To bring Jacob to him again, And that Israel might be gathered to him,—For I am honored in the eyes of Jehovah, And my God is my strength,—
He said, It is a small tiling that thou shouldst be my servant, To raise up the tribes of Jacob, And to restore the preserved of Israel; I will also make thee the light of the nations, That my salvation may reach the ends of the earth.
Thus saith Jehovah, the Redeemer of Israel, his Holy One, To him that is despised by men, abhorred by the people, To the servant of tyrants; Kings shall see, and stand up, Princes, and they shall pay homage, On account of Jehovah, who is faithful, The Holy One of Israel, who hath chosen thee.
Thus saith Jehovah; In the time of favor will I hear thee; In the day of deliverance will I help thee; I will preserve thee, and make thee a mediator for the people, To restore the land, to distribute the desolated inheritances;
To say to the prisoners, Go forth! To them that are in darkness, Come to the light! They shall feed in the ways, And on all high places shall be their pasture.
They shall not hunger, neither shall they thirst; Neither shall the heat nor the sun smite them; For he that hath compassion on them shall lead them; To springs of water shall he guide them.
And I will make all my mountains a highway; And my roads shall be prepared.
Behold! these shall come from far; And behold! these from the North and from the West, And these from the land of Sinim.
Sing, O ye heavens, and rejoice, O earth! Break forth into singing, ye mountains! For Jehovah comforteth his people, And hath compassion on his afflicted ones.
Zion saith, “Jehovah hath forsaken me; The Lord hath forgotten me.”
Can a woman forget her sucking child, So as not to have compassion on the son of her womb? Yet, should they forget, I will never forget thee!
Behold, I have graven thee on the palms of my hands; Thy walls are ever before my eyes.
Thy children shall make haste; They that destroyed and laid thee waste shall depart from thee.
Lift up thine eyes around, and see! They all assemble themselves, and come to thee. As I live, saith Jehovah, Thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all, as with a rich dress; Thou shalt bind them on thee, as a bride her jewels.
For thy waste and desolate places, and thy land laid in ruins, Shall now be too narrow for the inhabitants; And they that devoured thee shall be far away.
Thou, that hast been childless, shalt yet hear thy sons exclaim: “The place is too narrow for me; make room for me that I may dwell.”
And thou shalt say in thy heart, Who hath begotten me these? I surely was childless and unfruitful, An exile, and an outcast; who then hath brought up these? Behold, I was left alone; these, then, where were they?
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will lift up my hand to the nations, And set up my standard to the kingdoms; They shall bring thy sons in their arms, And thy daughters upon their shoulders.
And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, And queens thy nursing mothers; Upon their faces shall they bow down before thee, And lick the dust of thy feet. Thus shalt thou know that I am Jehovah; And they who trust in me shall not be put to shame.
Shall the prey be taken away from the mighty? Or shall the spoil of the terrible be rescued?
Yea, thus saith Jehovah, The prey shall be taken away from the mighty, And the spoil of the terrible shall be rescued; For with him that contendeth with thee will I contend, (49:26) And I will save thy children.
(49:27) And I will cause thine oppressors to eat their own flesh; With their own blood shall they be drunk, as with new wine; And all flesh shall know that I Jehovah am thy saviour; That thy redeemer is the Mighty One of Jacob.
Thus saith Jehovah: Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement, By which I dismissed her? Or who is he among my creditors To whom I have sold you? Behold, for your iniquities are ye sold, And for your transgressions was your mother dismissed.
Wherefore, when I came, was no man at hand? When I called, was there none to answer? Is my hand too short to redeem? Or have I no power to deliver? Behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea, And make the rivers a desert. Their fish putrefy for want of water, And die with thirst.
I clothe the heavens with blackness, And make sackcloth their covering.
The Lord Jehovah hath given me the tongue of the learned, That I might know how to strengthen with my words them that are weary; He wakeneth me every morning, He wakeneth mine ear, That I may hear in the manner of the learned.
The Lord Jehovah opened mine ear, And I was not disobedient, Neither did I withdraw myself backward.
I gave my back to the smiters, And my cheeks to them that pluck the beard; I hid not my face from shame and spitting.
But the Lord Jehovah is my helper, Therefore shall I not be confounded; Therefore have I made my face like a flint, For I know that I shall not be put to shame.
He that defendeth my cause is near; Who will contend with me? Let us stand up together! Who is my adversary? Let him come near to me!
Behold, the Lord Jehovah is my defender; Who is he that shall condemn me? Behold, they shall all waste away like a garment; The moth shall consume them.
Who is there among you that feareth Jehovah, That hearkeneth to the voice of his servant, That walketh in darkness and hath no light? Let him trust in the name of Jehovah, And lean upon his God.
Behold, all ye who kindle a fire, Who gird yourselves with burning arrows! Walk ye in the light of your fire, And in the burning arrows which ye have kindled. This shall ye have from my hand; Ye shall lie down in sorrow.
Hearken to me, ye that pursue righteousness. Ye that seek Jehovah! Look to the rock whence ye were hewn, To the pit-quarry whence ye were digged!
Look to Abraham your father, And to Sarah that bore you! For I called him when only one, And blessed him, and multiplied him.
Thus will Jehovah have pity upon Zion; He will have pity upon all her desolations. He will make her wilderness like Eden, Her desert like the garden of Jehovah. Joy and gladness shall be found therein; Thanksgiving, and the voice of melody.
Hearken to me, O my people! And give ear to me, O my nation! For a law shall proceed from me, And I will establish my statutes for the light of the nations.
My help is near; my salvation goeth forth; My arm shall judge the nations; Distant lands shall wait for me, And in my arm shall they trust.
Lift up your eyes to the heavens, And look down upon the earth beneath! For the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, And the earth shall decay like a garment, And its inhabitants shall perish like flies. But my salvation shall endure forever, And my goodness shall not decay.
Hearken to me, ye that know righteousness, The people in whose heart is my law! Fear ye not the reproach of men, Nor be disheartened by their revilings!
For the moth shall consume them like a garment, And the worm shall eat them like wool. But my goodness shall endure forever, And my salvation from generation to generation.
Awake! awake! clothe thyself with strength, O arm of Jehovah! Awake, as in the ancient days, in the generations of old!
Art thou not the same that smote Rahab, And wounded the dragon? Art thou not the same that dried up the sea, The waters of the great deep,—That made the depths of the sea a path for the redeemed to pass through?
Thus shall the ransomed of Jehovah return; They shall come to Zion with singing; Everlasting joy shall be upon their heads; They shall obtain gladness and joy, And sorrow and sighing shall flee away.
I, even I, am he that hath pity upon you; Who art thou, that thou art afraid of man, that shall die, Of the son of man, that shall perish like grass,
And forgettest Jehovah thy maker, That stretched out the heavens, And founded the earth, And fearest continually every day, On account of the fury of the oppressor, As if he were taking aim to destroy thee? Where now is the fury of the oppressor?
Soon shall the enchained be loosed; He shall not die in the pit, Nor shall his bread fail.
For I am Jehovah thy God, That rebuketh the sea when his waves roar; Jehovah of hosts is his name.
I have put my words into thy mouth, And have covered thee with the shadow of my hand, To establish the heavens, and to found the earth. And to say to Zion, “Thou art my people!”
Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem! Thou that hast drunk from the hand of Jehovah the cup of his fury, Thou that hast drunk to the dregs the cup of giddiness!
There is not one to lead her, of all the sons which she hath brought forth, Nor is there one to take her by the hand, of all the sons which she hath nurtured.
These two things have come upon thee, And who bemoaneth thee? Desolation and destruction, and famine and the sword; How shall I comfort thee?
Thy sons have fainted; they lie at the head of all the streets, Like a deer in the net; They are full of the wrath of Jehovah, Of the rebuke of thy God.
Therefore, hear this, thou afflicted, Thou drunken, and not with wine!
Thus saith thy Lord, Jehovah, And thy God, that defendeth the cause of his people. Behold, I will take from thy hand the cup of giddiness, The cup of my wrath; Thou shalt drink no more of it.
And I will put it into the hand of them that have afflicted thee; That have said to thee, “Bow down, that we may pass over!” And thou madest thy body as the ground, And as the street, to them that passed over.
Awake, awake, put on thy majesty, O Zion! Put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city! For no more shall come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean.
Shake thyself from the dust, Arise and sit erect, O Jerusalem! Loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion!
For thus saith Jehovah: For naught were ye sold, And without money shall ye be ransomed.
For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: My people went down to Egypt formerly to sojourn there, And the Assyrian oppressed them without cause.
And now, what have I here to do, saith the Lord, When my people is taken away for naught, And their tyrants exult, saith Jehovah, And all the day long my name is blasphemed.
Therefore shall my people know my name; Therefore in that day shall they know That I am he that said, Behold, here am I!
How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, of him that proclaimeth peace! That bringeth good tidings, that proclaimeth salvation! That saith to Zion, “Thy God is king!”
Hark! the voice of thy watchmen! They lift up the voice together; yea, they shout! For eye to eye shall they behold, When Jehovah returneth to Zion.
Break forth into joy; shout together, ye ruins of Jerusalem! For Jehovah hath pity on his people; he redeemeth Jerusalem.
Jehovah maketh bare his holy arm In the sight of all the nations; All the ends of the earth Behold the salvation from our God.
Depart, depart ye; go ye out from thence; Touch no unclean thing! Go ye out from the midst of her; Be ye clean, ye that bear the vessels of Jehovah!
For not in haste shall ye go forth, Nor in flight shall ye pass along; For Jehovah shall march in your front, And the God of Israel bring up your rear.
Behold, my servant shall prosper; He shall be lifted up, and set on high, and greatly exalted.
As many were amazed at the sight of him,—So disfigured and scarcely human was his visage, And so unlike that of a man was his form,—
So shall he cause many nations to exult on account of him; Kings shall shut their mouths before him. For what had never been told them shall they see, And what they never heard shall they perceive.
Who hath believed our report, And to whom hath the arm of Jehovah been revealed?
For He grew up before him like a tender plant, Like a sucker from a dry soil; He had no form, nor comeliness, that we should look upon him, Nor beauty, that we should take pleasure in him.
He was despised, and forsaken of men, A man of sorrows, and acquainted with disease; As one from whom men hide their faces, He was despised, and we esteemed him not.
But he bore our diseases, And carried our pains, And we esteemed him stricken from above, Smitten of God, and afflicted.
But he was wounded for our transgressions; He was bruised for our iniquities; For our peace was the chastisement upon him, And by his stripes are we healed.
All we, like sheep, were going astray; We turned every one to his own way, And Jehovah laid upon him the iniquity of us all.
He was oppressed, that was already afflicted. Yet he opened not his mouth; As a lamb that is led to the slaughter, And as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, He opened not his mouth.
By oppression and punishment he was taken away, And who in his generation would consider That he was cut off from the land of the living, That for the transgression of my people he was smitten?
His grave was appointed with the wicked, And with the rich man was his sepulchre, Although he had done no injustice, And there was no deceit in his mouth.
It pleased Jehovah severely to bruise him; But when he hath made his life a sacrifice for sin, He shall see posterity; he shall prolong his days, And the pleasure of Jehovah shall prosper in his hand.
Free from his sorrows, he shall see and be satisfied; By his knowledge shall my righteous servant lead many to righteousness, And he shall bear their iniquities.
Therefore will I give him his portion with the mighty, And with heroes shall he divide the spoil, Because he poured out his soul unto death, And was numbered with transgressors; Because he bore the sin of many, And made intercession for transgressors.
Sing, O thou barren, that didst not hear! Break forth into singing, and shout for joy, thou that wast not in travail! For more are the children of the desolate Than of the married woman, saith Jehovah.
Enlarge the place of thy tent, And let the canopy of thy habitation be extended! Spare not; lengthen thy cords, And make fast thy stakes!
For on the right hand and on the left shalt thou burst forth with increase; And thy posterity shall inherit the nations, And people the desolate cities.
Fear not, for thou shalt not be confounded; Blush not, for thou shalt not be put to shame. For thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, And the reproach of thy widowhood thou shalt remember no more.
For thy husband is thy Maker; Jehovah of hosts is his name. Thy redeemer is the Holy One of Israel; The God of the whole earth shall he be called.
For as a woman forsaken, and deeply afflicted, hath Jehovah recalled thee, And as a wife wedded in youth, that hath been rejected, saith thy God.
For a little moment I have forsaken thee, But with great mercy will I gather thee.
In overflowing wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment. But with everlasting kindness will I have mercy upon thee, Saith thy redeemer, Jehovah.
As in the time of the waters of Noah, so shall it be now; As I swore that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth, So do I swear that I will not be angry with thee, nor rebuke thee.
For the mountains shall depart, And the hills be overthrown, But my kindness shall not depart from thee, Nor shall my covenant of peace be overthrown, Saith Jehovah, that hath pity on thee.
O thou afflicted, beaten with the storm, destitute of consolation! Behold, I lay thy stones in cement of vermilion, And thy foundations with sapphires.
And I will make thy battlements of rubies, And thy gates of carbuncles, And all thy borders fill of precious stones.
All thy children shall be taught by Jehovah, And great shall be the prosperity of thy children.
By righteousness shalt thou be established; Be thou far from anxiety, for thou shalt have nothing to fear, And from terror, for it shall not come near thee.
If any be leagued against thee, it is not by my command; Whoever shall be leagued against thee shall come over to thee.
Behold, I create the smith, Who bloweth up the coals into a fire, And produceth an instrument for his work; I also create the destroyer to lay waste.
Whatever weapon is formed against thee, it shall not prosper; And against every tongue that contendeth with thee, thou shalt obtain thy cause. This is the inheritance of the servants of Jehovah, And the blessing which they receive from me, saith Jehovah.
Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters! Even ye that have no money, come ye, buy and eat! Yea, come, buy wine and milk, Without money and without price.
Wherefore do ye spend your money for that which is not bread, And your substance for that which doth not satisfy? Listen attentively to me; so shall ye eat that which is good, And your soul shall delight itself with delicacies.
Incline your ear, and come to me; Hear, and your soul shall live! And I will make with you an everlasting covenant; I will give you the sure mercies of David.
Behold, I gave him for a commander to the nations; For a prince, and a lawgiver to the nations.
Behold, the nation which thou knowest not thou shalt call; And the nation which knew not thee shall run to thee, For the sake of Jehovah, thy God, And of the Holy One of Israel, for he hath glorified thee.
Seek ye Jehovah, while he may be found; Call upon him while he is near;
Let the wicked forsake his way, And the unrighteous man his thoughts; Let him return to Jehovah, and he will have mercy upon him, And to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.
For my thoughts are not your thoughts, Neither are your ways my ways, saith Jehovah.
For as the heavens are higher than the earth, So are my ways higher than your ways, And my thoughts than your thoughts.
For as the rain and the snow descend from heaven, And return not thither, But water the earth, and make it bear and put forth its increase, That it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater;
So shall my word be, that goeth forth from my mouth; It shall not return to me void; But it shall bring to pass that which is my pleasure, And it shall accomplish that for which I send it.
For ye shall go out with joy And be led forth with peace; The mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into singing, And all the trees of the field shall clap their hands.
Instead of the thorn shall grow up the cypress-tree, And instead of the bramble shall grow up the myrtle-tree, And it shall be to Jehovah for a name; For an everlasting memorial, that shall not pass away.
Thus saith Jehovah: Keep ye justice, and practise righteousness; For the coming of my salvation is near, And my deliverance is soon to be revealed.
Happy the man that doeth this, And the son of man that holdeth it fast; That keepeth the sabbath, and profaneth it not, And restraineth his hand from doing evil.
And let not the stranger that joineth himself to Jehovah say, Jehovah hath wholly separated me from his people. And let not the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree!
For thus saith Jehovah concerning the eunuchs: They that keep my sabbaths, And take pleasure in doing my will, And hold fast my covenant,
To them will I give in my house, and within my walls, a portion and a name, Better than of sons and daughters; An everlasting name will I give them, That shall never fade away.
The strangers, also, that join themselves to Jehovah, to serve him, To love the name of Jehovah, and to be his servants. Every one that keepeth the sabbath, and profaneth it not, And holdeth fast my covenant,
Them will I bring to my holy mountain, And I will make them rejoice in my house of prayer; Their burnt-offerings and sacrifices shall be accepted on mine altar; For my house shall be called a house of prayer for all nations.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, That gathereth the outcasts of Israel; Yet will I gather others to him, Besides those that are already gathered.
Come, all ye beasts of the field, Yea, all ye beasts of the forest, to devour!
His watchmen are all blind; they know nothing; They are all dumb dogs, that cannot bark, Dreaming, lying down, loving to slumber;
Yet are they greedy dogs that cannot be satisfied; The shepherds themselves will not attend; They all turn aside to their own way, Every one of them to their own gain.
“Come on, let me bring wine, And let us fill ourselves with strong drink, And to-morrow shall be as to-day, And even much more abundant.”
The righteous man perisheth, and no one layeth it to heart; And pious men are taken away, and none considereth That because of the evil the righteous man is taken away.
He entereth into peace; He resteth in his bed, Every one that walketh in uprightness.
But draw near hither, ye sons of the sorceress, Ye brood of the adulterer and the harlot!
Of whom do ye make your sport, And at whom do ye make wide the mouth, And draw out the tongue? Are ye not rebellious children, a treacherous brood?
Burning with lust for idols Under every green tree, Slaying children in the valleys, Under the clefts of the rocks?
With the smooth stones of the valley is thy portion; These, these are thy lot; Here thou pourest out thy drink-offering, And presentest thy meat-offering; Can I see such things, and be at rest?
Upon a high and lofty mountain settest thou thy bed; Thither dost thou go up to offer sacrifice;
Behind the doors and the posts dost thou place thy memorial; Thou departest from me, and uncoverest, and ascendest, and enlargest thy bed. Thou makest an agreement with them; Thou desirest their bed; Thou choosest a place.
Thou goest to the king with oil, And takest much precious perfume; Thou sendest thine ambassadors afar, Yea, down to the under-world.
In the length of thy journeys thou hast wearied thyself, But thou sayest not, “I will desist”; Thou yet findest life in thy hand, Therefore thou art not discouraged.
On account of whom art thou anxious, and of whom art thou afraid, that thou hast proved false, And hast not remembered me, nor laid it to heart? Behold, I have been silent a long time; Therefore thou fearest me not.
But now I announce thy deliverance, And thy works do not profit thee.
When thou criest, let thy host of idols deliver thee! But the wind shall bear them all away; A breath shall take them off; But he that putteth his trust in me Shall possess the land, And shall inherit my holy mountain.
Men shall say, Cast up, cast up, prepare the road; Remove every obstruction from the way of my people!
For thus saith the high and lofty One That inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy: I dwell in the high and holy place; With him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit; To revive the spirit of the humble, And to revive the heart of the contrite ones.
For I will not contend forever, Nor will I be always angry; For life would fail before me, And the souls which I created.
For the guilt of his covetousness I was angry; I smote him, I hid myself, and was angry; But yet he went on perversely in the way of his heart.
I have seen his ways, yet will I heal him; I will guide him, and I will restore comfort To him and to his mourners;
I create the fruit of the lips. Peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that is nigh, Saith Jehovah; I will heal him.
But the wicked is like the troubled sea, Which cannot rest, Whose waters cast up mire and dirt.
There is no peace, saith my God, for the wicked.
Cry aloud, spare not, Lift up thy voice like a trumpet, And show my people their transgression, And the house of Jacob their sins!
Yet they seek me daily, And desire to know my ways, As a nation that hath done righteousness, And hath not forsaken the ordinances of their God; They inquire of me concerning the judgments which bring salvation; They long for the coming of God.
“Wherefore do we fast, and thou seest not? Wherefore do we afflict our souls, and thou dost not regard it?” Behold, in the day of your fasts ye pursue your pleasure, And exact all your labors.
Behold, ye fast in strife and contention, And smiting with the fist of wickedness. Ye do not fast now So that your voice shall be heard on high.
Is this the fast that I approve, A day for a man to afflict his soul? Is it that he should bow down his head like a bulrush, And lie down in sackcloth and ashes? Wilt thou call this a fast, And a day acceptable to Jehovah?
Is not this the fast that I approve,—To loose the bands of wickedness, To undo the heavy burdens, To let the oppressed go free, And to break in pieces every yoke?
Is it not to break thy bread to the hungry, And to bring the poor, that are cast out, to thy house? When thou seest the naked, that thou clothe him, And that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?
Then shall thy light break forth like the morning, And thy health shall spring forth speedily; Thy salvation shall go before thee, And the glory of Jehovah shall bring up thy rear.
Then shalt thou call, and Jehovah will answer; Thou shalt cry, and he shall say, Lo, here I am! If thou remove from the midst of thee the yoke, The pointing of the finger, and the injurious speech.
If thou bring forth thy bread to the hungry, And satisfy the afflicted soul, Then in obscurity shall light arise to thee; Yea, thy darkness shall become as noonday;
Jehovah shall lead thee continually, And satisfy thee in the time of drought, And strengthen thy bones; Thou shalt be like a watered garden, and a spring of water, Whose waters never fail.
Thy people shall build the ancient desolations, The ruins of many generations shall they restore; Thou shalt be called the repairer of the breach, The restorer of ways for inhabitants.
If thou restrain thy foot from the sabbath, From doing thy pleasure on my holy day, If thou shalt call the sabbath a delight, The holy day of Jehovah honorable, And shalt honor it by refraining from thy work, From doing thy pleasure, and speaking vain words,
Then shalt thou delight thyself in Jehovah. And I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, And cause thee to enjoy the inheritance of Jacob, thy father; For the mouth of Jehovah hath spoken it.
Behold, Jehovah's hand is not shortened, that it cannot save, Nor is his ear heavy, that it cannot hear;
But your iniquities have separated you from your God, And your sins have hidden his face from you, that he doth not hear.
For your hands are polluted with blood, And your fingers with iniquity; Your lips speak falsehood, And your tongue muttereth wickedness.
No one bringeth his suit with justice, And no one pleadeth with truth; They trust in vain words, and speak lies; They conceive mischief, and bring forth destruction.
They hatch the eggs of the basilisk, And weave the web of the spider; He that eateth of their eggs dieth, And when one of them is crushed, a viper breaketh forth.
Of their webs no garment is made, Nor can one cover himself with their work; Their works are works of iniquity, And the deed of violence is in their hands.
Their feet run to evil; They make haste to shed innocent blood. Their thoughts are evil thoughts; Oppression and destruction are in their paths.
The way of peace they know not, Nor is there any justice in their steps; They have made for themselves crooked paths; Whoso goeth in them knoweth not peace.
Therefore is judgment far from us, And deliverance doth not overtake us. We look for light, and behold obscurity; For brightness, and we walk in darkness.
We grope for the wall, like the blind; We feel our way, like those that are deprived of sight; We stumble at noonday as in the night; In the midst of fertile fields we are like the dead.
We groan, all of us, like bears, And like doves we make a continued moan; We look for judgment, and it cometh not; For salvation, and it is far from us.
For our transgressions are multiplied before thee, And our sins testify against us! For our transgressions are not hidden from us, And our iniquities we know.
We have rebelled, and proved false to Jehovah; We have departed from our God; We have spoken violence and rebellion; Our hearts have conceived and brought forth words of falsehood.
And justice is turned back, And equity standeth afar off, For truth falleth in the gate, And rectitude cannot enter.
Truth is not to be found, And he that departeth from evil is plundered; And Jehovah saw it, And it displeased him that there was no justice.
He saw that there was none to help, And wondered that there was none to interpose; Then his own arm wrought salvation for him, And his righteousness it supported him.
He put on righteousness as a breastplate, And the helmet of salvation upon his head; He put on garments of vengeance for his clothing, And clad himself with zeal, as with a mantle.
According to their deeds will he repay them,—Wrath to his adversaries, recompense to his enemies; To the distant coasts will he repay a recompense.
They in the west shall fear the name of Jehovah, And they in the rising of the sun his glory, When he cometh like a river straitened in its course, Which a strong wind driveth along.
Yet shall a redeemer come to Zion, For them that turn from their transgressions in Jacob, saith Jehovah.
And as for me, this is my covenant with them, saith Jehovah: My spirit, which is upon thee, And my words, which I have put in thy mouth, They shall not depart from thy mouth, Nor from the mouth of thy sons, Nor from the mouth of thy sons' sons, saith Jehovah, From this time forth forever.
Arise, shine! for thy light is come, And the glory of Jehovah is risen upon thee.
For, behold, darkness shall cover the earth, And gross darkness the nations; But upon thee shall Jehovah arise, And his glory shall be seen upon thee.
Nations shall come to thy light, And kings to the brightness that riseth upon thee.
Lift up thine eyes round about and see! They all gather themselves together, and come to thee; Thy sons come from afar, And thy daughters are carried at thy side.
Then shalt thou see, and be bright with joy; Thy heart shall throb, and swell with delight, When the riches of the sea shall be turned toward thee, And the wealth of the nations shall come to thee.
A multitude of camels shall cover thee, Dromedaries from Midian and Ephah; From Sheba shall they all come. Gold and frankincense shall they bring, And proclaim the praises of Jehovah.
All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered to thee, And the rams of Nebaioth shall minister to thee; They shall ascend mine altar, an acceptable offering, And my glorious house I will adorn.
Who are these that fly like clouds, And like doves to their habitations?
Behold, the distant coasts shall wait for me, And the ships of Tarshish among the first, To bring thy sons from afar, And their silver and their gold with them, Because of the name of Jehovah thy God, Of the Holy One of Israel, for he glorifieth thee.
The sons of the stranger shall build up thy walls, And their kings shall minister to thee; For in my wrath I smote thee, But in my mercy will I have pity upon thee.
Thy gates shall be open continually; They shall not be shut by day or by night, That the treasures of the nations may be brought to thee, And that their kings may come with their retinues.
For that nation and that kingdom Which will not serve thee shall perish; Yea, those nations shall be utterly destroyed.
The glory of Lebanon shall come to thee, The cypress, the plane-tree, and the larch together, To adorn the place of my sanctuary, That I may make the place where my feet rest glorious.
The sons of thine oppressors shall come bending before thee; They that despised thee shall fall down at thy feet; And they shall call thee the city of Jehovah, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel.
Instead of being forsaken and hated, So that no one passed through thee, I will make thee an everlasting glory; The joy of many generations.
Thou shalt also suck the milk of the nations, And be nursed from the breast of kings; And thou shalt know that I, Jehovah, am thy saviour, That thy redeemer is the Mighty One of Jacob.
Instead of brass will I bring gold; And instead of iron will I bring silver, And instead of wood, brass, And instead of stones, iron; I will make thine officers peace, And thy magistrates righteousness.
Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, Wasting or destruction within thy borders; Thou shalt call thy walls Salvation, And thy gates Praise.
No more shall the sun be thy light by day, Nor with her brightness shall the moon enlighten thee: But Jehovah shall be to thee an everlasting light, And thy God thy glory.
Thy sun shall no more go down, Neither shall thy moon be hid; For Jehovah shall be thine everlasting light, And the days of thy mourning shall be ended.
Thy people shall be all righteous; Forever shall they possess the land, The scion of my planting, The work of my hands, that I may be glorified.
The little one shall become a thousand, And the small one a strong nation; I, Jehovah, will hasten it in its time.
The spirit of the Lord Jehovah is upon me, For Jehovah hath anointed me; He hath sent me to publish good tidings to the distressed, To bind up the broken-hearted, To proclaim liberty to the captives, And the opening of the prison to them that are bound;
To proclaim the year of mercy from Jehovah, And the day of vengeance from our God; To comfort all that mourn;
To give gladness to the mourners in Zion; To give them a beautiful crown instead of ashes, The oil of joy for mourning, The garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, So that they shall be called blessed terebinth-trees, The plantation of Jehovah for his glory.
They shall build up the old ruins; They shall raise up the ancient desolations; They shall repair the cities laid waste, The desolations of many generations.
Strangers shall stand up and feed your flocks, And the sons of the alien shall be your ploughmen and vine-dressers;
But ye shall be named the priests of Jehovah, Men shall call you the ministers of our God. Ye shall eat the riches of the nations, And in their glory shall ye make your boast.
For your shame shall ye have a double reward; And for ignominy ye shall rejoice in your portion; Therefore in your land ye shall possess double; Everlasting joy shall be your portion.
For I, Jehovah, love justice, I hate rapine and iniquity, I will give them their reward with faithfulness, And an everlasting covenant will I make with them.
Their race shall be illustrious among the nations, And their offspring among the people; All that see them shall acknowledge That they are a race which Jehovah hath blessed.
“I will greatly rejoice in Jehovah; My soul shall exult in my God; For he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation; He hath covered me with the mantle of deliverance. As the bridegroom decketh himself with his turban, And as the bride adorneth herself with her jewels.”
For as the earth putteth forth her shoots, And as a garden causeth its plants to spring forth, So shall the Lord Jehovah cause salvation to spring forth; And praise before all the nations.
For Zion's sake I will not keep silence, And for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, Until her deliverance break forth like the shining light, And her salvation like a blazing torch.
Then shall the nations see thy prosperity, And all the kings thy glory; Thou shalt be called by a new name, Which the mouth of Jehovah shall give thee.
Thou shalt be a beautiful crown in the hand of Jehovah, A royal diadem in the hand of thy God.
No more shalt thou be called the Desolate, And thy land, the Forsaken. But thou shall be named My-delight-is-in-her. And thy land the wedded Matron. For Jehovah shall delight in thee, And thy land shall be married.
For as a young man weddeth a virgin. So shall thy children wed thee. And as a bridegroom rejoiceth in his bride, So shall thy God rejoice in thee.
Upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, have I set watchmen; All the day, and all the night, shall they not keep silence; O ye that praise Jehovah, keep not silence,
And give him no rest, Until he establish Jerusalem, and make her a praise in the earth!
Jehovah hath sworn by his right hand, and his mighty arm: No more will I give thy corn to be food for thine enemies, Nor shall the sons of the stranger drink thy wine, for which thou hast labored.
But they that reap the harvest shall eat it, And praise Jehovah; And they that gather the vintage shall drink it, In my holy comets.
Pass ye, pass ye through the gates; Prepare the way for the people; Cast ye up, cast ye up the highway, Clear it from the stones; Lift up on high a standard for the tribes!
Behold, Jehovah proclaimeth to the end of the earth: “Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy Deliverer cometh! Behold, his reward is with him, and his recompense before him!”
They shall be called, The holy people, The redeemed of Jehovah. And thou shalt be called, The Sought out, The Not forsaken City.
Who is this that cometh from Edom? In scarlet garments from Bozrah? This that is glorious in his apparel, Proud in the greatness of his strength? I that proclaim deliverance, And am mighty to save.
Wherefore is thine apparel red, And thy garments like those of one that treadeth the wine-vat?
I have trodden the wine-vat alone, And of the nations there was none with me. And I trod them in mine anger, And I trampled them in my fury, So that their life-blood was sprinkled upon my garments. And I have stained all my apparel.
For the day of vengeance was in my heart, And the year of my deliverance was come.
And I looked, and there was none to help, And I wondered, that there was none to uphold; Therefore my own arm wrought salvation for me, And my fury, it sustained me.
I trod down the nations in my anger; I crushed them in my fury, And spilled their blood upon the ground.
I will celebrate the mercy of Jehovah, the glory of Jehovah, According to all that he hath done for us; His great goodness to the house of Israel, Which he hath bestowed on it in his tender mercy, and his great kindness.
He said, Truly they are my people; Children that will not be false; So he was their deliverer.
In all their straits they had no distress; An angel of his presence saved them; In his love and compassion he redeemed them, He took them up and bore them all the days of old.
But they rebelled, and grieved his holy spirit; Then did he change himself into their enemy; He himself fought against them.
Then remembered his people the ancient days, the days of Moses, [[saying,]] Where is he that brought them up from the sea with the shepherd of his flock? Where is he that put his holy spirit within him?
That caused his glorious arm to accompany the right hand of Moses, That divided the water before them, To make to himself an everlasting name?
That led them through the deep, As a horse through a desert, without stumbling?
As the herd descendeth into the valley, The spirit of Jehovah led them to rest. So didst thou lead thy people, To make for thyself a glorious name.
Look down from heaven, and behold from thy holy and glorious habitation! Where is thy zeal and thy might? Thy pity and compassion for me, are they restrained?
Thou, surely, art our father; Abraham is ignorant of us, And Israel knoweth us not. Thou, O Jehovah, art our father; Our deliverer wast thou of old.
Why, O Jehovah, dost thou suffer us to wander from thy ways, And harden our hearts against thy fear? Return, for thy servants' sake, The tribes of thine inheritance!
But a little while did thy holy people possess the land; Then our enemies trampled upon thy sanctuary.
It has been with us as if thou hadst never ruled over us, As if we had not been called by thy name.
O that thou wouldst rend the heavens, and come down; That the mountains might tremble at thy presence, As fire kindleth the dry stubble, As fire causeth water to boil, To make known thy name to thine adversaries, That the nations might tremble at thy presence;
As thou once didst wonderful things, which we looked not for, And camest down, so that the mountains trembled at thy presence.
For never have men heard, nor perceived by the ear, Nor hath eye seen, a God beside thee. Who doeth such things for those that trust in him.
Thou art the friend of those who joyfully do righteousness, Those who remember thee in thy ways. Behold, thou art angry, and we are punished; Long doth the punishment endure, before we are delivered.
We are all of us an unclean thing; Like a filthy garment is all our righteousness; We are all withered like a leaf, And our sins, like a storm, have blown us away.
There is none that calleth upon thy name, That stirreth himself up to cleave to thee; For thou hidest thy face from us, And lettest us perish by our iniquities.
But now, O Jehovah, thou art our father; We are the clay, and thou hast formed us; We are all of us the work of thy hands.
Be not wroth, O Jehovah, to the uttermost, Nor remember our iniquity forever! Behold, look upon us, we beseech thee, we are all thy people!
Thy holy cities have become a wilderness; Zion is become a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation.
Our holy and glorious house, Where our fathers praised thee, Is burned with fire, And all our precious things are laid waste.
Wilt thou contain thyself at these things, O Jehovah, Wilt thou keep silence, and still grievously afflict us?
I have heard those that made no supplication; I have been found by those who sought me not; I said, Here I am, here I am, To a people that called not upon my name.
I have spread out my hands all the day To a rebellious people, That walketh in an evil way, According to their own devices;
To a people that provoke me to my face continually; That sacrifice in gardens, And burn incense on tiles;
That sit in sepulchres, And lodge in caverns; That eat swine's flesh, And have broth of unclean things in their vessels;
Who yet say: Stand by thyself! come not near to me, For I am holier than thou! These are a smoke in my nose, A fire that burneth continually.
Behold, it stands recorded before me; I will not keep silence, but will requite; I will requite it into their bosoms;
Your iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers together, saith Jehovah, Who burnt incense on the mountains, And dishonored me on the hills, I will pour the full recompense of their former deeds into their bosom.
Thus saith Jehovah: As when juice is found in a cluster, Men say, “Destroy it not, for a blessing is in it”; So will I do, for the sake of my servants, and will not destroy the whole;
I will cause a stem to spring forth from Jacob, And from Judah a possessor of my mountains; My chosen shall possess the land, And my servants shall dwell there.
And Sharon shall be a fold for flocks, And the valley of Achor a resting-place for herds, For my people that have sought me.
But ye, who have forsaken Jehovah, And have forgotten my holy mountain, That prepare a table for Fortune, And fill the cup for Destiny,
Yourselves do I destine to the sword, And all of you shall bow down before the slaughter; Because I called, and ye answered not, I spake, and ye would not hear, But did that which is evil in my sight, And chose that in which I had no delight.
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, my servants shall eat, and ye shall be hungry; Behold, my servants shall drink, and ye shall be thirsty; Behold, my servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be confounded;
Behold, my servants shall sing for gladness of heart, But ye shall shriek for sorrow of heart, And howl for anguish of spirit.
And ye shall leave your name for a curse to my chosen, And the Lord Jehovah shall slay you; But his servants will he call by another name.
Whoso blesseth himself in the land Shall bless by the true God; And he that sweareth in the land shall swear by the true God; For the former troubles are forgotten, And they are hid from mine eyes.
For behold! I create new heavens, and a new earth; The former ones shall not be remembered, Nor shall they be brought to mind any more.
But ye shall be glad and exult forever In that which I create; For behold! I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, And her people a joy.
And I will exult in Jerusalem, And rejoice in my people; No more shall be heard therein The voice of weeping and the cry of distress.
There shall not be there an infant child, nor an old man, That hath not filled the measure of his years; For he that dieth a hundred years old shall die a youth, And the sinner dying a hundred years old shall be held accursed.
They shall build houses, and inhabit them; They shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them;
They shall not build, and another inhabit; They shall not plant, and another eat; For as the days of a tree shall be the days of my people, Yea, long shall my chosen enjoy the work of their hands.
They shall not labor in vain, Nor bring forth children for early death; For they are a race blessed by Jehovah, And their offspring shall remain to them.
Before they call, I will answer; And while they are yet speaking, I will hear.
The wolf and the lamb shall feed together, And the lion shall eat straw like the ox, And dust shall be the food of the serpent. They shall not hurt, nor destroy, in all my holy mountain, Saith Jehovah.
Thus saith Jehovah: Heaven is my throne, And the earth my footstool; Where is the house that ye can build me, And where is the place of my rest?
For all these things hath my hand made; By it do all these things exist, saith Jehovah. But to this man will I look, Even to him who is humble and of a contrite spirit, And who trembleth at my word.
He that slayeth an ox killeth a man; He that sacrificeth a lamb beheadeth a dog; He that maketh an oblation offereth swine's blood; He that burneth incense blesseth an idol. Yea, they have chosen their own ways, And in their abominations their souls delight.
I also will choose their calamities; What they dread I will bring upon them; Because I called, and no one answered, I spake, and they did not hear; But they did what is evil in my sight, And chose that in which I have no delight.
Hear the word of Jehovah, Ye that tremble at his word! “Your brethren that hate you, And thrust you out for my name's sake, have said, “May Jehovah be glorified, that we may see your joy!” But they shall be confounded.
A voice of tumult from the city! A voice from the temple! The voice of Jehovah, rendering recompense to his enemies!
Before she was in travail, she brought forth, Before her pangs came, she was delivered of a son.
Who hath heard such a thing? Who hath seen such things? Is a country brought forth in a day? Is a nation born at once? For as soon as Zion was in travail, she brought forth her children.
Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth, saith Jehovah; Shall I, who beget, restrain the birth? saith thy God.
Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, And exult for her, all ye that love her! Be very joyful with her, all ye that mourn for her!
That ye may suck, and be satisfied, from the breast of her consolations, That ye may suck and be delighted with the fulness of her glory.
For thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I will bring prosperity to her like a river, And the wealth of the nations like an overflowing stream; Ye shall suck at the breast, Ye shall be carried on the arm, And on the knees shall ye be dandled.
As one whom his mother comforteth, So will I comfort you; And in Jerusalem shall ye be comforted.
Ye shall see, and your heart shall rejoice, And your bones shall flourish like a green plant, And the hand of Jehovah shall be manifested to his servants, And be moved with indignation against his enemies.
For behold, Jehovah cometh with fire, Like a whirlwind are his chariots, To breathe forth his anger in a glowing heat, And his rebuke in flames of fire.
For with fire will Jehovah contend, And with his sword, with all flesh, And many shall be the slain of Jehovah.
They who sanctify and purify themselves in the groves, Following one in the midst, Who eat swine's flesh, and the abomination, and the mouse. They shall all perish together, saith Jehovah.
For I know their works, and their thoughts; The time cometh to gather all nations and tongues together; They shall come, and behold my glory.
And I will give a sign among them, And of those that escape I will send to the nations, To Tarshish, Phul, and Lud, who draw the bow, to Tubal and Javan, To the distant coasts, who never heard my name, And who never saw my glory; And they shall declare my glory among the nations.
And they shall bring all your brethren From all the nations, an offering to Jehovah, Upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters, and upon mules and dromedaries, To my holy mountain, Jerusalem, saith Jehovah, As the sons of Israel bring their gifts In pure vessels to the house of Jehovah.
And of them will I also take For priests and for Levites, saith Jehovah.
For as the new heavens, And the new earth, which I make, Endure before me, saith Jehovah, So shall your race and your name endure.
And it shall be, from new moon to new moon, And from sabbath to sabbath, That all flesh shall come and worship before me, saith Jehovah.
Then shall they go forth and see The dead bodies of the men that rebelled against me! For their worm shall not die, And their fire shall not be quenched, And they shall be an abhorrence to all flesh.
The words of Jeremiah, the son of Hilkiah, one of the priests, who dwelt in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin;
to whom the word of Jehovah came in the days of Josiah, the son of Amon, king of Judah, in the thirteenth year of his reign;
to whom it also came in the days of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, until the end of the eleventh year of Zedekiah, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, until the carrying away of Jerusalem into captivity in the fifth month.
The word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Before I formed thee in the womb, I knew thee; and before thou camest into the world, I chose thee; I appointed thee to be a prophet to the nations.
Then said I, Alas, O Lord Jehovah! Behold, I am not able to speak; for I am a child.
But Jehovah said to me, Say not, I am a child; but go to whomever I send thee, and speak whatever I command thee!
Be not afraid of them! For I am with thee to help thee, saith Jehovah.
Then Jehovah put forth his hand, and touched my mouth. Jehovah also said to me, Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth.
Behold, I have set thee this day over nations and over kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to overthrow; and to build, and to plant.
Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying, What seest thou, Jeremiah? And I said, I see a rod of almond-wood.
And Jehovah said to me, Thou hast seen right; for I am watchful over my word to perform it.
And the word of Jehovah came to me a second time, saying, What seest thou? And I said, I see a boiling pot, whose face is turned from the north.
And Jehovah said to me, From the north shall evil break forth upon all the inhabitants of the land.
For, behold, I will call all the tribes of the kingdoms of the north, saith Jehovah; and they shall come, and shall set every one his throne at the entrance of the gates of Jerusalem, and against all her walls around, and against all the cities of Judah.
And I will pronounce my judgments against them for all their wickedness, in that they have forsaken me, and have burned incense to other gods, and worshipped the work of their own hands.
Thou, therefore, gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak to them all that I command thee; be not afraid of them, lest I confound thee before them.
For, behold, I make thee this day a fortified city, and a pillar of iron, and a wall of brass against all this land, against the kings of Judah, against the princes thereof, against the priests thereof, and against the people of the land.
They shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee; for I will be with thee, saith Jehovah, to help thee.
The word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Go and proclaim in the ears of Jerusalem, Thus saith Jehovah: I remember the kindness shown thee in thy youth, The love with which I espoused thee, When thou wast led by me through the wilderness, Through a land that was not sown.
Israel was a sacred thing to Jehovah, His first ripe fruit. All that devoured him were held guilty; Evil came upon them, saith Jehovah.
Hear ye the word of Jehovah, O house of Jacob, And all the families of the house of Israel!
Thus saith Jehovah: What fault did your fathers find in me, That they went far from me, And walked after vanity, and practised folly?
They said not, Where is Jehovah, Who brought us up from the land of Egypt, Who led us through the wilderness, Through a land of deserts and pits, Through a land of drought and deathlike gloom, Through a land which no man passed through, And where no man dwelt?
I brought you to a land of fruitful fields, To eat the fruit thereof, and the good thereof; But when ye had come in, ye defiled my land, And made my inheritance an abomination.
The priests said not, Where is Jehovah? And the teachers of the law knew me not; The rulers also rebelled against me; The prophets prophesied in the name of Baal, And walked after things that could not profit.
Therefore I will yet contend with you, saith Jehovah; Yea, with your children's children will I contend.
For pass over to the islands of the Chittaeans, and see; Send ye to Kedar, and inform yourselves well; And see if such a thing hath been done!
Hath any nation changed their gods, even those that are no gods? But my people have changed their glory for that which cannot profit.
Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this! Shudder, and be amazed! saith Jehovah.
For my people have committed two evils; Me have they forsaken, the fountain of living water, And they have hewn out for themselves cisterns, Broken cisterns, that can hold no water.
Is Israel a slave? Is he a home-born servant? Why then hath he become a spoil?
The young lions roar over him; They lift up their voice; They have made his land a desolation; His cities are burned so as to be without an inhabitant.
Even the sons of Noph and Tahpanhes have consumed the crown of thy head.
Hath not this come upon thee, Because thou didst forsake Jehovah thy God, When he would have led thee in the way?
And now what hast thou to do with the way of Egypt, To drink the waters of the Nile? Or what hast thou to do with the way of Assyria, To drink the waters of the Euphrates?
Thy wickedness shall chasten thee, And thy transgressions reprove thee; And thou shalt know and see that it is an evil and bitter thing That thou hast forsaken Jehovah thy God, And that the fear of me is not with thee, Saith the Lord, Jehovah of hosts.
Of old hast thou broken thy yoke, And burst thy bands, And said, “I will not be in subjection!” For upon every high hill, And under every green tree, Hast thou reclined, playing the harlot.
Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, Wholly a genuine seed; How then art thou changed to the degenerate shoot of a strange vine?
For though thou wash thee with nitre, And take thee much soap, Yet is thine iniquity black before me, saith Jehovah.
How canst thou say, “I am not polluted,” “I have not gone after Baals”? Behold thy way in the valley! Know what thou hast done, A swift young camel, traversing her ways.
A wild ass, used to the wilderness, That in her desire snuffeth up the wind, In her occasion, who can turn her aside? All that seek her do not weary themselves; In her month they will find her.
Withhold thy feet from being unshod, And thy throat from thirst! But thou sayest, There is no remedy! No! For I love strangers, And after them I will go.
As a thief is ashamed when he is taken, So is the house of Israel ashamed, They, their kings, and their princes, And their priests, and their prophets;
That say to a stock, Thou art my father, And to a stone, Thou hast brought me forth! For they turn the back to me, and not the face. Yet in the time of their trouble they say, Arise and save us!
But where are thy gods, which thou hast made thee? Let them arise, if they can save thee in the time of thy trouble! For according to the number of thy cities are thy gods, O Judah!
Why do ye enter into controversy with me? Ye have all rebelled against me, saith Jehovah.
In vain have I smitten your children; They would receive no correction; Your own sword hath devoured your prophets, Like a destroying lion.
O generation! Behold ye the word of Jehovah! Have I been a wilderness to Israel? Or a land of darkness? Why then say my people, “We will rove at pleasure, We will come no more to thee”?
Can a virgin forget her ornaments, Or a bride her belt? Yet my people have forgotten me, days without number!
Why trimmest thou thy way to seek love? On this account hast thou accustomed thy ways to wickedness.
Upon thy skirts is found the blood of the innocent poor, Whom thou didst not find committing violence.
But notwithstanding all this, thou sayest, I am innocent; Surely his anger is turned away from me. Behold, I will enter into judgment with thee, Because thou sayest, “I have not sinned.”
Why dost thou run so eagerly, changing thy way? By Egypt also shalt thou be put to shame, Even as thou hast been put to shame by Assyria.
From Egypt also shalt thou go forth With thy hands upon thy head. For Jehovah hath rejected the objects of thy confidence, Therefore shalt thou not prosper in them.
It is said, if a man put away his wife, And she go from him, and become another man's, Shall he return to her again? Shall not that land be polluted? But thou hast played the harlot with many lovers; And shalt thou return to me, saith Jehovah?
Lift up thine eyes to the high places, and see! Where hast thou not been defiled? In the ways hast thou sat waiting, As the Arabian in the desert, And hast polluted the land by thy lewdness and thy wickedness.
And although the showers have been withholden, And there hath been no latter rain, Yet thou hast had a harlot's forehead; Thou hast refused to be ashamed.
Wilt thou not from this time cry to me, Thou art my father, Yea, the friend of my youth art thou?
Will he retain his anger forever? Will he keep it forevermore? Behold, thus dost thou speak, But thou doest evil with all thy might.
Jehovah said to me, in the time of King Josiah, Hast thou heard what rebellious Israel hath done? She hath gone upon every high mountain and under every green tree, and there hath played the harlot.
And I said, after she had done all these things, Return thou to me! But she returned not. And her faithless sister Judah saw it.
And I saw, when, for all the adulteries which rebellious Israel had committed, I had put her away, and given her a bill of divorce, that her faithless sister Judah was not afraid, but went and played the harlot also herself.
And when by the fame of her lewdness she had polluted the land, committing adultery with stone and wood,
yet for all this did not her faithless sister Judah return to me with her whole heart, but feignedly, saith Jehovah.
Then said Jehovah to me, Rebellious Israel is less guilty than faithless Judah.
Go and proclaim these words toward the north:—Return, O rebellious Israel, saith Jehovah! I will not turn a frowning face upon you; For I am merciful, saith Jehovah, I retain not anger forever.
Only acknowledge thine iniquity, That thou hast rebelled against Jehovah thy God, And hast roved about to strangers Under every green tree, And hast not obeyed my voice, saith Jehovah.
Return, ye rebellious children! saith Jehovah; Though I have rejected you, Yet will I receive you again, One from a city, and two from a nation, And I will bring you to Zion.
And I will give you shepherds after my own heart, Who shall feed you with wisdom and discretion.
And when ye shall have multiplied and increased in the land, saith Jehovah, Then shall ye no more speak of the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, Nor shall it come into your mind. None shall remember it; None shall care for it; It shall not be made any more.
For then shall Jerusalem be called the throne of Jehovah, And all the nations shall resort to it; They shall resort to Jehovah, to Jerusalem, And shall no more walk after the perverseness of their evil hearts.
In those days shall the house of Judah unite themselves with the house of Israel, And they shall come together from the north country, To the land which I caused your fathers to inherit.
Then I said, how will I place thee among my children, And give thee a pleasant land, A goodly inheritance among the hosts of nations! And I said, Thou wilt call me thy father; Thou wilt not turn aside from following me.
Yet as a woman is faithless to her husband, So have ye been faithless to me, O house of Israel! saith Jehovah.
A voice is heard upon the hills, The weeping and supplications of the children of Israel! For they have perverted their way; They have forgotten Jehovah their God.
Return, O revolted children! I will heal your rebellion. Behold, we come to thee, For thou art Jehovah our God!
Truly in vain from the hills, In vain from the mountains do we seek abundance; Only from Jehovah our God cometh salvation for Israel.
For the things of shame have devoured the substance of our fathers from our youth, Their sheep and their oxen, Their sons and their daughters.
We lie down in our shame, And our ignominy covereth us; For we have sinned against Jehovah our God, We and our fathers, from our youth even to this day, And have not obeyed the voice of Jehovah our God.
If thou wilt return to me, O Israel, saith Jehovah, Thou shalt return [[to thy land]]; If thou wilt put away thy abominations from my sight, Thou shalt no more be a wanderer [[in a foreign land]].
If thou wilt swear, As Jehovah liveth! In truth, in justice, and in righteousness, Then shall the nations bless themselves by thee, And in thee shall they glory.
Thus saith Jehovah to the men of Judah and Jerusalem: Break up your fallow ground, And sow not among thorns!
Circumcise yourselves to Jehovah; Yea, circumcise your hearts, Ye men of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem! Lest, for the evil of your doings, My fury break forth like fire, And burn so that none can quench it.
Declare ye in Judah, And proclaim in Jerusalem, and say, Blow ye the trumpet in the land; Cry ye aloud, and say, Gather yourselves together, And let us go into the fortified cities;
Set up a standard toward Zion, Flee, make no stand! For I am about to bring evil from the north, Even great destruction.
The lion goeth up from his thicket, The destroyer of nations is on his way; He goeth forth from his place to make thy land desolate; Thy cities shall be laid waste so as to be without an inhabitant.
For this cause gird on sackcloth, Lament and howl! For the fierce anger of Jehovah is not turned away from us.
In that day, saith Jehovah, Shall the heart of the king perish, And the heart of the princes; The priests shall be amazed, And the prophets confounded.
Then said I, Alas, O Lord Jehovah! Surely thou hast greatly deceived this people and Jerusalem; Thou hast said, “Ye shall have peace”; And the sword reacheth to the very life!
At that time shall it be said to this people and to Jerusalem: A dry wind cometh from the hills of the desert, It cometh toward my people, Not to fan, nor to cleanse.
Yea, a wind stronger than this shall come; Now will I myself give sentence against them.
Behold, he cometh up like clouds, And his chariots are like a whirlwind; His horses are swifter than eagles. Woe to us! for we are laid waste!
Wash thy heart from wickedness, O Jerusalem, That thou mayst be saved! How long shall thy evil devices lodge within thee?
For a voice proclaimeth tidings from Dan, And announceth calamity from mount Ephraim.
Proclaim ye to the nations, Behold, publish ye to Jerusalem, “Watchmen are coming from a far country, And lift their voice against the cities of Judah.”
Like keepers of fields are they round about her Because she hath rebelled against me, saith Jehovah.
Thy way and thy doings have brought this upon thee; This is the fruit of thy wickedness; It is bitter; it reacheth to thy heart.
O my breast, my breast! I am pained in the walls of my heart; My heart trembleth within me; I cannot be silent; For thou hearest, O my soul, the sound of the trumpet, The alarm of war!
There is a cry of destruction upon destruction; Yea, the whole land is laid waste; Suddenly are my tents destroyed, And my canopies in an instant.
How long shall I see the standard, Hear the sound of the trumpet?
My people is foolish, They have no regard to me; Stupid children are they, And have no understanding; They are wise to do evil, But for doing good they have no knowledge.
I look to the earth, and lo! emptiness and desolation; To the heavens, and there is no light.
I look to the mountains, and lo! they tremble, And all the hills shake.
I look, and lo! there is not a man, And all the birds of heaven are fled.
I look, and lo! Carmel is a desert, And all its cities are thrown down, Before the presence of Jehovah, Before the heat of his anger.
For thus saith Jehovah: The whole land shall be desolate, Yet will I not make a full end.
Therefore shall the earth mourn, And the heavens above be black, Because I have spoken, and I will not repent; I have purposed, and I will not recede from it.
At the noise of the horsemen and bowmen every city fleeth; They go into thickets, And climb up upon the rocks; All the cities are forsaken, And not a man dwelleth in them.
And thou, destined to perish, what wilt thou do? Though thou clothe thyself in scarlet, And deck thyself with ornaments of gold, And rend thine eyes with paint, In vain dost thou adorn thyself; Thy lovers despise thee; They seek thy life.
I hear a cry, as of a woman in travail, Anguish, as of her that bringeth forth her first child. The voice of the daughter of Zion. She sobbeth, she spreadeth out her hands, “Ah! woe is me! I am dying by murderers!”
Run ye through the streets of Jerusalem, [[saith Jehovah,]] And see now, and know, and seek in her broad places If ye can find a single man, If there be one that doeth justice, That seeketh uprightness, And I will forgive her.
Yea, though they say, “As Jehovah liveth!” Yet do they swear falsely.
Are not thine eyes upon the truth, O Jehovah! Thou hast smitten them, but they have not grieved; Thou hast consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction; They have made their faces harder than a rock; They have refused to return.
Then I said, These are only the poor; They are foolish, because they know not the way of Jehovah, The law of their God.
I will get me to the great ones, And I will speak to them; For they know the way of Jehovah, The law of their God. But these also have together broken the yoke; They have burst the bands.
Therefore the lion out of the forest shall slay them, And the evening wolf shall destroy them. The leopard shall keep watch upon their cities; Every one that goeth out from them shall be torn in pieces; Because their transgressions are multiplied, Their rebellions are increased.
How can I pardon thee for this? [[saith Jehovah;]] Thy children have forsaken me, And sworn by them that are no gods. I have fed them to the full, yet do they commit adultery, And assemble themselves in crowds in the house of the harlot.
They are as well-fed horses in the morning; Every one neigheth after his neighbor's wife.
Shall I not punish for these things, saith Jehovah? Shall I not avenge myself on such a nation as this?
Go ye up upon her walls and destroy! Yet make ye not a full end! Take ye away her branches, For they belong not to Jehovah!
For they have proved false to me, The house of Israel and the house of Judah, saith Jehovah.
They have denied Jehovah, And have said, “It is not He; Evil shall not come upon us, Nor shall we see sword or famine.
The prophets are but wind, And the word is not in them; Thus may it happen to them!”
Therefore thus saith Jehovah, God of hosts: Because ye say such things, Behold, I will make thy words in thy mouth fire, And this people wood, And it shall devour them.
Behold, I will bring against you a nation from afar, O house of Israel, saith Jehovah; It is a mighty nation; It is an ancient nation; A nation whose language thou dost not know, And whose words thou canst not understand.
Their quiver is like an open sepulchre; They are all mighty men.
They shall consume thy harvest and thy bread; They shall consume thy sons and thy daughters; They shalt consume thy sheep and thy oxen; They shall consume thy vine and thy fig-tree; They shall destroy with the sword thy fortified cities, In which thou placest thy trust.
Yet even in those days, saith Jehovah, I will not make a full end with you.
And when they shall say, Wherefore hath Jehovah our God brought all these things upon us? Then shalt thou say to them, “As ye have forsaken me, And served strange gods in your land, So shall ye serve strangers in a land that is not yours.”
Declare ye this in the house of Jacob, And publish it in Judah, saying:
Hear ye now this, O foolish people and without understanding, Who have eyes and see not, Who have ears and hear not!
Will ye not fear me, saith Jehovah? Will ye not tremble before me, Who appointed the sand a bound to the sea, A perpetual barrier, which it cannot pass? Though the waves thereof toss themselves, Yet do they not prevail, Though they roar, yet can they not pass over it.
But this people hath a revolting and rebellious heart; They revolt continually.
Neither say they in their heart, Let us now fear Jehovah our God, Who giveth rain, both the former and the latter, in its season, And secureth to us the appointed weeks of the harvest.
Your iniquities have turned away these things, And your sins have withholden that which is good from you.
For among my people are found wicked men, Who lie on the watch like fowlers; They set a trap that they may catch men.
As a cage is full of birds, So are their houses full of fraud. Therefore are they grown great and rich;
They have become fat and shine; Yea, they overpass the deeds of the wicked; They maintain no cause, No cause of the fatherless, and they prosper; And the right of the needy do they not defend.
Shall I not punish for these things, saith Jehovah? Shall I not be avenged on such a nation as this?
Astonishing and horrible is that which is done in this land;
The prophets prophesy falsely, And the priests rule under their guidance, And my people love to have it so. But what will ye do in the end of it?
Flee, O ye sons of Benjamin, from Jerusalem, And blow ye the trumpet in Tekoa, And lift up the banner in Beth-haccerem! For evil threateneth from the North; Yea, great destruction.
O daughter of Zion, the comely and delicate, Thee have I doomed to destruction!
The shepherds with their flocks shall come to her; They shall pitch their tents against her round about; They shall feed each one in his place.
“Prepare ye war against her, [[shall they say;]] Arise, and let us go up at noonday; Alas for us! for the day goeth away, For the shadows of evening are lengthened.
Arise, and let us go up by night, And let us destroy her palaces!”
For thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Hew ye down trees, And raise a mound against Jerusalem! She is a city to be punished; She is full of oppression.
As a fountain sendeth forth its waters, So she sendeth forth her wickedness. Violence and rapine are heard within her; Before me continually are bruises and wounds.
Receive correction, O Jerusalem, Lest my soul be alienated from thee, Lest I make thee a desolation, A land not inhabited!
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: They shall thoroughly glean the remnant of Israel as a vine; Turn thy hand like a grape-gatherer again to the baskets!
To whom shall I speak? To whom give warning, so that they shall hear? Behold, their ear is uncircumcised, so that they cannot hearken; Behold, the word of Jehovah is to them a derision; They have no delight in it.
Therefore I am full of the fury of Jehovah; I am weary of holding it; I will pour it out alike upon the children in the street, And upon the assembly of the young men. Yea, also the husband with the wife shall be taken, The old man, and he that is full of days.
Their houses also shall be transferred to others, Their fields and their wives together, For I will stretch out my hand over the inhabitants of the land, saith Jehovah.
For from the least of them even to the greatest, Every one is greedy of gain; Prophet and priest alike, Every one of them practiseth deceit.
They heal the wound of my people slightly, Saying, Peace! peace! when there is no peace.
Are they ashamed that they have done abominable things? Nay, they are not at all ashamed; They know not how to blush; Therefore shall they fall with them that fall; At the time when I punish them, They shall be cast down, saith Jehovah.
Thus saith Jehovah: Stand ye upon the ways and look; And ask for the old paths, “Where is the good way?” Walk ye in it, and ye shall find for yourselves rest. But they say, We will not walk in it.
I have also set watchmen over you, [[saying,]] Hearken to the sound of the trumpet! But they say, We will not hearken.
Therefore hear, O ye nations, And know, ye assembled multitude, What shall come upon them!
Hear thou, O earth! Behold, I bring evil upon this people, The fruit of their devices; Because they have not hearkened to my words, And have even rejected my law.
To what purpose is incense brought to me from Sheba, And the sweet-smelling reed from a far country? Your burnt-offerings are not acceptable, Nor are your sacrifices sweet to me.
Therefore thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I lay stumbling-blocks before this people, Upon which fathers and sons shall stumble together, The neighbor and his friend, and shall perish.
Thus saith Jehovah: Behold, a people cometh from the land of the North; A great nation riseth up from the extremities of the earth.
They bear the bow and the spear; They are cruel and show no mercy; Their voice roareth like the sea; And upon horses do they ride, Arrayed as a warrior against thee, O daughter of Zion.
We have heard the report thereof; Our hands lose their strength; Anguish hath taken hold of us, Pain, as of a woman in travail.
Go not forth into the field, Nor walk ye in the highway! For the sword of the enemy And terror are on every side.
O daughter of my people, gird thee with sackcloth, And roll thyself in ashes! Make thee mourning as for an only son, Most bitter lamentation! For suddenly shall the spoiler come upon us.
I have set thee, like a tower, for an assayer among my people, That thou mayst know and try their way.
They are all stubborn revolters, Slanderers are they, brass and iron; They are all corrupt.
The bellows burn; The lead is consumed by the fire; The refiner hath melted in vain, For the bad are not separated.
Rejected silver shall men call them, Because Jehovah hath rejected them.
The word which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
Stand in the gate of the house of Jehovah, and proclaim these words, and say:—Hear the word of Jehovah, all ye of Judah, Who enter in at these gates to worship Jehovah!
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Amend your ways and your doings, And I will suffer you to dwell in this place!
Trust ye not in lying words, when they say, “The temple of Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah, The temple of Jehovah are these.”
Yet if ye will thoroughly amend your ways and your doings, And dispense justice between man and man,
If ye oppress not the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, And shed not innocent blood in this place, And go not after other gods to your own hurt,
Then will I cause you to dwell in this place, In the land which I gave to your fathers, For ever and ever.
Behold, ye trust in lying words without profit.
Ye steal, and murder, and commit adultery, And swear falsely, and burn incense to Baal, And go after strange gods, which ye know not,
And then come and stand before me in this house, Which is called by my name, And say, “We are delivered!” Whilst ye practise all these abominations.
Is this house, which is called by my name, Become a den for robbers in your eyes? Behold, I myself have seen it, saith Jehovah.
But go now to my place, which was in Shiloh, Where I caused my name to dwell at the first, And see what I have done to it On account of the wickedness of my people Israel.
And now because ye have done all these works, saith Jehovah, And I have spoken to you, rising early and speaking, But ye hearkened not, And I have called to you, But ye answered not,
Therefore will I do to the house which is called by my name, In which ye place your confidence, And to the place which I gave to you and to your fathers, As I have done to Shiloh.
I will cast you out from my presence, As I have cast out all your brethren, The whole race of Ephraim.
And as for thee, pray not for this people, Nor lift up a cry or a prayer for them, Nor make intercession to me for them; For I will not hear thee.
Seest thou not what they do In the cities of Judah, and the streets of Jerusalem?
The sons gather the wood, And the fathers kindle the fire, And the women knead dough, To make cakes for the queen of heaven, And to pour out libations to strange gods, That they may vex me.
But do they vex me, saith Jehovah? Do they not rather vex themselves, to the confusion of their own faces?
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold my anger and my fury shall be poured out on this place, Upon man and upon beast; Upon the trees of the field, And upon the fruit of the ground; It shall burn and not be quenched.
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Add your burnt-offerings to your sacrifices, And eat ye the flesh.
For I spake not to your fathers, nor commanded them Concerning burnt-offerings and sacrifices, At the time when I brought them out of the land of Egypt;
But this command gave I to them: “Hearken,” said I, “to my voice, And I will be your God, And ye shall be my people. And walk ye in all the ways which I command you, That it may go well with you.”
But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, But walked in the devices and obstinacy of their evil heart, Turning their backs and not their faces toward me.
From the day when your fathers came forth from the land of Egypt, Even to this day, I have also sent to you all my servants, the prophets, Daily rising early and sending.
But they have not hearkened to me, Nor have they inclined their ear; But they have hardened their neck, And acted more wickedly than their fathers.
And when thou shalt speak all these things to them, They will not hearken to thee; And when thou shalt call to them, They will make thee no answer.
Therefore shalt thou say to them, This is the nation that hearkeneth not to the voice of Jehovah their God, And taketh no correction; Truth hath failed, and is cut off from their mouth.
Cut off thy locks, O Jerusalem, and cast them away! Set up a lamentation upon the high place! For Jehovah hath rejected and forsaken the children Against which his wrath hath been kindled.
For the children of Judah have done evil in my sight, saith Jehovah, They have set their abominations in the house Which is called by my name, to pollute it.
They have built the high places of Tophet, Which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, To burn their sons and their daughters in the fire, Which I commanded not, Which even came not into my mind.
Therefore behold, the days come, saith Jehovah, That it shall no more be called Tophet, Or the valley of the son of Hinnom, But the Valley of Slaughter; For they shall bury in Tophet till there be no room left.
And the dead bodies of this people shall be for meat To the birds of the air and to the beasts of the earth; And none shall scare them away.
And I will cause to cease from the cities of Judah, And from the streets of Jerusalem, The voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, The voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride; For the land shall be desolate.
At that time, saith Jehovah, Shall the bones of the kings of Judah, and the bones of the princes, The bones of the priests, and the bones of the prophets, And the bones of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Be cast forth from their graves;
And they shall be spread before the sun, and the moon, and all the host of heaven, Which they have loved, and which they have served, and after which they have walked; Which they have consulted and have worshipped; They shall not be gathered, nor be buried; They shall be as dung upon the face of the ground.
And death shall be chosen rather than life By all the residue of them that remain of this evil race, Which remain in all the places whither I have driver them, Saith Jehovah of hosts.
Thou shalt also say to them, Thus saith Jehovah, Doth a man fall, and not rise again? Doth one turn aside from the way, and not return,
Why then hath this people, Why hath Jerusalem, completely revolted? They hold fast deceit; They refuse to return.
I have listened and heard, But they speak not aright; No one repenteth of his wickedness, Saying, “What have I done?” Every one runneth at full speed in his rebellion, As a horse rusheth to the battle.
Even the stork in the heavens knoweth her times, And the turtle-dove and the swallow and the crane observe the season of their coming, But my people regard not the laws of Jehovah.
How is it that ye say, “We are wise, We possess the law of Jehovah”? Behold, the false pen of the scribes Hath turned it into falsehood.
The wise men shall be confounded; They shall be dismayed and ensnared; Behold, they have rejected the word of Jehovah, And what wisdom is there in them?
Therefore will I give their wives to others, And their fields to plunderers. For from the least of them even to the greatest, Every one is greedy of gain, Prophet and priest alike, Every one of them practiseth deceit.
They heal the wound of my people slightly, Saying, Peace! peace! when there is no peace.
Are they ashamed, that they have done abominable things? Nay, they are not at all ashamed; They know not how to blush. Therefore shall they fall with them that fall; At the time when I punish them, They shall be cast down, saith Jehovah.
I will utterly consume them, saith Jehovah; There shall be no grapes on the vine, Nor shall there be from the fig-tree; Even the leaf shall be withered; For I will send those that shall overrun them.
“Why do we remain here?” [[shall they say.]] “Assemble yourselves and let us go into the fortified cities. And let us there wait in silence! For Jehovah our God hath put us to silence, And given us the water of hemlock to drink, Because we have sinned against Jehovah.
We look for peace, but no good cometh; For a time of deliverance, and behold, terror!”
From Dan is heard the snorting of their horses, At the sound of the neighing of their steeds the whole land trembleth; They come and devour the land, and all that is in it; The city, and them that dwell therein.
Behold I send against you serpents, Basilisks, which cannot be charmed, And they shall bite you, saith Jehovah.
O where is consolation for my sorrow! My heart is faint within me.
Behold, the cry of the daughter of my people from a far country! “Is not Jehovah in Zion? Is her King there no more?” Why then have they provoked me by their graven images, And their foreign vanities?
The harvest is passed, the summer is ended, And we are not delivered.
For the wound of the daughter of my people am I wounded; I mourn; amazement hath taken hold of me.
Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no physician there? Why then are not the wounds of my people healed?
O that my head were waters, And mine eyes a fountain of tears, That I might weep day and night For the slain of the daughter of my people!
O that I had a traveller's lodge in the wilderness, That I might leave my people, and go from them! For they are all adulterers; An assembly of revolters.
They bend their tongues, like their bows, for lies, And not by truth do they grow mighty in the earth; They proceed from wickedness to wickedness, And have no regard to me, saith Jehovah.
Be on your guard each one against his neighbor, And trust ye not in any brother; For every brother will supplant, And every neighbor will slander.
They deceive every one his neighbor, And do not speak the truth; They have accustomed their tongues to speak lies; They weary themselves in doing iniquity.
Thy habitation is in the midst of deceit, [[O prophet!]] Through deceit they refuse to know me, saith Jehovah.
Therefore thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Behold I will melt them and try them; For what else can I do on account of the daughter of my people?
Their tongue is a deadly arrow; Every one of them speaketh treachery; With their mouth they speak peace to their neighbor, But in their heart they lay snares for him.
Shall I not punish them for these things? saith Jehovah; Shall I not be avenged on such a nation as this?
For the mountains will I lift up a weeping and wailing, And for the pastures of the plains a lamentation, For they are burned up, so that none can pass through them; No more is heard the voice of the cattle; Both the birds of the heavens and the beasts have fled, and are gone.
I will make Jerusalem heaps of stones, The dwelling-place of jackals; And I will make the cities of Judah desolate, without an inhabitant.
Who is the wise man, that he may understand this, And he to whom the mouth of the Lord hath spoken, that he may declare it? Why is it that the land perisheth, That it is burned up like a desert, which none passeth through?
Jehovah himself hath said: It is because they have forsaken my law, Which I set before them, And have not hearkened to my voice, Nor walked according to it;
But have walked after the obstinacy of their own heart, And after the Baals, as their fathers taught them.
Therefore thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will feed this people with wormwood, And give them water of hemlock to drink.
I will also scatter them among nations Which neither they nor their fathers have known, And I will send after them the sword, Till I have made an end of them.
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Consider ye, and call for the mourning women, that they may come, And send to the skilful ones, that they may come;
Let them make haste, and lift up a wailing for us, That our eyes may run down with tears, And our eyelids gush forth with waters.
Behold, a voice of wailing is heard from Zion: “How are we spoiled! How are we put to shame! We must leave our native land; They have cast down our habitations.”
Hear, O ye women, the word of Jehovah! Let your ear receive the word of his mouth! Teach your daughters a lamentation, And every one her companion a mournful dirge!
For death cometh in through our windows, It entereth our palaces; It cutteth off the children from the street, And the young men from the public places.
Declare it, saith Jehovah! The dead bodies of men shall fall as dung upon the open field, And as the handful behind the reaper, Which none gathereth up.
Thus saith Jehovah: Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, Nor let the mighty glory in his might, Nor let the rich glory in his riches!
But let him that glorieth glory in this, That he hath regard to me, and knoweth me, That I am Jehovah, who exercise loving-kindness, Justice, and righteousness upon the earth; For in these do I delight, saith Jehovah.
Behold the days come, saith Jehovah, That I will punish all the circumcised with the uncircumcised,
Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, And the sons of Ammon and Moab, And all with shaven cheeks, that dwell in the wilderness. For all the nations are uncircumcised, And all the house of Israel is uncircumcised in heart.
Hear ye the word which Jehovah speaketh to you, O house of Israel!
Thus saith Jehovah: Conform ye not to the way of the heathen, And be not dismayed at the signs of the heavens, Because the heathen are dismayed at them!
The customs of the nations are vanity. For a tree of the wood is cut down, It is wrought by the hands of the artificer with the axe,
It is decked with silver and gold, And with nails and with hammers is it fastened, That it may not totter.
They are like a turned palm-tree pillar, and cannot speak; They must be borne by men, for they cannot walk. Be not afraid of them, for they cannot hurt, Nor is it in their power to do good.
There is none like thee, O Jehovah! Thou art great, And great is thy name by mighty deeds.
Who shall not fear thee, O king of nations, For to thee doth it belong! For among all the wise men of the nations, And in all their kingdoms, there is none like thee.
They are all brutish and without understanding; A doctrine of vanities is the stock.
Beaten silver is brought from Tarshish, And gold from Uphaz, The work of the artificer and the founder; Blue and purple is their clothing; The work of the skilful is it all.
But Jehovah is the true God, He is the living God, and an everlasting king; At his wrath the earth trembleth, And the nations are not able to abide his indignation.
[[Thus shall ye say to them: The gods, that have not made the heavens and the earth, Shall perish from the earth and from under these heavens.]]
He made the earth by his power; He established the world by his wisdom, And by his understanding he spread out the heavens.
When he uttereth his voice there is an abundance of water in the heavens; He causeth clouds to ascend from the ends of the earth; He maketh lightnings with rain; He bringeth the wind from his storehouses.
Brutish is every one who hath not this knowledge; By his image is every founder put to shame, For his molten-work is deceit; There is no breath in it.
They are vanity, deceptive work; In the time of their punishment shall they perish.
Not like them is He who is the portion of Jacob; He is the former of all things, And Israel is his allotted inheritance; Jehovah of hosts is his name.
Gather up thy goods out of the land, O inhabitant of the fortress!
For thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I will sling forth the inhabitants of the land at this time; I will distress them, so that they shall be taken.
“Ah me! my wound!” [[saith the daughter of Zion;]] “My bruise is deadly; Yet I say, This is my affliction, and I must bear it!
My tent is torn down, And all my cords broken. My children are gone forth from me, and are no more; There is none to stretch forth my tent any more, Or to set up my curtains.
For the shepherds have become brutish; They have not sought Jehovah; Therefore have they not prospered, And all their flock is dispersed.”
[[Hark!]] the sound of tiding! Behold it cometh, And a great tumult from the land of the North, To make the cities of Judah desolate, A dwelling-place for jackals.
“I know, O Jehovah, that the way of a man is not within his power, That it is not within the power of a man that walketh to establish his steps.
Chasten me, O Jehovah, but in measure; Not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing!
Pour out thy wrath on the nations which acknowledge thee not, And on the kingdoms which call not on thy name! For they have devoured Jacob; They have devoured and consumed him, And laid waste his dwelling-place.”
The word which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
Hear ye the words of this covenant, And speak ye to the men of Judah, And the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
And say thou to them, Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel: Cursed is the man who will not obey the words of this covenant,
Which I commanded your fathers, When I brought them forth from the land of Egypt, From the iron furnace, saying, “Obey ye my voice, And do all which I command you; So shall ye be my people, And I will be your God;
So that I may perform the oath, Which I made to your fathers, To give them a land flowing with milk and honey, as it is this day.” Then answered I, and said, So may it be, O Jehovah!
Then said Jehovah to me, Proclaim all these words in the cities of Judah, And the streets of Jerusalem, saying: Hear ye the words of this covenant, and do them!
For I have earnestly admonished your fathers, From the time when I brought them up from the land of Egypt to this day, Rising early and admonishing them, saying, “Obey ye my voice!”
Yet they obeyed not, nor inclined their ear, But walked every one in the obstinacy of his evil heart; Therefore have I brought upon them all the words of this covenant, Which I commanded them to obey, And they obeyed not.
Jehovah also said to me: A conspiracy hath been found among the men of Judah, And the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
They turn back to the iniquities of their forefathers, Who refused to hearken to my words; They go after strange gods and serve them; The house of Israel and the house of Judah have broken the covenant Which I made with their fathers.
Therefore thus saith Jehovah: Behold I bring upon them a calamity, From which they shall not be able to escape; And though they cry to me, I will not hear them.
Then may the cities of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem go, And cry to the gods to whom they burn incense; But they shall not save them at all in the time of their calamity.
For according to the number of thy cities are thy gods, O Judah! According to the number of the streets of Jerusalem have ye set up altars to a thing of shame, Altars for burning incense to Baal.
Therefore pray not thou for this people, Nor lift up a cry or a prayer for them; For I will not hear when they cry to me On account of their calamity.
What hath my beloved to do in my house, While many pollute it with wickedness? The holy flesh shall pass away from thee, For when thou doest evil, thou rejoicest.
Jehovah hath called thee an olive-tree, Green, fair, and of goodly fruit; With the noise of a great crackling doth he kindle a fire upon it, And the branches of it shall be broken.
For Jehovah of hosts, who planted thee, Hath pronounced evil against thee, On account of the wickedness of the house of Israel and of Judah, which they have committed In provoking me to anger by burning incense to Baal.
Jehovah made it known to me, and I knew it; Thou didst show me their machinations!
For I was like a tame lamb, that is led to the slaughter, And knew not that they had formed plots against me, [[saying,]] “Let us destroy the tree with its fruit, Let us cut him off from the land of the living, That his name may no more be remembered!”
But, O Jehovah of hosts, the righteous judge, Who triest the reins and the heart, I shall see thy vengeance on them, For to thee have I revealed my cause!
Therefore thus saith Jehovah against the men of Anathoth, Who seek thy life, and say, “Prophesy not in the name of Jehovah, Lest thou die by our hand!”
Therefore thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Behold, I will punish them; Their young men shall die by the sword; Their sons and their daughters shall die by famine,
There shall be none of them left; For I will bring evil upon the men of Anathoth, At the time of their punishment.
Righteous art thou, O Jehovah, when I contend with thee, Yet will I enter into controversy with thee. Why doth the way of the wicked prosper? Why are all the men of treachery at ease?
Thou hast planted them; yea, they have taken root; They grow, yea, they bring forth fruit; Thou art near to their mouth, But far from their hearts.
But thou, O Jehovah, knowest me; Thou hast seen me, and tried my heart, Whether it be devoted to thee. Tear them away, as sheep for slaughter; Separate them for the day of slaughter!
How long shall the land mourn, And the grass of every field wither? For the wickedness of them that dwell therein, The beasts are consumed, and the birds; For they say, “He will not see our latter end.”
If thou hast run with footmen, and they have wearied thee, Then how canst thou contend with horses? If it be so with thee in a land of peace, in which thou art secure, What wilt thou do in the glory of Jordan?
For even thy brethren and the house of thy father, Even these are treacherous toward thee, And raise a full cry after thee; Trust them not, though they speak fair words to thee!
I have forsaken my house, I have abandoned my inheritance, I have given the darling of my soul into the hand of her enemies.
My inheritance is become to me like a lion of the forest; She lifteth up her voice against me; Therefore do I hate her.
A rapacious beast, a hyena, is my inheritance become to me; Therefore shall the rapacious beasts rush upon her on all sides. Come, gather all the beasts of the field, Bring them to devour!
Many shepherds have destroyed my vineyard; They have trodden my portion under foot; My pleasant portion have they made a desolate wilderness.
They have made it a desolation; Desolate it mourneth on account of me; The whole land is desolate, Because no man layeth my word to heart.
Upon all the high places in the desert do the plunderers come; Behold, the sword of Jehovah devoureth from one end of the land to the other; No man hath peace.
They sow wheat, but they reap thorns; They weary themselves, and are not profited; They shall be ashamed of their harvest, Because of the fierce anger of Jehovah.
Thus saith Jehovah against all my evil neighbors, Who seize the inheritance which I gave my people, Israel: Behold, I will pluck them out of their land, And the house of Judah will I pluck out from among them.
Yet after I have plucked them out of their land, I will again have compassion on them, and bring them back, Every one to his own possession, And every one to his own land.
And if they will indeed learn the ways of my people, And swear by my name, saying, As Jehovah liveth! As they taught my people to swear by Baal, Then shall they be built up in the midst of my people;
But if they will not hearken, I will utterly pluck up and destroy that nation, saith Jehovah.
Thus saith Jehovah to me: Go and get thee a linen girdle, and put it on thy loins, and put it not into water!
So I got a girdle according to the word of Jehovah, and put it on my loins.
Then the word of Jehovah came to me the second time, saying,
Take the girdle which thou hast gotten, which is upon thy loins, and arise, go to the Euphrates, and hide it there in a hole of the rock.
So I went and hid it near the Euphrates, as Jehovah commanded me.
And after many days Jehovah said to me. Arise, go to the Euphrates, and take thence the girdle which I commanded thee to hide there.
Then I went to the Euphrates, and digged, and took the girdle from the place where I had hidden it; and, behold, the girdle was marred, so that it was good for nothing.
Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:—
Thus saith Jehovah: After this manner will I mar the pride of Judah, And the great pride of Jerusalem.
This evil people, Who refuse to hearken to my words, Who walk after the obstinacy of their heart, And walk after strange gods, To serve them and to worship them, Shall be like this girdle, Which is good for nothing.
For as a girdle cleaveth to the loins of a man, So have I caused to cleave to me the whole house of Israel, And the whole house of Judah, saith Jehovah, That they might be to me a people, And a name, and a praise, and a glory; But they hearkened not to me.
Then shalt thou speak to them in this manner. Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel: Every flagon shall be filled with wine. And they will say to thee, “Do we not know that every flagon shall be filled with wine?”
Then shalt thou say to them, Thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I will fill all the inhabitants of this land, And the kings that sit upon David's throne, And the priests, and the prophets, And all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with drunkenness.
And I will dash them one against another, Even fathers and children together, saith Jehovah; I will not pity, nor spare, Nor show mercy, so as not to destroy them.
Hear ye, and attend! be not lifted up! For Jehovah speaketh.
Give glory to Jehovah, your God, Before he bring darkness, And your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, And, while ye look for light, He turn it into deathlike shade, And make it gross darkness.
But if ye will not hear, I will mourn in secret places for your pride, I will weep continually, And my eyes shall run down with tears, Because the flock of Jehovah is carried away captive.
Say to the king and to the queen, Sit ye down upon the ground, For your beautiful crown shall fall from your heads.
The cities of the South are shut up, and none openeth them; Judah is carried away captive, all of it, Every man of it is carried away captive.
Lift up your eyes, and behold them that come from the North! Where is the flock that was given thee, thy beautiful flock?
What wilt thou say when he shall punish thee? For thou thyself hast taught them to be lords over thee. Shall not sorrows seize thee, as a woman in travail?
And if thou say in thine heart, “Wherefore are these things coming upon me?” For the greatness of thy iniquity are thy skirts uncovered, And thy heels made bare.
Can the Ethiopian change his skin, Or the leopard his spots? Then may ye also do good, Who have been accustomed to do evil.
Therefore will I scatter you like stubble, Which passeth away before the wind of the desert.
This is thy lot, The portion measured out for thee by me, saith Jehovah, Because thou hast forgotten me, and trusted in falsehood.
Therefore will I lift up thy skirts over thy head, So that thy shame shall be seen.
Thine adulteries, thy neighings, The lewdness of thy whoredom on the hills, in the fields, All thy abominations, have I seen. Woe to thee, O Jerusalem! How long ere thou wilt become pure!
The word of Jehovah, which came to Jeremiah concerning a drought.
Judah mourneth, And the gates thereof languish; They are in deep mourning upon the ground. And the cry of Jerusalem goeth up.
The nobles send their younger ones for water; They come to the wells, they find none; They return with their vessels empty; They are ashamed and confounded; They cover their heads.
Because of the ground, which is in consternation, No rain falling upon the earth, The husbandmen are ashamed, They hide their heads.
Even the hind in the field is delivered, And deserteth her young, Because there is no grass.
The wild asses stand upon the hills, They snuff up the wind like jackals; Their eyes fail, Because there is no grass.
Though our iniquities testify against us, Yet do thou, O Jehovah, act from a regard to thine own name. For our transgressions have been many; We have sinned against thee.
O thou hope of Israel, His saviour in the time of trouble, Why wilt thou be as a stranger in the land, As a traveller who spreadeth his tent to pass the night?
Why wilt thou be as a man that is amazed, As a hero that cannot save? Thou art in the midst of us, O Jehovah, And we are called by thy name; Do not forsake us!
Thus saith Jehovah concerning this people: Thus they love to wander, They restrain not their feet; Therefore Jehovah doth not accept them; Now will he remember their iniquities, And punish their sins.
Then said Jehovah to me: Pray not for this people for their good!
Though they fast, I will not hear their cry; Though they offer burnt-offerings and flour-offerings, I will not accept them; But by the sword, and by famine, and by pestilence, I will make an end of them.
Then said I, Alas! O Lord Jehovah! Behold, the prophets say to them, “Ye shall not see the sword, Nor shall famine come upon you; But Jehovah will give you lasting peace in this place.”
Then said Jehovah to me: The prophets prophesy lies in my name; I have not sent them, nor commissioned them, nor spoken to them; A false vision, and divination, and vanity, And the fraud of their hearts, do they prophesy to you.
Therefore thus saith Jehovah concerning the prophets Who prophesy in my name, though I sent them not, But who themselves say, “The sword and famine shall not be in this land”: By the sword and by famine shall those prophets be consumed.
And the people to whom they prophesy Shall be cast forth in the streets of Jerusalem By means of famine and the sword; And they shall have none to bury them,—They, their wives, and their sons, and their daughters; For I will pour their wickedness upon them.
Thus also shalt thou speak to them: My eyes shall run down with tears night and day; They shall not cease; For a deep wound hath she received, The virgin daughter of my people, A deadly blow.
If I go forth into the fields, Then behold them that are slain by the sword! And if I enter the city, Then behold them that pine with famine! Both prophet and priest wander about the land, they know not whither.
Hast thou utterly rejected Judah? Doth thy soul abhor Zion? Why hast thou smitten us, so that there is no healing for us! We look for peace, and there is no good, For a time of healing, and behold, terror!
We acknowledge, O Jehovah, our wickedness, And the iniquity of our fathers; For we have sinned against thee.
Do not spurn us, for thy name's sake! Do not dishonor thy glorious throne! Call to mind, break not, thy covenant with us!
Are there among the vanities of the nations any that can cause rain? Or can the heavens give showers? Art not thou he, O Jehovah, our God? Therefore in thee will we trust, For thou hast made all these things!
Then said Jehovah to me: Though Moses and Samuel should stand before me, Yet would I not be reconciled to this people. Send them out of my sight, and let them go forth!
And if they say to thee, “Whither shall we go forth?” Then say thou to them, Thus saith Jehovah: They that are for the pestilence, to the pestilence, And they that are for the sword, to the sword. And they that are for famine, to famine, And they that are for captivity, to captivity.
I will commission against them four woes, saith Jehovah! The sword to slay, And the dogs to drag about, And the birds of heaven, and the beasts of the earth, To devour and destroy.
I will cause them to be harassed in all the kingdoms of the earth, On account of Manasseh, the son of Hezekiah, king of Judah, On account of all which he did in Jerusalem.
For who will have pity on thee, O Jerusalem? Or who condole with thee? Or who turn aside to ask thee of thy welfare?
Thou hast forsaken me, saith Jehovah; Thou hast gone backward; Therefore will I stretch out my hand against thee, and destroy thee; I am weary of relenting.
I will scatter them with a winnowing-fan through the gates of the land; I will bereave them of their sons; I will destroy my people, Since they return not from their ways.
Their widows shall be more numerous than the sand of the sea; Against the mother of the young men do I bring a spoiler at noonday; Suddenly will I bring alarm and terrors upon them.
She, that hath borne seven, languisheth; She is ready to expire; Her sun goeth down while it is yet day; She is ashamed and confounded. Their remnant will I also give to the sword Before their enemies, saith Jehovah.
Alas for me, my mother, that thou hast borne me, To live in strife and contention with all the land! I have neither borrowed nor lent money, Yet doth every one curse me!
Jehovah said: Surely I will deliver and prosper thee, Surely, in the time of trouble and in the time of distress, Will I cause the adversary to be a suppliant to thee.
Who is able to break iron, Iron from the North, and brass?
Thy substance and thy treasures will I give for spoil, without price, On account of all thy sins in all thy borders.
I will cause them to pass with thy enemies into a land which thou knowest not; For a fire is kindled in my anger, which shall burn against you.
Thou, O Jehovah, knowest all my concerns! O remember me, and have regard to me, And revenge me of my persecutors! Do not, through thy long-suffering, take me away! Consider that for thy sake I have suffered rebuke!
As soon as I found thy words, I devoured them; For thy words were the joy and rejoicing of my heart; For I am called by thy name, O Jehovah, God of hosts!
I have not sat in the assembly of them that made merry, nor rejoiced; On account of thy hand I have sat alone; For thou hast filled me with indignation.
Why is my pain perpetual, And my wound mortal, refusing to be healed? Thou hast been to me like a deceitful stream; Like waters that fail.
Then answered Jehovah thus: If thou wilt return, then will I restore thee, and thou shalt stand before me; And if thou wilt separate the precious from the vile, Thou shalt be as my mouth. They shall turn to thee, And thou shalt not turn to them.
I will make thee against this people a strong wall of brass; When they war against thee, they shall not prevail against thee, For I will be with thee to save thee, And to deliver thee, saith Jehovah.
I will rescue thee from the hand of the wicked, And I will redeem thee from the grasp of the violent.
The word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Take thee not a wife; Have no sons or daughters in this place!
For thus saith Jehovah concerning the sons and the daughters That are born in this place, And concerning their mothers that bore them, And concerning their fathers that begat them in this land;
By deadly diseases shall they die; They shall not be lamented nor buried; They shall become dung upon the face of the earth; By the sword also and by famine shall they be consumed, And their carcasses shall be food for the birds of heaven And the beasts of the earth.
For thus saith Jehovah: Enter not into the house of wailing; Go not to lament; Comfort them not! For I have taken away my peace from this people, saith Jehovah, My kindness and mercy.
The great and the small in this land shall die; They shall not be buried nor lamented; No one shall cut himself for them, Nor shall any one make himself bald for them.
Men shall not break bread for them in their grief, To comfort them for the dead, Nor give them the cup of consolation to drink, On account of a lost father or mother.
Neither enter thou into the house of feasting, To sit down with them to eat and to drink!
For thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I am about to cause to cease from this place, Before your eyes, in your days, The voice of joy and the voice of mirth, The voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride.
And when thou shalt have declared to this people all these things, and they shall say to thee, “Why hath Jehovah pronounced against us all this great evil? What is our iniquity, and what our sin, which we have committed against Jehovah our God?”
Then shalt thou say to them: Because your fathers have forsaken me, saith Jehovah, And have walked after strange gods, And have served them and worshipped them, And have forsaken me, and not kept my law.
And ye yourselves have done worse than your fathers; For, behold, ye walk every one after the perverseness of his evil heart, And do not hearken to me.
Therefore will I cast you forth from this land Into a land unknown to you and to your fathers; And there shall ye serve strange gods day and night; For I will show you no favor.
Yet behold the days shall come, saith Jehovah, When men shall no more say, “As Jehovah liveth Who brought up the children of Israel from the land of Egypt,”
But, “As Jehovah liveth Who brought up the children of Israel from the land of the North, And from all the lands whither he had driven them.” For I will bring them again into their own land, Which I gave to their fathers.
Behold, I will send many fishers, saith Jehovah, who shall fish them, And then will I send many hunters who shall hunt them From every mountain, and from every hill, and from the holes of the rocks.
For mine eyes are upon all their ways; They are not concealed from my view, Nor is their iniquity hidden from mine eyes.
And I will requite their former and their repeated iniquities and sins, Because they have polluted my land with carcasses offered to their idols, And filled my inheritance with their abominable things.
O Jehovah, my strength and my fortress, My refuge in the day of distress! To thee shall the nations come from the ends of the earth, And shall say, “Truly our fathers inherited delusion, Vain and unprofitable things.
Shall one make for himself gods Which are no gods?”
Therefore, behold, I will this time cause them to feel, I will cause them to feel my hand and my might, And they shall know that my name is Jehovah.
The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, With the point of a diamond is it engraved Upon the tablet of their hearts, Upon the horns of their altars.
While their children remember the altars, and the images of Astarte, Near the green trees, And upon the high hills.
My mountain in the field! thy substance and all thy treasures will I give up for spoil; Thy high places for sin in all thy borders.
Thou shalt of thyself cease to possess the inheritance which I gave thee, And I will cause thee to serve thy enemies in a land which thou knowest not; For ye have kindled a fire in my anger, Which shall burn forever.
Thus saith Jehovah: Cursed be the man who trusteth in man, And maketh flesh his arm, And whose heart departeth from Jehovah!
He shall be like a poor wanderer in the desert, Who seeth not when good cometh, But dwelleth in the parched places of the desert, In a salt land, and uninhabited.
Blessed is the man who trusteth in Jehovah; Who in Jehovah placeth his hope!
He shall be like a tree planted by the water-side, That spreadeth out her roots by the stream, That feeleth not when the heat cometh, But whose leaf is green; That careth not in the year of drought, Nor ceaseth from yielding fruit.
The heart is deceitful above all things; Yea, it is corrupt; who can know it?
I, Jehovah, search the heart, And try the reins, To give to every man according to his ways, And according to the fruit of his doings.
As the partridge sitteth on eggs which she hath not laid, So is he that getteth riches, and not by right; In the midst of his days shall he leave them, And in his latter end find himself a fool.
A glorious, lofty throne from the beginning Hath been the place of our sanctuary.
O thou hope of Israel, Jehovah! All that forsake thee shall be put to shame; Yea, all that depart from me shall be written in dust, Because they have forsaken the fountain of living water, they have forsaken Jehovah.
Heal me, O Jehovah, and I shall be healed; Save me, and I shall be saved; For thou art my praise!
Behold, they say to me, “Where is the word of Jehovah? Let it come to pass!”
I have not refused to follow thee, as thy shepherd, Neither have I desired the day of woe, as thou knowest! That which came from my lips hath been before thine eyes.
Be not thou a terror to me, Thou, my refuge in the day of distress! Let my persecutors be confounded, but let not me be confounded!
Let them be dismayed, but let not me be dismayed! Bring upon them the day of calamity, And destroy them with double destruction!
Thus said Jehovah to me: Go and stand in the people's gate, Through which the kings of Judah come in and go out, And in all the gates of Jerusalem,
And say to them, Hear the word of Jehovah, ye kings of Judah, All Judah, and all ye who dwell at Jerusalem, Who enter in through these gates!
Thus saith Jehovah: Take heed to yourselves, And carry no burden on the sabbath-day, And bring none through the gates of Jerusalem.
Bear no burden from your houses on the sabbath-day, And do no kind of work; But keep ye holy the sabbath-day, As I commanded your fathers.
But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, But made their necks stiff, and refused to hear, And refused to receive instruction.
If ye will now diligently hearken to me, saith Jehovah, And bring no burden through the gates of this city on the sabbath-day, But keep holy the sabbath-day, Doing no work therein,
Then shall enter the gates of this city kings and princes, Who sit upon the throne of David, Riding in chariots and on horses, They and their chieftains, The men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem; And this city shall be inhabited forever.
Then from the cities of Judah, and the places around Jerusalem, From the land of Benjamin, and from the plain, From the mountains, and from the South, Shall they come bringing burnt-offerings, and sacrifices, And flour-offerings, and incense, And bringing thank-offerings to the house of Jehovah.
But if ye will not hearken to me, To keep holy the sabbath-day, And to carry no burden through the gates of Jerusalem on the sabbath-day, Then will I kindle in her gates an unquenchable fire, Which shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem.
The word which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
Arise, and go down to the potter's house, and there will I cause thee to hear my words.
So I went down to the potter's house, and behold, he was at work at the wheel.
And the vessel which he was making of clay was marred in the hand of the potter; so he began anew and made it another vessel, as seemed good to the potter to make it.
Then came the word of Jehovah to me, saying:
Cannot I do after the manner of this potter With respect to you. O house of Israel, saith Jehovah? Behold, as the clay is in the hand of the potter, So are ye in my hand, O house of Israel!
Whenever I speak concerning a nation or a kingdom, That I will pluck it up, cast it down, or destroy it,
If that nation shall turn from its wickedness On account of which I threatened it, Then will I repent of the evil which I purposed to do to it.
And whenever I speak concerning a nation or a kingdom, That I will build it, or plant it,
And it shall do that which is evil in my sight, And not hearken to my voice, Then will I repent of the good with which I promised to bless them.
And now speak to the men of Judah, And to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, Thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I am framing evil against you, And meditating a design against you; Return ye now every one from his evil way, And amend your ways and your doings.
But they say, “There is no remedy, For we will walk after our own devices, And we will practise every one the perverseness of his evil heart.”
Therefore thus saith Jehovah: Inquire ye now among the nations, Who hath heard such things as these? The virgin of Israel hath done a deed of horror.
Shall the snow from the rocks of Lebanon forsake my fields? Or shall the cold flowing waters, that come from afar, be dried up?
Yet my people have forgotten me, And burned incense to vanity; They stumble in their paths, the old ways, And walk in ways that have not been thrown up,
To make their land a desolation, A perpetual hissing; Every one that passeth through it shall be amazed, And shake his head.
I will scatter them before the enemy, as with the east wind; I will show them the back, and not the face, In the day of their calamity.
But they say, “Come, let us devise measures against Jeremiah; For the law shall not perish from the priest, Nor counsel from the wise, Nor the word from the prophet; Come, let us smite him with the tongue, And not give heed to any of his words.”
Give heed to me, O Jehovah, And hear the voice of my adversaries!
Shall evil be returned for good? For they have digged a pit for me. Remember how I have stood before thee, To announce good to them, And to turn away thy wrath from them!
Therefore give thou up their sons to famine, And deliver them to the edge of the sword! Let their wives be childless and widows, Let their men be slain by pestilence, And their young men fall by the sword in battle!
Let a cry be heard from their houses, When thou shalt bring a troop upon them suddenly! For they have digged a pit to take me, And hidden snares for my feet.
Thou, O Jehovah, knowest all their plots against my life! Cover not their iniquity, And blot not out their sin from thy sight! But let them be overthrown before thee; Deal with them in the time of thy wrath!
Thus saith Jehovah: Go and buy an earthen bottle of the potter, And take with thee the elders of the people, And the elders of the priests,
And go forth to the valley of the son of Hinnom, At the entrance of the pottery-gate, And proclaim there the words Which I shall speak to thee.
Say, Hear the word of Jehovah, Ye kings of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem! Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I am about to bring such an evil upon this place, That whoever heareth of it, his ears shall tingle.
For they have forsaken me, And have alienated this place, And have burned incense in it to strange gods, Which neither they, nor their fathers, nor the kings of Judah have known, And have filled this place with the blood of innocent children,
And have built high places to Baal, To burn their sons in the fire for burnt-offerings to Baal; Which I ordained not, and commanded not, And which never came into my mind.
Therefore, behold, the days are coming, saith Jehovah, When this place shall no more be called Tophet, Nor the valley of the son of Hinnom, But the valley of Slaughter.
For I will in this place bring to naught the plans of Judah and Jerusalem, And I will cause them to fall by the sword before their enemies, And by the hands of them that seek their lives; And their dead bodies will I give for food To the birds of heaven and the beasts of the earth.
And I will make this city a wonder and a hissing; Every one that passeth by it shall wonder and hiss, On account of all its plagues.
For I will cause them to eat the flesh of their sons and of their daughters, Yea, the flesh of each other shall they eat, In the straitness and the distress With which their enemies, and they that seek their lives, shall press them.
Then break thou the bottle Before the eyes of the men that go with thee.
And say to them: Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: So will I break this people and this city, As one breaks a potter's vessel which cannot be made whole again; And they shall be buried in Tophet, till there is no room to bury.
Thus will I do to this place and to its inhabitants, saith Jehovah, And I will make this city itself like Tophet;
And the houses of Jerusalem and the houses of the kings of Judah shall be unclean, like the place of Tophet, All the houses upon whose roofs they have burned incense to all the host of heaven, And poured out drink-offerings to strange gods.
Then came Jeremiah from Tophet, Whither Jehovah had sent him to prophesy, And stood in the court of the house of Jehovah, And said to all the people:
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I am about to bring upon this city, and upon all the cities belonging to it, All the evil which I have pronounced against it; For they have made their necks stiff, And refused to hearken to my words.
Now Pashur, the son of Immer, the priest, who was also chief overseer in the house of Jehovah, heard Jeremiah prophesying these things.
Then Pashur smote Jeremiah the prophet, and put him in the stocks, that were at the high gate of Benjamin, which was in the house of Jehovah.
And on the next day Pashur took Jeremiah out of the stocks. Then said Jeremiah to him, Jehovah calleth thee, not Pashur, but Magor-missabib [[not Safety on every side, but Terror on every side]].
For thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I am about to make thee a terror to thyself and to all thy friends; and they shall fall by the sword of their enemies, thine eyes looking on; and all Judah will I give into the hand of the king of Babylon, who shall carry them captive to Babylon, and shall smite them with the sword.
And I will give all the wealth of this city, and all its possessions, and all its precious things, and all the treasures of the kings of Judah will I give, into the hand of their enemies, and they shall spoil them, and take them and carry them to Babylon.
And thou, Pashur, and all that dwell in thy house, shall go into captivity; thou shalt go to Babylon, and there shalt thou die, and there shalt thou be buried, thou, and all thy friends, to whom thou hast prophesied falsely.
Thou didst persuade me, O Jehovah, and I was persuaded; Thou wast stronger than I, and didst prevail. But I am in derision daily, Every one mocketh me.
For whenever I speak, I cry out on account of violence, And complain of oppression; For the word of Jehovah bringeth upon me reproach, And daily derision.
So I say, I will no more make mention of him, Nor speak any more in his name; But his word is in my heart like a burning fire, shut up in my bones, And I am weary with forbearing, And I cannot refrain.
For I hear the slander of many, terror on every side; “Tell us something against him, and we will denounce him.” All my familiar friends, they who leave not my side, [[say,]] “Perhaps he will be enticed, So that we may prevail against him, And take our revenge on him.”
But Jehovah is on my side, like a mighty champion, Therefore shall my persecutors stumble, and not prevail; They shall be covered with shame, because they act not wisely,—With everlasting shame, that shall not be forgotten.
O Jehovah of hosts, thou that provest the righteous, That seest the reins and the heart, Let me see thy vengeance on them, For to thee have I laid open my cause!
Sing to Jehovah! Praise ye Jehovah! For he delivereth the oppressed From the hand of evil-doers.
Cursed be the day on which I was born; Let not the day on which my mother bore me be blessed!
Cursed be the man who brought the tidings to my father, Saying, “A son is born to thee,” making him very glad!
Let that man be like the cities which Jehovah overthrew, and relented not; Let him hear an outcry in the morning, And an alarm at noontide;
Because he slew me not before I saw the light, So that my mother might have been my grave, And her womb have been great with me forever!
Wherefore came I forth from the womb, to see weariness and sorrow, And that my days might be consumed in shame?
The word which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, when King Zedekiah sent to him Pashur, the son of Melchiah, and Zephaniah, the son of Maaseiah, the priest, saying:
Inquire, I pray thee, of Jehovah for us; for Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, maketh war against us; whether Jehovah will deal with us according to all his wondrous works, that he may go up from us.
And Jeremiah said to them, Thus shall ye say to Zedekiah:
Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel: Behold, I will turn back the weapons of war which are in your hands, with which ye fight against the king of Babylon and the Chaldaeans, which besiege you without the walls, and I will assemble them in the midst of this city.
And I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand, and with a strong arm, with anger and fury and great wrath.
And I will smite the inhabitants of this city, both man and beast; by a great pestilence shall they die.
And after this, saith Jehovah, I will deliver Zedekiah, the king of Judah, and his servants, and the people, and those in the city who shall be left alive by the pestilence, the sword, and the famine, into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, and into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those that seek their life; and he shall smite them with the edge of the sword. He shall not spare them, nor have pity, nor show mercy.
And to this people thou shalt say, Thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I set before you the way of life, and the way of death.
He that abideth in this city shall die by the sword, and by famine, and by pestilence; but he that goeth out and surrendereth himself to the Chaldaeans that besiege you, he shall live, and bear away his life as a prey.
For I have set my face against this city for evil, and not for good, saith Jehovah. It shall be given into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire.
And to the house of the king of Judah: Hear ye the word of Jehovah,
O house of David! Thus saith Jehovah: Administer justice in season, and deliver him that is spoiled from the hand of the oppressor, lest my fury go forth like fire, and burn so that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings!
Behold, I am against thee, thou inhabitant of the valley, the rock of the plain, who sayest, “Who shall come down against us? Or who shall enter our habitations?”
But I will punish you with the fruit of your doings. I will kindle a fire in her forest, which shall consume all around her.
Thus said Jehovah: Go down to the house of the king of Judah, and there speak these words.
Hear the word of Jehovah, thou king of Judah, That sittest upon the throne of David, Thou, and thy servants, and thy people, Who go in and out through these gates!
Thus saith Jehovah: Do justice and righteousness; Deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor; To the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow Do no wrong, do no violence, And shed no innocent blood in this place!
For if ye shall do this, Then shall there enter in through the gates of this house Kings, who shall sit upon the throne of David, Riding in chariots and upon horses, Each one with his servants and his people.
But if ye will not hearken to these words, By myself do I swear, saith Jehovah, That this house shall become a desolation.
For thus saith Jehovah to the house of the king of Judah: Gilead art thou to me, yea, the summit of Lebanon; Yet will I make thee a desert, As cities not inhabited.
I will appoint against thee destroyers, Every one with his weapons; And they shall cut down thy choice cedars, And cast them into the fire.
And many nations shall pass by this city, And they shall say one to another, “Wherefore hath Jehovah done thus to this great city?”
Then shall they answer: “Because they forsook the covenant of Jehovah their God, And worshipped strange gods, And served them.”
Weep not for him that is dead, Make no lamentation for him! Weep, weep ye for him who is gone away; For he shall return no more, Nor see his native land!
For thus saith Jehovah Concerning Shallum, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, Who reigned instead of Josiah his father, Who went forth from this place: He shall return to it no more;
But in the place whither they have led him captive shall he die, And shall see this land no more.
Woe to him that buildeth his house with injustice, And his upper apartments with wrong; That exacteth a man's service without wages, And giveth him no recompense!
That saith, “I will build me a large house, And spacious apartments,” And that cutteth out windows, And ceileth it with cedar, And painteth it with vermilion!
Shalt thou reign because thou rivallest others in cedar? Did not thy father eat and drink? Yet he had regard to justice and equity; Therefore it was well, with him.
He maintained the cause of the poor and needy; Then was it well with him; Was not this to know me, saith Jehovah?
But thine eyes and thy heart are only upon thine own gain, And the shedding of innocent blood, And deeds of violence and oppression.
Therefore thus saith Jehovah, Concerning Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah: They shall not lament for him, saying, “Alas, my brother!” or, “Alas, sister!” They shall not lament for him, saying, “Alas, lord!” or, “Alas, his glory!”
With the burial of an ass shall he be buried, Dragged along and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem.
Go thou up to Lebanon and cry, [[O Jerusalem!]] And upon Bashan lift up thy voice; Cry aloud from Abarim! For all thy lovers are fallen.
I spake to thee in thy prosperity, But thou saidst, “I will not hear.” This hath been thy manner from thy youth; Thou hast not obeyed my voice.
The wind shall consume all thy shepherds, And thy lovers shall go into captivity; Then shalt thou be ashamed And confounded for all thy wickedness.
O thou that dwellest in Lebanon, That makest thy nest in cedars, How wretched shalt thou be, when anguish cometh upon thee, Pain, as of a woman in travail!
As I live, saith Jehovah, Thou Coniah, son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, Though thou wert the signet upon my right hand, Even thence would I pluck thee!
And I will give thee into the hand of them that seek thy life, And into the hand of them that thou fearest, Even into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, And into the hand of the Chaldaeans.
And I will cast thee forth, And thy mother that bore thee, Into a foreign land, Where ye were not born; And there shall ye die.
To the land to which they desire to return, Thither shall they not return.
“Is then this man Coniah a contemptible broken vessel? Is he a vessel which no man careth for? Wherefore are he and his offspring cast forth, And thrown into a land which they know not?”
O land, land, land, hear the word of Jehovah!
Thus saith Jehovah: Write ye this man childless, A man that shall not be prosperous through his life; For none of his offspring shall prosper, So as to sit on the throne of David, And reign hereafter in Judah.
Woe to the shepherds, Who lose and scatter the sheep of my pasture, saith Jehovah.
For concerning the shepherds, the feeders of my people, Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel: Ye have scattered my flock, and driven them away, And have not taken care of them. Behold, I am about to requite you For the evil of your doings, saith Jehovah.
But I will gather the remnant of my flock From all the countries whither I have driven them, And I will bring them back to their folds, And they shall be fruitful and increase.
And I will raise up shepherds over them, who shall feed them; They shall fear no more, nor be dismayed; Nor shall they be lost, saith Jehovah.
Behold, the days are coming, saith Jehovah, When I will raise up from David a righteous Branch, And a king shall reign and prosper, And shall maintain justice and equity in the land.
In his days Judah shall be saved, And Israel shall dwell securely; And this is the name which shall be given him, Jehovah-is-our-salvation.
Therefore, behold, the days shall come, saith Jehovah, When they shall no more say, “As Jehovah liveth Who brought up the children of Israel from the land of Egypt!”
But, “As Jehovah liveth Who brought up and led the race of Israel from the north country, And from all the countries whither I had driven them!” And they shall dwell in their own land.
Concerning the Prophets. My heart is broken within me; All my bones tremble. I am become like a drunken man, Like a man whom wine hath overcome, Because of Jehovah, And because of his holy words.
For the land is full of adulteries; Because of a curse doth the land mourn; The pastures of the waste are dried up; For they run to do evil, And their might is without right.
Yea, both prophet and priest are profane; Even in my house have I found their wickedness, saith Jehovah.
Therefore shall their way become as slippery places in the dark; They shall be driven on and fall therein; For I will bring evil upon them In the time of their visitation, saith Jehovah.
In the prophets of Samaria have I seen folly; They prophesy in the name of Baal, and cause my people Israel to err.
In the prophets of Jerusalem also have I seen a horrible thing; They commit adultery, and walk in falsehood; They strengthen the hands of evil-doers, So that none doth turn from his iniquity. They have all become to me as Sodom, And her inhabitants as Gomorrah.
Therefore thus saith Jehovah of hosts concerning the prophets: Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, And give them the water of hemlock to drink; For from the prophets of Jerusalem Hath profaneness gone forth into all the land.
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Hearken not to the words of the prophets; They lead you to vanity; They utter the vision of their own heart, And not from the mouth of Jehovah.
To them that despise me they say continually, “Jehovah hath said, Ye shall have peace”; And to every one that walketh after the perverseness of his heart, “No evil shall come upon you.”
For who of them hath stood in the council of Jehovah, And hath seen and heard his word? Who hath listened to his word and heard it?
Behold a whirlwind from Jehovah goeth forth in fury, Even a rushing whirlwind; Upon the head of the wicked shall it rush.
The fierce anger of Jehovah shall not turn back, Until he shall have executed, until he shall have accomplished the purpose of his heart. In the latter days ye shall understand it fully.
I sent not these prophets, yet they ran; I spake not to them, yet they prophesied.
For if they had stood in my council, Then would they have caused my people to hear my words, And would have turned them from their evil way. And from the wickedness of their doings.
Am I a God near at hand, saith Jehovah, And not a God afar off?
Can any one hide himself in secret places, So that I shall not see him? saith Jehovah; Do I nor fill heaven and earth? saith Jehovah.
I have heard what the prophets say, Who prophesy falsehood in my name, Saying, “I have dreamed, I have dreamed.”
How long shall this be In the heart of the prophets, who prophesy falsehood, The prophets of the deceit of their own heart,
Who think to cause my people to forget my name By the dreams which they relate one to another, As their fathers forgot my name through Baal?
The prophet who hath a dream, let him tell a dream; And he that hath my word, let him speak my word truly! What is the chaff to the wheat? saith Jehovah.
Is not my word like fire, saith Jehovah, And like a hammer, that breaketh the rock in pieces?
Therefore, behold, I am against the prophets, saith Jehovah, That steal my words one from another.
Behold, I am against the prophets, saith Jehovah, That take their tongues and utter oracles.
Behold, I am against the prophets of false dreams, saith Jehovah, Who tell them, and cause my people to err By their lies and their arrogance. I have not sent them, nor commanded them, And they shall not profit this people at all, saith Jehovah.
And when this people, or a prophet, or a priest Shall ask thee, saying, “What is the burden from Jehovah?” Then say thou to them, “What is the burden?” That I will cast you away, saith Jehovah.
And the prophet, the priest, and the people, Who shall say, “The burden of Jehovah,” I will punish that man and his house.
Thus shall ye speak, one to another: “What hath Jehovah answered?” And, “What hath Jehovah spoken?”
And of a burden of Jehovah shall ye speak no more; Else shall every man's word be his burden, Because ye pervert the words of the living God, Of Jehovah of hosts, our God.
Thus shalt thou say to the prophet: “What hath Jehovah answered thee?” And, “What hath Jehovah spoken?”
If ye shall say, “The burden of Jehovah,” Then thus saith Jehovah: Because ye say, “The burden of Jehovah,” Although I sent to you and said, Ye shall not say, “The burden of Jehovah,”
Therefore, behold, I will utterly forget you, And I will cast you, and the city which I gave to your fathers, out of my presence;
And I will bring upon you an everlasting reproach, And a perpetual shame which shall not be forgotten.
Jehovah showed me this vision. Behold, two baskets of figs were set before the temple of Jehovah. This was after Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, had carried away captive Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, and the princes of Judah, and the artificers, and the smiths, from Jerusalem, and had led them to Babylon.
One of the baskets contained very good figs, like those which are first ripe. The other contained very bad figs, so bad that they could not be eaten.
And Jehovah said to me, What seest thou, Jeremiah? And I said: Figs; the good figs, exceedingly good; and the bad, exceedingly bad, so bad that they cannot be eaten.
Then came the word of Jehovah to me, saying:
Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel: As these good figs, so will I regard the captives of Judah, whom I have sent out of this place into the land of Chaldaea for their good;
yea, I will set my eyes upon them for good, and I will bring them again to this land; and I will build them up, and not pull them down; and I will plant them, and not pluck them up.
And I will give them a heart to know me, that I am Jehovah; and they shall be my people, and I will be their God; for they shall return to me with their whole heart.
And as the bad figs, which are so bad that they cannot be eaten, saith Jehovah, so will I make Zedekiah, the king of Judah, and his princes, and the residue of Jerusalem, those that are left in this land, and those that dwell in the land of Egypt;
and I will give them up to oppression and affliction in all the kingdoms of the earth; yea, to be a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in all places whither I shall drive them.
And I will send the sword, the famine, and the pestilence among them, till they be consumed from the land, which I gave to them and to their fathers.
The word which came to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, which was the first year of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon;
which Jeremiah the prophet spake to all the people of Judah, and to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying:—
From the thirteenth year of Josiah, the son of Amon, king of Judah, even to this day, for three and twenty years, the word of Jehovah hath come to me, and I have spoken to you, rising early and speaking; but ye have not hearkened.
Also Jehovah hath sent to you all his servants the prophets, rising early and sending them; but ye have not hearkened, nor inclined your ear to hear.
“Turn ye now,” said they, “every one from your evil way, and from your evil doings, and ye shall dwell in the land which Jehovah gave to you and to your fathers for ever and ever.
And go not after strange gods to serve them, and to worship them, and provoke me not to anger with the work of your hands; and I will do you no hurt.”
But ye have not hearkened to me, saith Jehovah, that ye might provoke me to anger with the works of your hands to your own hurt.
Therefore thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Because ye have not hearkened to my words,
behold, I will send and take all the nations of the North, saith Jehovah, and Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, my servant, and will bring them against this land and its inhabitants, and against all these nations round about, and will utterly destroy them, and make them an astonishment, and a hissing, and a perpetual desolation.
Yea, I will take from them the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the sound of the mill-stones, and the light of the lamp.
And this whole land shall be a desolation and an astonishment; and these nations shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years.
But when seventy years shall have passed, I will punish the king of Babylon and his nation for their iniquity, saith Jehovah, and the land of the Chaldaeans, and I will make it a perpetual desolation.
And I will bring upon that land all my words which I have pronounced against it, all that is written in this book, which Jeremiah hath prophesied against all the nations.
For they, even they, shall be brought into subjection to many nations and great kings. I will render to them according to their deeds, and according to the works of their own hands.
For thus hath Jehovah, the God of Israel, said to me: Take this cup of the wine of wrath from my hand; and let all the nations to which I shall send thee drink of it.
Let them drink, and stagger, and become mad because of the sword which I am about to send among them.
So I took the cup from the hand of Jehovah, and gave it to all the nations to drink, to which Jehovah sent me;
to Jerusalem and to the cities of Judah, and to the kings thereof, and the princes thereof, to make them a desolation, and an astonishment, and a hissing, and a curse; [[as it is this day.]]
To Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and to his servants, and to his princes, and to all his people,
and all the allied people; and to all the kings of the land of Uz, and to all the kings of the land of the Philistines, and to Askelon, and to Gaza, and to Ekron, and to the remnant of Ashdod;
to Edom, and to Moab, and to the children of Ammon;
and to all the kings of Tyre, and to all the kings of Sidon, and to the kings of the lands which are beyond the sea;
to Dedan, and to Tema, and to Buz, and to all that shave the cheek;
and to all the kings of Arabia, and to all the kings of the allied people who dwell in the desert;
and to all the kings of Zimri, and to all the kings of Elam, and to all the kings of Media;
and to all the kings of the North, those that are near, and those that are afar off with respect to each other, and to all the kingdoms of the earth which are upon the face of the ground; and the king of Sheshach shall drink after them.
And say to them, Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Drink ye and be drunken, and vomit, and fall to rise no more because of the sword which I am about to send among you.
And if they refuse to take the cup from thy hand to drink, then say to them, Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Ye shall surely drink!
For behold, upon the city which is called by my name I begin to bring evil; and shall ye go wholly unpunished? Ye shall not go unpunished; for I am about to call the sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, saith Jehovah of hosts.
Therefore, prophesy against them all these words, and say to them:—Jehovah shall roar from on high, From his holy habitation shall he utter his voice; He shall roar aloud against his dwelling-place; A shout like that of vintagers shall he raise Against all the inhabitants of the earth.
An outcry shall reach to the ends of the earth; For Jehovah hath a controversy with the nations; He entereth into judgment with all flesh; The wicked will he give up to the sword, saith Jehovah.
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Behold, evil shall go forth from nation to nation, And a great whirlwind shall be raised up from the extremities of the earth.
At that day shall the slain of Jehovah lie From one end of the earth to the other end of the earth; They shall not be lamented, nor gathered, nor buried; They shall be dung upon the ground.
Howl, O ye shepherds, and cry! Roll yourselves in the dust, ye leaders of the flock, For your time to be slaughtered has come! And I will scatter you, and ye shall fall like a goodly vessel.
The shepherds shall have no way to flee, Nor the leaders of the flock to escape.
[[Hark!]] the voice of the cry of the shepherds, And the wailing of the leaders of the flock, Because Jehovah layeth waste their pasture!
Yea, the peaceful pastures are destroyed Because of the fierce anger of Jehovah.
He hath left, like a lion, his covert; For their land is become desolate, Because of the wrath of the destroying sword, And because of the fierceness of his anger.
In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, came this word from Jehovah, saying:—
Thus saith Jehovah: Stand in the court of the house of Jehovah, and speak to those who come from all the cities of Judah to worship in the house of Jehovah all the words which I have commanded thee to speak to them; abate not a word.
If peradventure they will hearken and turn every one from his evil way, that I may repent me of the evil which I purpose to do to them because of their evil doings.
And thou shalt say to them, Thus saith Jehovah: If ye will not hearken to me, to walk in my law which I have set before you,
to hearken to the words of my servants the prophets, whom I sent to you, rising early and sending, and ye have not hearkened,
then will I make this house like Shiloh, and this city will I make a curse to all the nations of the earth.
And the priests and the prophets and all the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of Jehovah.
And when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking all that Jehovah had commanded him to speak to all the people, then the priests and the prophets and all the people seized him, and said, Thou shalt surely die!
Why dost thou prophesy in the name of Jehovah, and say, This house shall be as Shiloh, and this city shall be made desolate without an inhabitant? And all the people were assembled together against Jeremiah in the house of Jehovah.
When the princes of Judah heard these things, they went up from the king's house to the house of Jehovah, and sat in the entrance of the new gate of the house of Jehovah.
Then spake the priests and the prophets to the princes and to all the people, saying: This man is worthy to die; for he hath prophesied against this city, as ye have heard with your ears.
Then spake Jeremiah to all the princes and to all the people, saying: Jehovah hath sent me to prophesy against this house, and against this city, all the words which ye have heard.
But now amend ye your ways and your doings, and obey the voice of Jehovah, your God, and Jehovah will repent of the evil which he hath pronounced against you.
And as for me, behold, I am in your hands; do to me as it seemeth good and right in your eyes.
But know ye for certain that, if ye put me to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon yourselves, and upon this city, and its inhabitants; for of a truth Jehovah hath sent me to you to speak all these words in your ears.
Then said the princes and all the people to the priests and the prophets: This man is not worthy to die, for he hath spoken to us in the name of Jehovah, our God.
Certain elders of the land also rose up, and spoke to all the assembly of the people, saying:
Micah, the Morasthite, prophesied in the days of Hezekiah, king of Judah, and spake to all the people of Judah, saying, Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Zion shall be ploughed like a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps of stones, and the mountain of the house [[of Jehovah]] as the heights of a forest.
Did Hezekiah, king of Judah, and all Judah, put him to death? Did he not fear Jehovah, and beseech Jehovah, so that Jehovah repented of the evil which he had pronounced against them? Shall we then bring so great an evil upon ourselves?
There was also another man that prophesied in the name of Jehovah, Urijah, the son of Shemaiah of Kirjath-jearim, who prophesied against this city and this land, according to all the words of Jeremiah;
and when Jehoiakim the king, and all his mighty men, and all the princes, heard his words, the king sought to put him to death. But when Urijah heard it, he was afraid, and fled and went into Egypt.
But Jehoiakim the king sent men into Egypt, Elnathan the son of Achbor, and certain men with him into Egypt,
and they brought Urijah out of Egypt, and carried him to King Jehoiakim, who slew him with the sword, and cast his dead body into the graves of the common people.
Nevertheless, the hand of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, was with Jeremiah, that he should not be delivered into the hand of the people, to be put to death.
In the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, came this word to Jeremiah from Jehovah.
Thus said Jehovah to me: Make thee bands and yokes, and put them upon thy neck,
and send them to the king of Edom, and to the king of Moab, and to the king of the children of Ammon, and to the king of Tyre, and to the king of Zidon, by the hands of the messengers that are come to Jerusalem, to Zedekiah, king of Judah.
And command them to say to their masters, Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Thus shall ye say to your masters:
The earth, and the men and the beasts which are upon the earth, have I made by my great power and my outstretched arm, and I give it to whomsoever it seemeth meet to me.
And now I give all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, my servant; the beasts of the field also I give him to serve him.
And all nations shall serve him, and his son, and his son's son, until the time of his land, even his, shall come, and then shall many nations and great kings make him their servant.
And the nation and the kingdom that will not serve him, Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, and put their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon,—with the sword and with famine and with pestilence will I punish that nation, saith Jehovah, until I have consumed them by his hand.
Therefore hearken ye not to your prophets, and your diviners, and your dreamers, your soothsayers, and your sorcerers, who say to you, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon.
For they prophesy a lie to you, to remove you far from your land, and that I should drive you out, and that ye should perish.
But the nations that bring their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him, those will I let remain still in their own land, saith Jehovah, and they shall till it, and dwell therein.
And to Zedekiah, king of Judah, also, spake I according to all these words, and said: Bring your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him and his people, and live.
Why will ye die, thou and thy people, by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence, as Jehovah hath spoken concerning the nation that will not serve the king of Babylon?
Therefore hearken not to the prophets, that say to you, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon; for they prophesy a lie to you.
For I have not sent them, saith Jehovah; but they prophesy a lie in my name, that I may drive you out, and that ye may perish, ye and the prophets that prophesy to you.
To the priests, also, and to all the people; spake I, saying, Thus saith Jehovah: Hearken not to the words of your prophets who prophesy to you, and say, Behold the vessels of the house of Jehovah shall be brought back from Babylon now shortly; for they prophesy a lie to you.
Hearken ye not to them; serve the king of Babylon, and live! Why should this city become a desolation?
But if they be indeed prophets, and if the word of Jehovah be with them, let them now make intercession to Jehovah of hosts, that the vessels which are left in the house of Jehovah, and in the house of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem, may not go to Babylon.
For thus saith Jehovah of hosts concerning the pillars, and concerning the sea, and concerning the bases, and concerning the residue of the vessels that are let in this city,
which Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, took not, when he carried away captive Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, from Jerusalem to Babylon, with all the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem;
yea, thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, concerning the vessels that are left in the house of Jehovah, and in the house of the king of Judah and of Jerusalem:
They shall be carried to Babylon, and there shall they be until the day when I shall visit them, saith Jehovah. Then will I bring them up, and restore them to this place.
And it came to pass in the same year, in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah, in the fourth year, in the fifth month, that Hananiah, the son of Azur the prophet, who was of Gibeon, spoke to me in the presence of the priests and of all the people, saying,
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: “I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.
Within two full years will I bring again to this place all the vessels of the house of Jehovah, which Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon took from this place, and carried to Babylon.
And Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, and all the captives of Judah that went to Babylon, will I bring again to this place, saith Jehovah; for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.”
Then Jeremiah the prophet spake to Hananiah the prophet, in the presence of the priests, and in the presence of all the people that stood in the house of Jehovah.
And Jeremiah the prophet said, Amen! So may Jehovah do! May Jehovah fulfill thy words which thou hast prophesied, and bring back the vessels of the house of Jehovah, and all the captives from Babylon to this place!
Nevertheless, hear now this word, which I speak in thine ears, and in the ears of all the people.
The prophets who have been before me and before thee from ancient times have also prophesied against many nations, and against great kingdoms, of war, of calamity, and of pestilence.
The prophet who prophesieth of peace, when the word of the prophet shall come to pass, then shall he be known as a prophet whom Jehovah hath truly sent.
Then Hananiah the prophet took the yoke from the prophet Jeremiah's neck, and broke it.
And Hananiah spake in the presence of all the people, saying, Thus saith Jehovah: In this manner will I break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, from the neck of all the nations, within the space of two full years. And the prophet Jeremiah went his way.
Then came the word of Jehovah to Jeremiah, after that Hananiah the prophet had broken the yoke from the neck of the prophet Jeremiah, saying:
Go and tell Hananiah, saying: Thou hast broken a yoke of wood, but thou shalt make instead of it a yoke of iron.
For thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: A yoke of iron do I put upon the neck of all these nations, that they may serve Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon; and they shall serve him. The beasts of the field also do I give to him.
Jeremiah the prophet said also to Hananiah the prophet: Hear now, Hananiah! Jehovah hath not sent thee; but thou makest this people to trust in a lie.
Therefore thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I will cast thee off from the face of the earth. This year thou shalt die; for thou hast spoken rebellion against Jehovah.
And Hananiah the prophet died in the same year, in the seventh month.
Now these are the words of the letter which Jeremiah the prophet sent to the residue of the elders of the captivity, and to the priests, and to the prophets, and to all the people, whom Nebuchadnezzar had carried away captive from Jerusalem to Babylon,
after the departure of Jeconiah the king, and the queen, and the eunuchs, and the princes of Judah and Jerusalem, and the artificers, and the smiths, from Jerusalem,
by the hand of Elasah, the son of Shaphan, and Gemariah, the son of Hilkiah, (whom Zedekiah, the king of Judah, sent to Babylon, to Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon,) saying:—
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, to all the captives whom I have caused to be carried away from Jerusalem to Babylon:
Build ye houses and dwell in them; and plant gardens and eat the fruit of them.
Take ye wives, and have sons and daughters; and take wives for your sons, and give your daughters to husbands, that they may bear sons and daughters; and increase ye there, and be not diminished.
And seek ye the peace of the city whither I have caused you to be carried away captive, and pray for it to Jehovah, for in its peace shall be your peace.
For thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Let not your prophets and your diviners, who are in the midst of you, deceive you, neither hearken to your dreams which ye cause to be dreamed.
For they prophesy falsely to you in my name; I have not sent them, saith Jehovah.
For thus saith Jehovah: Surely, when seventy years shall be completed for Babylon, I will visit you, and I will perform for you my good promise, that I would bring you again to this place.
For I know the designs which I have in mind concerning you, designs of good and not of evil, to give you a happy end, and fulfill your hopes.
Then ye shall call upon me, and go in peace; ye shall pray to me, and I will hear you;
ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye search for me with all your heart.
And I will be found by you, saith Jehovah, and I will bring you back from captivity, and I will gather you from all the nations, and from all the places whither I have driven you, saith Jehovah; and I will bring you again to the place whence I caused you to be carried away captive.
Since ye say, Jehovah hath raised us up prophets in Babylon,
behold, thus saith Jehovah concerning the king that sitteth upon the throne of David, and concerning all the people that dwell in this city, your brethren that went not forth with you into captivity,—
thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Behold, I will send upon them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and I will make them like vile figs, which cannot be eaten for badness.
And I will persecute them with the sword, and with famine, and with pestilence, and I will give them up to oppression in all kingdoms of the earth, to be a curse, and an astonishment, and a hissing, and a reproach, among all the nations whither I drive them;
because they have not hearkened to my words, saith Jehovah, when I sent to them my servants, the prophets, rising early and sending them; but ye would not hear, saith Jehovah.
Hear ye, therefore, the word of Jehovah, all ye of the captivity, whom I have sent from Jerusalem to Babylon.
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, concerning Ahab, the son of Kolaiah, and concerning Zedekiah, the son of Maaseiah, who prophesy a lie to you in my name: Behold, I will deliver them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and he shall slay them before your eyes.
And from them shall be taken a curse among all the captives of Judah that are at Babylon, so that they shall say, “Jehovah make thee like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom the king of Babylon roasted in the fire!”
because they have practised villany in Israel, and have committed adultery with their neighbors' wives, and have spoken lying words in my name, which I commanded them not. But I know it, and am a witness, saith Jehovah.
And to Shemaiah, the Nehelamite, shalt thou say,
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Because thou hast sent letters in thy name to all the people that are at Jerusalem, and to Zephaniah, the son of Maaseiah the priest, and to all the priests, saying,
Jehovah hath made thee priest in the room of Jehoiada the priest, that there should be officers in the house of Jehovah against every one that is mad and prophesieth, and that thou shouldst put him into the stocks, and into prison;
now, therefore, why hast thou not reproved Jeremiah of Anathoth, who prophesieth to you?
For he hath sent to us at Babylon, saying, This captivity is long. Build ye houses and dwell in them, and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them.
And Zephaniah the priest read this letter in the ears of Jeremiah the prophet.
Then came the word of Jehovah to Jeremiah, saying:
Send to all those of the captivity, saying, Thus saith Jehovah concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite: Because Shemaiah the prophet hath prophesied to you, and I sent him not, and he hath caused you to trust in a lie,
therefore thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I will punish Shemaiah, the Nehelamite, and his offspring. There shall descend from him not a man to dwell among this people, and he shall not behold the good which I will do for my people, saith Jehovah; for he hath spoken rebellion against Jehovah.
The word which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:—
Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel: Write thee all the words which I have spoken to thee in a book.
For behold the days come, saith Jehovah, when I will bring back the captives of my people Israel and Judah, saith Jehovah, and cause them to return to the land which I gave to their fathers, and they shall possess it.
And these are the words which Jehovah spake concerning Israel and concerning Judah.
Behold, thus saith Jehovah: The voice of trembling do we hear; There is alarm, and no peace.
Ask ye now and see, Whether a male doth bring forth? Why then do I see every man's hands upon his loins, like a woman in travail? And why are all faces turned into paleness?
Alas! that day is great, So that there is none like it; It is a time of trouble for Jacob, Yet shall he be saved from it.
For in that day, saith Jehovah of hosts, I will break his yoke from his neck, And his bands will I burst asunder, And he shall be subject to strangers no more.
But they shall serve Jehovah, their God, And David, their king, whom I will raise up for them.
Therefore fear thou not, O my servant Jacob, saith Jehovah, And be not thou dismayed, O Israel! For, behold, I will bring thee safe from afar, And thy posterity from the land of their captivity; And Jacob shall return, and be at rest; Yea, he shall be quiet, and none shall make him afraid.
For I will be with thee, saith Jehovah, to save thee; When I shall make a full end of all the nations Whither I have dispersed thee, Yet will I not make a full end of thee; I will correct thee in measure, Yet must I not leave thee wholly unpunished.
For thus saith Jehovah: Thy bruise is incurable; Thy wound is mortal.
No one offereth his help for thy cure; No healing medicines are applied to thee.
All thy lovers have forgotten thee; They inquire not after thee. For with the wound of an enemy have I smitten thee, With the chastisement of a cruel one, For the multitude of thine iniquities, Because thy sins were increased.
Why criest thou because of thy bruise? Thy pain is without remedy. For the multitude of thine iniquities, Because thy sins were increased, Have I done these things to thee.
Yet all they that devour thee shall be devoured, And all thine enemies, yea, all of them, shall go into captivity, And they that spoil thee shall become a spoil, And all that plunder thee will I give up to plunder.
For I will restore soundness to thee, And I will heal thee of thy wounds, saith Jehovah; For they have called thee the outcast, Zion, whom no man careth for.
Thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I will bring back the captives of the tents of Jacob, And I will have pity upon his dwelling-places, And the city shall be builded upon her heap, And the palace shall be inhabited as of old.
And out of them shall go forth thanksgiving, And the voice of them that make merry. And I will multiply them, and they shall not be few, And I will exalt them, and they shall not be low.
And their children shall be as aforetime, And their congregation shall be established before me, And I will punish all that oppress them.
And their princes shall be of themselves, And their governor shall proceed from the midst of them. And I will cause them to approach, and they shall come near to me; For who is he that would dare to come near to me? saith Jehovah.
And ye shall be my people, And I will be your God.
Behold, a whirlwind from Jehovah, Furious doth it go forth, Even a sweeping whirlwind; Upon the head of the wicked shall it rush.
The fierce anger of Jehovah shall not turn back Until he shall have executed, until he shall have accomplished, the purpose of his heart; In a future day ye shall understand it fully.
At that time, saith Jehovah, will I be the God of all the families of Israel, And they shall be my people.
Thus saith Jehovah: The people, escaped from the sword, hath found favor in the wilderness; I will go and give rest to Israel.
Jehovah appeared to me from afar, [[saying,]] With an everlasting love do I love thee, Therefore have I kept mercy for thee.
Again will I build thee, and thou shalt be built, O virgin of Israel! Again shalt thou adorn thy tabrets, And go forth in the dance of them that make merry.
Thou shalt yet plant vines upon the mountains of Samaria; The planters shall plant, and eat the fruit.
For the day is coming when the watchmen shall cry upon Mount Ephraim, Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion, To Jehovah, our God.
For thus saith Jehovah: Sing with gladness for Jacob, And shout for the head of the nations! Publish ye, praise ye, and say: Jehovah, thou hast saved thy people, The remnant of Israel.
Behold, I will bring them from the land of the North, And gather them from the extremities of the earth; And with them shall be the blind and the lame, The woman with child, and she that is in travail with child together; A great company shall return thither.
They shall come with weeping, And amid supplications will I lead them; I will conduct them to streams of water, In a straight way, in which they shall not stumble. For I have become a father to Israel, And Ephraim is my first-born.
Hear the word of Jehovah, O ye nations, And proclaim it in the distant coasts, and say: “He that scattered Israel will gather him, And will guard him, as a shepherd his flock.”
For Jehovah hath redeemed Jacob, And ransomed him from the hand of him that was stronger than he.
And they shall come and sing upon the height of Zion; They shall exult in the bounty of Jehovah, The corn, and the new wine, and the oil, And the young of the flock, and of the herd; And they shall be as a well-watered garden, And they shall languish no more.
Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, And the young men and old men together, For I will change their mourning into joy; I will comfort them, and cheer them after their sorrow.
And I will satisfy the priests with fatness, And my people shall be satisfied with my bounty, saith Jehovah.
Thus saith Jehovah: A voice hath been heard in Ramah, Lamentation and bitter weeping; Rachel, weeping for her children, Refuseth to be comforted, because they are no more.
Thus saith Jehovah: Refrain thy voice from weeping, And thine eyes from tears, For thy labor shall be rewarded, saith Jehovah; They shall come again from the land of the enemy.
There is hope for thy future days, saith Jehovah; Thy children shall come again to their border.
I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself: “Thou hast chastised me, and I was chastised, Like a steer not broken. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, For thou, O Jehovah, art my God!
Surely, after I returned, I repented, And after I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh; I was ashamed, yea, I was confounded, Because I bore the reproach of my youth.”
Is Ephraim my dear son? Is he a beloved child? For as often as I speak of him, I do earnestly remember him still. My heart beateth for him; I will have mercy upon him, saith Jehovah.
Set thee up waymarks; Raise thee pillars; Have regard to the highway, the way that thou goest! Return, O virgin of Israel, Return to these thy cities!
How long wilt thou wander about, O rebellious daughter? Behold, Jehovah createth a new thing in the earth: The woman shall protect the man.
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Again shall they say in the land of Judah, And in the cities thereof, when I bring back their captives, “May Jehovah bless thee, O habitation of justice, O holy mountain!”
And Judah shall dwell in it, and all his cities together, Husbandmen, and they that go forth with their flocks.
For I will refresh him that is thirsty, And I will satisfy him that languisheth.
Upon this I awoke, and beheld, And my sleep was sweet to me.
Behold, the days come, saith Jehovah, That I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah. With the seed of man, and with the seed of beast.
And it shall be that as I have watched over them To pluck up, and to pull down, and to overthrow, And to destroy, and to afflict, So will I watch over them To build, and to plant, saith Jehovah.
In those days they shall no more say, “The fathers have eaten sour grapes, And the children's teeth are set on edge.”
But every one shall die for his own iniquity; Every man that eateth sour grapes, His teeth shall be set on edge.
Behold, the days come, saith Jehovah, That I will make with the house of Israel, And with the house of Judah, a new covenant;
Not according to the covenant which I made with their fathers, In the day when I took them by the hand To bring them out of the land of Egypt; Which covenant of mine they broke, And I rejected them, saith Jehovah.
But this is the covenant which I will make with the house of Israel: After those days, saith Jehovah, I will put my law into their inward parts, And upon their hearts will I write it; And I will be their God, And they shall be my people.
And they shall teach no more, Every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, Saying, “Know ye Jehovah!” For they shall all know me, From the least of them even to the greatest of them, saith Jehovah; For I will forgive their iniquity, And I will remember their sin no more.
Thus saith Jehovah, Who made the sun for a light by day, And the ordinances of the moon and stars for a light by night, Who stirreth up the sea, so that the waves thereof roar, Jehovah of hosts is his name:
If these ordinances shall depart from before me, Then shall the race of Israel also cease from being a nation before me forever.
Thus saith Jehovah: If the heavens above can be measured, Or the foundations of the earth beneath searched out, Then will I cast off all the race of Israel For all which they have done, saith Jehovah.
Behold, the days come, saith Jehovah, That the city shall be built to Jehovah From the tower of Hananeel to the corner-gate.
And the measuring line shall go forth over against it even to the hill Gareb, And extend itself to Goath.
And the whole valley of the dead bodies and of the ashes, And all the fields to the brook Kidron, Even to the corner of the horsegate toward the East, Shall be holy to Jehovah. No more shall it be plucked up, Or thrown down, forever.
The word which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah in the tenth year of Zedekiah, the king of Judah, which was the eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar.
And at that time the army of the king of Babylon was laying siege to Jerusalem, and Jeremiah the prophet was shut up in the court of the prison, which was in the house of the king of Judah.
For Zedekiah, the king of Judah, had shut him up, saying, Wherefore dost thou prophesy, and say, “Thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I am about to give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it;
and Zedekiah, the king of Judah, shall not escape out of the hand of the Chaldaeans, but shall surely be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall speak with him mouth to mouth, and his eyes shall behold his eyes;
and he shall lead Zedekiah to Babylon, and there shall he be until I visit him, saith Jehovah; though ye fight with the Chaldaeans, ye shall not prosper?”
Then said Jeremiah, The word of Jehovah came to me, and said:
Behold, Hanameel, the son of Shallum, thine uncle, will come to thee, and say, Buy thee my field which is in Anathoth, for thine is the redemption-right to buy it.
And so Hanameel, the son of my uncle, came to me in the court of the prison according to the word of Jehovah, and said to me: Buy, I pray thee, my field, which is in Anathoth, for thine is the right of inheritance and redemption; buy it for thyself! Then I knew that this was the word of Jehovah.
I bought, therefore, the field of Hanameel, my uncle's son, in Anathoth, and I paid him the money, seventeen shekels of silver.
And I wrote a deed, and sealed it, and took witnesses thereto, and weighed the silver in the balances.
And I took the purchase-deed, that which was sealed according to the law and the statutes, and that which was open,
and I gave the purchase-deed to Baruch, the son of Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, in the presence of Hanameel, my uncle's son, and in the presence of the witnesses, who subscribed their names to the purchase-deed, and in the presence of all the Jews who sat in the court of the prison.
And I charged Baruch in their presence, saying,
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Take these writings, this sealed purchase-deed, and this open deed, and put them into an earthen vessel, that they may endure a great length of time.
For thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Yet again shall houses and fields and vineyards be bought in this land.
And when I had delivered the purchase-deed to Baruch, the son of Neriah, I prayed to Jehovah, saying,
Ah, Lord, Jehovah! Behold, thou hast made the heavens and the earth by thy great power and thy stretched-out arm, and there is nothing too hard for thee.
Thou showest kindness to a thousand generations, and recompensest the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of the children who come after them. The great, the mighty God, Jehovah of hosts is his name,
great in counsel and mighty in work; for thine eyes are open upon all the ways of the sons of men, to give every one according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings;
who hast displayed signs and wonders in the land of Egypt even to this day, and in Israel, and among other men, and hast made thee a name, as at this day;
and hast brought forth thy people Israel out of the land of Egypt with signs, and with wonders, and with a strong hand, and with a stretched-out arm, and with great terror,
and hast given them this land, which thou didst swear to their fathers to give them, a land flowing with milk and honey;
and they have come in and possessed it; but they have not obeyed thy voice, nor walked according to thy law. They have done nothing of all which thou commandedst them to do. Therefore hast thou caused all this evil to come upon them.
Behold, the mounds of the enemy have already come up against the city to take it; and the city is given into the hand of the Chaldaeans, who fight against it by means of the sword, and of the famine, and of the pestilence; and what thou hast spoken is come to pass, and, behold, thou seest it.
And yet hast thou said to me, O Lord Jehovah, “Buy thee the field for money, and take witnesses thereto!” when the city is given into the hand of the Chaldaeans.
Then came the word of Jehovah to Jeremiah, saying:
Behold, I, Jehovah, am the God of all flesh. Is there anything too hard for me?
Therefore thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the Chaldaeans, and into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, and he shall take it.
And the Chaldaeans who fight against this city shall come and set this city on fire, and burn it, with the houses upon whose roofs they have offered incense to Baal, and poured out incense to other gods, to provoke me to anger.
For the children of Israel and the children of Judah have done nothing but evil before me from their youth; yea, the children of Israel have but provoked me to anger with the work of their hands, saith Jehovah.
For this city hath been the object of my anger and my fury, from the day when they built it even to this day; that I might remove it from before my face,
because of all the wickedness of the children of Israel, and of the children of Judah, which they have committed to provoke me to anger, they, their kings, their princes, their priests, and their prophets, and the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
For they have turned to me the back, and not the face; though I have taught them, rising up early and teaching them, yet have they not hearkened to receive instruction.
And they have set their abominations in the house which is called by my name, to defile it.
And they have built the high places of Baal, which are in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to cause their sons and their daughters to pass through the fire to Moloch, which I commanded them not, neither came it into my mind, that they should practise their abomination, to cause Judah to sin.
Yet now thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel concerning this city, of which ye say, “It is delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence.”
Behold, I will gather them out of all the countries whither I have driven them in my anger and my fury and my great wrath, and I will bring them back to this place, and I will cause them to dwell securely,
and they shall be my people, and I will be their God.
And I will give them one heart, and one way, to fear me continually, that it may be well with them, and with their children after them.
And I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, nor cease to do them good; for I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.
Yea, I will rejoice over them to do them good, and I will plant them in this land in truth, with my whole heart, and with my whole soul.
For thus saith Jehovah: As I have brought upon this people all this great evil, so will I bring upon them all the good which I have promised them.
And fields shall yet be bought in this land, of which ye say, “It is desolate, without man or beast; it is given into the hand of the Chaldaeans.”
Fields shall men buy for money, and subscribe deeds, and seal them, and take witnesses, in the land of Benjamin, and in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, and in the cities of the hill-country, and in the cities of the valley, and in the cities of the south; for I will bring them back from their captivity, saith Jehovah.
The word of Jehovah came also to Jeremiah the second time, while he was shut up in the court of the prison, and said:—
Thus saith Jehovah, who doeth it, Jehovah who disposeth it, to establish it; Jehovah is his name.
Call to me, and I will answer thee, And I will show thee great things, And hidden things which thou knowest not.
For thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel, Concerning the houses of this city, And concerning the houses of the kings of Judah, Which are thrown down toward the mounds and the sword,
To fight with the Chaldaeans, And to fill them with the dead bodies of men, Whom I have smitten in mine anger and in my wrath, And for all whose wickedness I have hid my face from this city:
Behold, I will bind up her wounds, and heal them, And I will reveal to them abundance of peace and stability.
And I will bring back the captives of Judah, And the captives of Israel, And I will build them, as at the first.
And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, Whereby they have sinned against me; And I will forgive all their iniquities, Whereby they have sinned, And have rebelled against me.
And it [[the city]] shall be to me a name of joy, A praise and a glory among all the nations of the earth, Who shall hear of all the good which I do to them. And they shall fear and tremble because of all the good, And because of all the prosperity, which I bestow upon it.
Thus saith Jehovah: Yet again shall be heard in this place, Of which ye say, “It is desolate, without man and without beast,” In the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, Which are desolate, without man, Even without an inhabitant and without beast,
The voice of joy and the voice of gladness, The voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, The voice of them that say, “Praise ye Jehovah of hosts, For Jehovah is good, For his mercy endureth forever!” And of them that bring an offering of praise to the house of Jehovah. For I will restore the captives of the land, As at the first, saith Jehovah.
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Yet again shall there be in this place, Which is desolate, without man and without beast, And in all the cities thereof, A habitation of shepherds, who shall cause their flocks to rest;
In the cities of the hill-country, and in the cities of the plain, And in the cities of the south, and in the land of Benjamin, And in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, Shall the flocks pass yet again Under the hands of him that numbereth them, saith Jehovah.
Behold, the days come, saith Jehovah, That I will perform that good thing Which I have spoken concerning the house of Israel, And concerning the house of Judah.
In those days and at that time Will I cause to grow up from David a righteous branch, Who shall maintain justice and equity in the land.
In those days shall Judah be saved, And Jerusalem shall dwell securely; And this is the name which shall be given her, Jehovah-is-our-salvation.
For thus saith Jehovah: There shall never fail from David A man to sit upon the throne of the house of Israel;
Neither from the priests and the Levites Shall a man fail before me, To offer burnt-offerings, and to kindle meat-offerings, And to perform sacrifice continually.
And the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah and said,
Thus saith Jehovah: If ye can break my covenant concerning the day, And my covenant concerning the night, So that there shall no more be day and night in their season,
Then also may my covenant with David my servant be broken, So that he shall not have a son to reign upon his throne, And with the Levites, the priests, my servants.
As the host of heaven cannot be numbered, Nor the sand of the sea measured, So will I multiply the posterity of David my servant, And the Levites who minister to me.
The word of Jehovah came also to Jeremiah, saying:
Seest thou not what this people speaketh, saying, “The two families, which Jehovah chose, he hath cast off”? Therefore they despise my people, So that they are no more a people in their eyes.
Thus saith Jehovah: If my covenant concerning the day and the night be not maintained, And if I have not established the ordinances of the heaven and the earth,
Then will I cast away the posterity of Jacob, and of David, my servant, So as not to take of his posterity to be rulers Over the posterity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; For I will bring them back from their captivity, And have mercy upon them.
The word which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, when Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and all his army, and all the kingdoms of the earth that were under his dominion, and all the nations, made war against Jerusalem, and against all the cities thereof, saying:—
Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel: Go and speak to Zedekiah, the king of Judah, and say to him, Thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire.
And thou shalt not escape out of his hand, but shalt surely be taken and delivered into his hand; and thine eyes shall behold the eyes of the king of Babylon, and he shall speak with thee mouth to mouth, and thou shalt go to Babylon.
Yet hear the word of Jehovah, O Zedekiah, king of Judah! Thus saith Jehovah concerning thee: Thou shalt not die by the sword;
in peace shalt thou die; and according to the burnings of thy fathers, the former kings, who were before thee, so shall they burn for thee; and they shall lament for thee, saying, “Ah, lord!” for I have spoken the word, saith Jehovah.
And Jeremiah the prophet spake all these words to Zedekiah, king of Judah, at Jerusalem.
And the army of the king of Babylon fought against Jerusalem, and against all the cities of Judah that were left, against Lachish, and against Azekah; for these fortified cities remained of the cities of Judah.
The word which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, after King Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the people that were at Jerusalem, to proclaim liberty to them,
that every one should let his man-servant or his maid-servant, being a Hebrew or Hebrewess, go free, that no one should retain his brother, a Jew, in servitude.
And all the princes, and all the people, who had entered into covenant to let every one his man-servant and every one his maid-servant go free, and retain them in servitude no longer, obeyed; they obeyed, and let them go.
But they returned afterwards, and took back the men-servants and the maid-servants whom they had let go free, and brought them into subjection as men-servants and as maid-servants.
Then came the word of Jehovah to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,
Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel: I made a covenant with your fathers in the day when I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondmen, and said,
“At the end of seven years ye shall let go every man his brother, a Hebrew, who shall have been sold to thee; when he shall have served thee six years, thou shalt let him go free from thee.” But your fathers hearkened not to me, nor inclined their ear.
And when ye had turned at this time, and had done what was right in mine eyes, in proclaiming liberty every one to his neighbor, and had entered into a covenant before me in the house which is called by my name,
then ye returned and profaned my name, and took back every one his man-servant, and every one his maid-servant, whom he had set at liberty at their pleasure, and brought them into subjection to be men-servants and maid-servants to you.
Therefore thus saith Jehovah: Ye have not hearkened to me in proclaiming liberty every one to his brother, and every one to his neighbor. Behold, I proclaim a liberty for you, saith Jehovah, to the sword, to pestilence, and to famine, and I will give you up to oppression in all the kingdoms of the earth;
and I will make the men who have transgressed my covenant, who have not performed the words of the covenant which they made before me, like the calf which they cut in twain, and passed between the parts thereof,
the princes of Judah, and the princes of Jerusalem, the eunuchs, and the priests, and all the people of the land, that passed between the parts of the calf.
I will give them into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life; and their dead bodies shall be food for the birds of heaven, and for the beasts of the earth.
And Zedekiah, king of Judah, and his princes, will I give into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life, even into the hand of the king of Babylon's army, which are gone up from you.
Behold, I will command, saith Jehovah, and cause them to return to this city, and they shall fight against it, and take it, and burn it with fire; and I will make the cities of Judah a desolation without an inhabitant.
The word which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, in the days of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, saying:
Go to the house of the Rechabites, and speak to them, and bring them into the house of Jehovah, into one of the chambers, and give them wine to drink.
Then I took Jaazaniah, the son of Jeremiah, the son of Habaziniah, and his brethren, and all his sons, and the whole house of the Rechabites,
and brought them into the house of Jehovah, into the chamber of the sons of Hanan, the son of Igdaliah, a man of God, which was by the chamber of the princes, which was above the chamber of Maaseiah, the son of Shallum, the keeper of the door.
And I set before the sons of the house of the Rechabites pots full of wine and cups, and I said to them, “Drink ye wine.”
But they said, “We will not drink wine; for Jonadab, the son of Rechab, our father, commanded us, saying, Ye shall drink no wine, ye nor your sons, forever;
neither shall ye build house, nor sow seed, nor plant vineyard, nor have any; but all your days ye shall dwell in tents, that ye may live long in the land wherein ye are strangers.
And we have obeyed the voice of Jonadab, the son of Rechab, our father, in all that he charged us, to drink no wine all our days, neither we, nor our wives, nor our sons, nor our daughters;
nor to build houses for us to dwell in; neither have we vineyard, nor field, nor seed;
but we have dwelt in tents, and have obeyed, and done according to all that Jonadab, the son of Rechab, our father, commanded us.
But it came to pass when Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, came up into the land, that we said, Come, and let us go to Jerusalem for fear of the army of the Chaldaeans, and for fear of the army of the Syrians; so we dwell at Jerusalem.”
Then came the word of Jehovah to Jeremiah, saying,
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Go and say to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem: Will ye not receive instruction, to hearken to my words? saith Jehovah.
The words of Jonadab, the son of Rechab, in which he commanded his sons not to drink wine, have been performed; for they have drunk no wine to this day, but have obeyed the commandment of their father. I also have spoken to you, rising up early and speaking, but ye have not hearkened to me.
And I have sent to you all my servants, the prophets, rising up early and sending them, saying, Return ye now every one from his evil way, and amend your doings, and go not after other gods to serve them, and ye shall dwell in the land which I have given to you and to your fathers; but ye have not inclined your ear, nor hearkened to me.
Since then the sons of Jonadab, the son of Rechab, have performed the commandment of their father which he commanded them, and this people have not hearkened to me;
therefore thus saith Jehovah, the God of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will bring upon Judah, and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, all the evil which I have pronounced against them; because I have spoken to them, and they have not hearkened, and I have called to them, and they have not answered.
And to the house of the Rechabites Jeremiah said: Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Because ye have obeyed the commandment of Jonadab, your father, and kept all his precepts, and done according to all which he commanded you,
therefore thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: There shall not fail in the land of Jonadab, the son of Rechab, men to stand before me forever.
And it came to pass in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, that this word came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
Take thee a book-roll, and write upon it all the words which I have spoken to thee concerning Israel, and concerning Judah, and concerning all the nations, from the day when I began to speak to thee even to this day.
It may be that the house of Judah will hear all the evil which I purpose to do to them, and return every one from his evil way, so that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin.
Then Jeremiah called Baruch, the son of Neriah; and Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of Jehovah which he had spoken to him, upon a book-roll.
And Jeremiah commanded Baruch and said: I am shut up; I cannot go into the house of Jehovah;
therefore, go thou, and read in the roll which thou hast written from my mouth the words of Jehovah, in the ears of the people, in the house of Jehovah, upon the fast-day; also in the ears of all Judah, that come out of their cities, shalt thou read them.
It may be that they will prostrate themselves in supplication before Jehovah, and will return every one from his evil way. For great is the anger and the indignation which Jehovah hath denounced against this people.
And Baruch, the son of Neriah, did according to all that Jeremiah the prophet commanded him, reading in the book the words of Jehovah in the house of Jehovah.
And it came to pass in the fifth year of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, in the ninth month, that all the people in Jerusalem, and all the people that came out of the cities of Judah, proclaimed a fast before Jehovah, in Jerusalem.
Then read Baruch in the book the words of Jeremiah in the house of Jehovah, in the chamber of Gemariah, the son of Shaphan the scribe, in the higher court, at the entrance of the new gate of the house of Jehovah, in the ears of all the people.
And when Micah, the son of Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, had heard from the book all the words of Jehovah,
he went down to the king's house, into the scribe's chamber; and lo, all the princes were sitting there, Elishama the scribe, and Delaiah, the son of Shemaiah, and Elnathan, the son of Achbor, and Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, and Zedekiah, the son of Hananiah, and all the princes.
Then Micah declared to them all the words which he had heard when Baruch read the book in the ears of the people.
Then all the princes sent Jehudi, the son of Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Cushi, to Baruch, and said, “Take in thy hand the roll wherein thou hast read in the ears of the people, and come.” So Baruch, the son of Neriah, took the roll in his hand, and came to them.
And they said to him, “Sit down now, and read it in our ears.” And Baruch read it in their ears.
And when they had heard all the words, they looked with consternation upon one another, and they said to Baruch, “We must tell the king of all these things.”
And they asked Baruch, saying, “Tell us now, how didst thou write all these words from his mouth?”
And Baruch said to them, “With his mouth he pronounced to me all these words, and I wrote them on the book with ink.”
Then said the princes to Baruch, “Go, hide thee, thou and Jeremiah, and let no man know where ye are.”
And they went in to the king into the court; but they laid up the roll in the chamber of Elishama the scribe, and they told all these things in the ears of the king.
Then the king sent Jehudi to fetch the roll, and he took it out of the chamber of Elishama the scribe; and Jehudi read it in the ears of the king, and in the ears of all the princes who stood beside the king.
And the king was sitting in the winter-house, in the ninth month, and a brasier was burning before him.
And when Jehudi had read three or four sections, he [[the king]] cut it with the penknife, and cast it into the fire, into the brasier, until the whole roll was consumed in the fire in the brasier.
And they were not afraid, and rent not their garments, neither the king, nor any of his servants, who heard all these words;
and although Elnathan and Delaiah and Gemariah interceded with the king not to burn the roll, yet he would not hearken to them.
And the king commanded Jerahmeel, the son of Hammelech, and Seraiah, the son of Azreel, and Shelemiah, the son of Abdeel, to seize Baruch the scribe, and Jeremiah the prophet; but Jehovah had hid them.
Then came the word of Jehovah to Jeremiah, after that the king had burned the roll, and the words which Baruch had written from the mouth of Jeremiah, saying:
Take thee another roll, and write in it all the former words that were in the first roll, which Jehoiakim, king of Judah, hath burned.
And concerning Jehoiakim, king of Judah, thou shalt say, Thou hast burned this roll, saying, “Why hast thou written therein and said, The king of Babylon shall surely come and shall destroy this land, and shall cause to cease from it man and beast?”
Therefore thus saith Jehovah concerning Jehoiakim, king of Judah: He shall have not one to sit upon the throne of David; and his dead body shall be cast out in the day to the heat, and in the night to the frost.
And I will punish him, and his offspring, and his servants, for their iniquity; and I will bring upon them, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and upon the men of Judah, all the evil which I have pronounced against them, and they have not hearkened.
Then Jeremiah took another roll, and gave it to Baruch the scribe, the son of Neriah, who wrote therein from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the book which Jehoiakim had burned in the fire; and there were added to them many words of the same kind.
Now King Zedekiah, the son of Josiah, reigned instead of Coniah, the son of Jehoiakim, whom Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, made king in the land of Judah.
But neither he nor his servants nor the people of the land regarded the words of Jehovah, which he spake by the prophet Jeremiah.
And Zedekiah the king sent Jehucal, the son of Shelemiah, and Zephaniah, the son of Maaseiah the priest, to Jeremiah the prophet, saying, “Pray now to Jehovah our God for us.”
Now Jeremiah came in and went out among the people, for they had not cast him into prison.
And Pharaoh's army had come forth out of Egypt; and the Chaldaeans, who were besieging Jerusalem, having heard tidings of them, had departed from Jerusalem.
Then came the word of Jehovah to Jeremiah the prophet, saying,
Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel: Thus shall ye say to the king of Judah, who sent you to inquire of me: Behold, the army of Pharaoh, which is come forth to help you, shall return to Egypt, into their own land.
And the Chaldaeans shall come again, and fight against this city, and take it, and burn it with fire.
Thus saith Jehovah: Deceive not yourselves, saying, “The Chaldaeans shall surely depart from us”; for they shall not depart.
For though ye had smitten the whole army of the Chaldaeans that fight against you, and there remained only wounded men among them, each one in his tent, yet should they rise up and burn this city with fire.
And it came to pass, when the army of the Chaldaeans had marched away from Jerusalem because of the army of Pharaoh,
that Jeremiah was going forth from Jerusalem, to go into the land of Benjamin, to receive thence his inheritance among the people.
And when he was in the gate of Benjamin, a captain of the ward was there, whose name was Irijah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Hananiah; and he seized Jeremiah the prophet, saying, “Thou art going over to the Chaldaeans.”
And Jeremiah said, “It is false; I am not going over to the Chaldaeans.” But he hearkened not to him; so Irijah took Jeremiah and brought him to the princes.
And the princes were enraged against Jeremiah, and smote him, and put him in prison in the house of Jonathan the scribe; for they had made that a prison.
And when Jeremiah had gone into the dungeon, and into the cells, and had remained there a long time,
then Zedekiah the king sent and took him out; and the king asked him in his house privately, and said, “Hast thou any word from Jehovah?” And Jeremiah said, “I have.” And he said, “Into the hand of the king of Babylon shalt thou be delivered.”
And Jeremiah said to King Zedekiah, What offence have I committed against thee, or against thy servants, or against this people, that ye have put me in prison?
And where are your prophets, who prophesied to you, saying, “The king of Babylon shall not come against you, nor against this land?”
But now hear, I pray thee, my lord the king! let my supplication, I pray thee, be accepted before thee, and cause me not to return to the house of Jonathan the scribe, lest I die there!
Then Zedekiah the king commanded that they should commit Jeremiah into the court of the prison, and that they should give him daily a piece of bread out of the bakers' street, until all the bread in the city should be consumed. And Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison.
And Shephatiah, the son of Mattan, and Gedaliah, the son of Pashur, and Jucal, the son of Shelemiah, and Pashur, the son of Malchiah, heard the words which Jeremiah spoke to all the people, saying,
“Thus saith Jehovah: He that remaineth in this city shall die by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence; but he that goeth forth to the Chaldaeans shall live, and he shall retain his life as a prey, and shall live.
Thus saith Jehovah: This city shall surely be given into the hand of the army of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it.”
Then said the princes to the king, “We beseech thee, let this man be put to death! for thus he weakeneth the hands of the men of war that remain in this city, and the hands of all the people, in speaking such words to them; for this man seeketh not the welfare of this people, but their hurt.”
Then Zedekiah the king said, “Behold, he is in your hand; for the king is not one that can do anything in opposition to you.”
Then took they Jeremiah, and cast him into the dungeon of Malchiah, the son of Hammelech, which was in the court of the prison; and they let down Jeremiah with cords. And in the dungeon there was no water, but only mire; and Jeremiah sunk in the mire.
And Ebedmelech, the Ethiopian, a eunuch, who was then in the king's house, heard that they had put Jeremiah into the dungeon; and the king was sitting in the gate of Benjamin.
Then Ebedmelech went forth out of the king's house, and spake to the king, saying,
“My lord the king! these men have done evil in all that they have done to Jeremiah the prophet whom they have cast into the dungeon; for he was already almost dead in his place for hunger; for there is no more bread in the city.”
Then the king commanded Ebedmelech, the Ethiopian, saying, “Take along with thee thirty men from hence, and take up Jeremiah the prophet out of the dungeon, before he die.”
And Ebedmelech took the men with him, and went into the king's house under the store-room, and took from thence torn rags and worn-out rags, and let them down by cords into the dungeon to Jeremiah.
And Ebedmelech, the Ethiopian, said to Jeremiah, put now these torn and worn-out rags under thy knuckles under the cords. And Jeremiah did so.
And they drew up Jeremiah with cords, and took him up out of the dungeon; and Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison.
And King Zedekiah sent, and took Jeremiah the prophet to him into the third entrance, which is in the house of Jehovah; and the king said to Jeremiah, “I will ask thee a question; hide nothing from me!”
And Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, “When I have told thee, wilt thou not surely put me to death? and if I give thee counsel, thou wilt not hearken to me.”
Then King Zedekiah swore to Jeremiah in secret, saying, “As Jehovah liveth, who made for us this soul, I will not put thee to death, neither will I give thee into the hand of these men that seek thy life.”
Then said Jeremiah to Zedekiah, “Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: If thou wilt go forth to the chieftains of the king of Babylon, then shalt thou live; and this city shall not be burned with fire; and thou shalt live, thou and thine house.
But if thou wilt not go forth to the chieftains of the king of Babylon, then shall this city be given into the hand of the Chaldaeans, and they shall burn it with fire, and thou shalt not escape out of their hand.”
And Zedekiah the king said to Jeremiah, “I am afraid of the Jews who have gone over to the Chaldaeans, lest I should be delivered into their hand, and they should mock me.”
And Jeremiah said, “Thou shalt not be delivered up to them. Obey, I beseech thee, the voice of Jehovah in what I speak to thee; so shall it be well with thee, and thou shalt live.
But if thou refuse to go forth, this is what Jehovah hath revealed to me.
Behold, all the women that are left in the house of the king of Judah shall be brought forth to the chieftains of the king of Babylon, and shall say, 'Thy friends have set thee on, and have prevailed against thee; thy feet are sunk in the mire; they go backward.'
And all thy wives and thy children shall they bring out to the Chaldaeans, and thou shalt not escape out of their hand, but by the hand of the king of Babylon shalt thou be taken; and thou shalt cause this city to be burned with fire.”
Then said Zedekiah to Jeremiah, “Let no man know of these words, and thou shalt not die.
But if the princes shall hear that I have talked with thee, and shall come to thee, and say to thee, 'Tell us, we pray thee, what thou hast said to the king; hide it not from us, and we will not put thee to death; and what the king hath said to thee';
then shalt thou say to them, 'I presented my supplication before the king, that he would not cause me to return to the house of Jonathan to die there.'”
Then came all the princes to Jeremiah, and asked him; and he told them according to all those words which the king had commanded. And they said no more to him, for the matter was not known.
And Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison to the day when Jerusalem was taken.
And it came to pass, when Jerusalem was taken, (in the ninth year of Zedekiah, the king of Judah, in the tenth month, came Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, and all his army, against Jerusalem, and besieged it;
and in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month, on the ninth day of the month, was the city broken into,)
that all the chieftains of the king of Babylon came, and stationed themselves in the middle gate, Nergalsharezer, Samgarnebo, Sarsechim, prefect of the eunuchs, Nergalsharezer, prefect of the magians, and all the rest of the princes of the king of Babylon.
And when Zedekiah, the king of Judah, and all the men of war, saw them, they fled, and went forth out of the city by night, by the way of the king's garden, through the gate between the two walls; and they went forth toward the plain.
But the army of the Chaldaeans pursued them, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; and they took him, and brought him to Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, at Riblah in the land of Hamath, where he gave judgment concerning him.
And the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah at Riblah before his eyes; and all the nobles of Judah did the king of Babylon slay.
And he put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him with fetters of brass, to carry him to Babylon.
And the Chaldaeans burned the king's house, and the houses of the people, with fire, and they broke down the walls of Jerusalem.
And the residue of the people that remained in the city, and the deserters who had come over to him, the residue of the people that remained, Nebuzaradan, the captain of the guard, carried away to Babylon.
But the poor of the people, who had nothing, Nebuzaradan, captain of the guard, left in the land of Judah, and gave them vineyards and fields at the same time.
And Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, gave charge concerning Jeremiah to Nebuzaradan, captain of the guard, saying,
“Take him, and have thine eyes upon him, and do him no harm; but do to him even as he shall say to you.”
Then sent Nebuzaradan, the captain of the guard, and Nebushasban, prefect of the eunuchs, and Nergalsharezer, prefect of the magians, and all the princes of the king of Babylon,
they sent and took Jeremiah out of the court of the prison, and committed him to Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, that he should carry him home; and he dwelt among the people.
Now the word of Jehovah had come to Jeremiah, while he was shut up in the court of the prison, saying:
Go and speak to Ebedmelech, the Ethiopian, and say: Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I bring my words upon this city for evil and not for good, and with thine own eyes shalt thou see it in that day.
But I will deliver thee in that day, saith Jehovah; and thou shalt not be given into the hand of the men of whom thou art afraid.
But I will surely deliver thee, and thou shalt not fall by the sword, but thy life shall be to thee as a prey; because thou hast put thy trust in me, saith Jehovah.
The word which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, after that Nebuzaradan, captain of the guard, had let him go from Ramah. For he had taken him, and he had been bound with chains among all the captives of Jerusalem and Judah which were carried away captive to Babylon.
And the captain of the guard took Jeremiah, and said to him: “Jehovah, thy God, pronounced this evil against this place;
and now Jehovah hath brought it, and done according as he spake, because ye sinned against Jehovah, and obeyed not his voice; therefore hath this thing come upon you.
And now, behold, I loose thee this day from the chains upon thy hands. If it seem good to thee to come with me to Babylon, come; and I will set my eyes upon thee; but if it seem evil to thee to come with me to Babylon, forbear; behold, the whole land is before thee; whither it seemeth good and desirable for thee to go, thither go.”
And while he was not yet gone away [[he said]]: “Go to Gedaliah, the of son Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, whom the king of Babylon hath made governor over the cities of Judah, and dwell with him among the people; or go whithersoever it seemeth good to thee to go.” And the captain of the guard gave him provisions, and a present, and dismissed him.
And Jeremiah went to Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, to Mizpah, and dwelt with him among the people that were left in the land.
Now when all the captains of the forces which were in the fields, they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, governor over the land, and had committed to his charge men and women and children, of the poor of the land, of them that were not carried away captive to Babylon,
then they came to Gedaliah, to Mizpah; namely, Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jonathan, the sons of Kareah, and Seraiah, the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the Netophathite, and Jezaniah, the son of the Maachathite, they and their men;
and Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, swore to them and to their men, saying, “Fear not to serve the Chaldaeans; dwell in the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it shall be well with you.
As for me, behold, I will dwell at Mizpah, to stand before the Chaldaeans, who shall come to us; but ye, gather ye in wine, and summer fruits, and oil, and put them in your vessels, and dwell in your cities which ye have taken.”
Also when all the Jews that were in Moab, and among the children of Ammon, and in Edom, and that were in all the countries, heard that the king of Babylon had left a remnant to Judah, and that he had set over them Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan,
then all the Jews returned from all the places whither they were driven, and came to the land of Judah, to Gedaliah, to Mizpah, and gathered wine and summer fruits in abundance.
And Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that were in the fields, came to Gedaliah, to Mizpah,
and said to him, “Dost thou know that Baalis, the king of the children of Ammon, hath sent Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, to slay thee?” But Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, believed them not.
And Johanan, the son of Kareah, spake to Gedaliah in private at Mizpah, saying, “Let me go, I pray thee, and smite Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, and no man shall know it. Wherefore should he slay thee, that all the Jews which are gathered to thee should be scattered, and the remnant in Judah perish?”
But Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, said to Johanan, the son of Kareah, “Thou shalt not do this thing, for thou speakest falsely of Ishmael.”
And it came to pass in the seventh month, that Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the blood royal, and one of the great officers of the king, and ten men with him, came to Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, to Mizpah; and they ate bread there together in Mizpah.
Then Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, arose, and the ten men that were with him, and smote Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, with the sword, and slew him whom the king of Babylon had made governor over the land.
And all the Jews that were with him, with Gedaliah at Mizpah, and the Chaldaeans that were found there, the men of war, did Ishmael smite.
And it came to pass, the second day after he had slain Gedaliah, and no man knew it,
that there came certain men from Shechem, from Shiloh, and from Samaria, fourscore persons, having their beards shaven, and their clothes rent, and having cut themselves, with an oblation and incense in their hands, to bring to the house of Jehovah.
And Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, went forth from Mizpah to meet them, weeping all along as he went; and when he met them, he said to them, “Come ye to Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam.”
And when they had come into the midst of the city, Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, slew them, and cast them into the pit, he and the men that were with him.
But ten men were found among them who said to Ishmael, “Slay us not, for we have hidden stores in the field, of wheat, and barley, and oil, and honey.” He forbore, therefore, and slew them not with their brethren.
Now the pit into which Ishmael cast all the dead bodies of the men whom he slew, together with Gedaliah, is the same which King Asa made on account of Baasha, king of Israel; and Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, filled it with them that were slain.
And Ishmael took captive all the residue of the people that were in Mizpah, the king's daughters, and all the people that remained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan, captain of the guard, had committed to the charge of Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam; even Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, took them captive, and set forth to go over [[the Jordan]] to the children of Ammon.
But when Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that were with him, heard of all the evil which Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, had done,
they took all the men, and went up to fight with Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, and came up with him at the great waters that are in Gibeon.
And when all the people which were with Ishmael saw Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that were with him, they were glad;
and all the people that Ishmael had carried away captive from Mizpah faced about and returned, and went to Johanan, the son of Kareah.
But Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, escaped from Johanan with eight men, and went to the children of Ammon.
Then took Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that were with him, all the remnant of the people whom he had recovered from Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, from Mizpah, after he had slain Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, strong men, men of war, and women, and children, and eunuchs, whom he had brought back from Gibeon;
and they went, and tarried in the inn of Chimham, which is near Bethlehem, in order to flee into Egypt
from the Chaldaeans; for they were afraid of them, because Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, had slain Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon had made governor over the land.
And all the captains of the forces, and Johanan, the son of Kareah, and Jezaniah, the son of Hoshaiah, and all the people, from the least even to the greatest, came near,
and said to Jeremiah the prophet: “Let, we beseech thee, our supplication be accepted before thee, and pray for us to Jehovah, thy God, for all this remnant; (for we are left a few out of many, as thine eyes do behold us;)
that Jehovah, thy God, may show us the way wherein we shall walk, and the thing which we shall do.”
And Jeremiah the prophet said to them: “I have heard; behold, I will pray to Jehovah your God, according to your words, and all which Jehovah shall answer you I will declare to you; I will keep back nothing from you.”
Then they said to Jeremiah: “May Jehovah be our witness, a faithful and true witness! According to all for which Jehovah our God shall send thee to us, so will we do.
Whether it be good, or whether it be evil, we will obey the voice of Jehovah our God, to whom we send thee, that it may be well with us when we shall have obeyed the voice of Jehovah our God.”
And it came to pass after ten days, that the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah.
And he called Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces which were with him, and all the people, from the least even to the greatest,
and said to them: “Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel, to whom ye sent me to present your supplication before him:
If ye will still abide in this land, then will I build you, and not pull you down, and I will plant you, and not pluck you up; for I repent me of the evil which I have done to you.
Be not afraid of the king of Babylon, of whom ye are afraid; be not afraid of him, saith Jehovah; for I will be with you to save you, and to deliver you from his hand.
And I will show mercies to you, that he may have compassion upon you, and cause you to return to your own land.
But if ye say, 'We will not dwell in this land,' so as not to hearken to the voice of Jehovah your God,
saying, 'No! but we will go into the land of Egypt, where we shall see no war, nor hear the sound of the trumpet, nor be hungry for bread, and there will we dwell,—
now, therefore, hear the word of Jehovah, ye remnant of Judah! Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: If ye set your faces to enter into Egypt, and go to sojourn there,
then it shall come to pass that the sword, which ye feared, shall overtake you there in the land of Egypt, and the famine, of which ye were afraid, shall follow close after you into Egypt, and there shall ye die.
So shall it be with all the men that set their faces to go into Egypt to sojourn there. They shall die by the sword, and by famine, and by pestilence, and not one of them shall remain, or escape from the evil which I bring upon them.
For thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: As my anger and my wrath have been poured forth upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so shall my wrath be poured forth upon you, when ye shall enter into Egypt; and ye shall be an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach; and ye shall see this place no more.
This is the word of Jehovah to you, ye remnant of Judah! Go ye not into Egypt; ye shall surely know that I have warned you this day.
Ye err to your own ruin; for ye sent me to Jehovah your God, saying, 'Pray for us to Jehovah our God, and according to all that Jehovah our God shall say, so declare to us, and we will do it';
and now I have this day declared it to you, but ye have not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah your God, nor to anything for which he sent me to you.
Now, therefore, ye shall know assuredly, that by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence ye shall die, in the place whither ye have chosen to go and to sojourn.”
And it came to pass, when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking to all the people all the words of Jehovah their God, for which Jehovah their God had sent him to them, even all these words,
then spake Azariah, the son of Hoshaiah, and Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the proud men, saying to Jeremiah, “Thou speakest falsely; Jehovah our God hath not sent thee to say, Go not into Egypt to sojourn there;
but Baruch, the son of Neriah, setteth thee on against us, to deliver us into the hand of the Chaldaeans, that they may put us to death, and carry us away captive to Babylon.”
So Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces, and all the people, obeyed not the voice of Jehovah, to remain in the land of Judah.
But Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces, took all the remnant of Judah, who were returned from all the nations whither they had been driven to dwell in the land of Judah,
the men, and the women, and the children, and the king's daughters, and every person whom Nebuzaradan, the captain of the guard, had left with Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, and Jeremiah the prophet, and Baruch, the son of Neriah;
and they went into the land of Egypt; for they obeyed not the voice of Jehovah; and they came to Tahpanhes.
Then came the word of Jehovah to Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying:
Take in thy hand great stones, and hide them in the clay in the brick-kiln which is at the entrance of the house of Pharaoh in Tahpanhes, in the sight of the men of Judah,
and say to them: Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will send, and take Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, my servant, and I will set his throne upon these stones which I have hidden, and he shall spread his royal canopy over them.
And he shall come and smite the land of Egypt, and deliver those that are for death to death, and those that are for captivity to captivity, and those that are for the sword to the sword.
And I will kindle a fire in the houses of the gods of Egypt; and he shall burn them, and carry them away captive; and he shall wrap himself in the land of Egypt, as a shepherd wrappeth himself in his garment, and he shall go forth from thence in peace.
And he shall break in pieces the images of Bethshemesh in the land of Egypt; and the houses of the gods of Egypt shall he burn with fire.
The word which came to Jeremiah concerning all the Jews that dwelt in the land of Egypt, that dwelt at Migdol, and at Tahpanhes, and at Noph, and in the land of Pathros, saying:
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Ye have seen all the evil which I have brought upon Jerusalem, and upon all the cities of Judah; and behold, this day they are a desolation, and no man dwelleth therein;
because of their wickedness, which they have committed, to provoke me to anger, in that they went to burn incense and to serve strange gods, whom they knew not, neither they, ye, nor your fathers;
and I sent to you all my servants, the prophets, rising early and sending them, saying: O do not this abominable thing, which I hate!
But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear to turn from their wickedness, to burn no incense to strange gods.
Therefore hath my fury been poured forth, and mine anger, and hath burned in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem; and they are become a desolation and a waste at this day.
And now thus saith Jehovah, the God of hosts, the God of Israel: Wherefore do ye commit this great evil against your own souls, that ye may cut off from you man and woman, child and suckling, out of Judah, so as to leave yourselves no remnant?
Why do ye provoke me to wrath with the works of your hands, burning incense to strange gods in the land of Egypt, whither ye are gone to dwell, so that ye may cut yourselves off, and that ye may be a curse and a reproach among all the nations of the earth?
Have ye forgotten the wickedness of your fathers, and the wickedness of the kings of Judah, and the wickedness of their wives, and your own wickedness, and the wickedness of your wives, which they have committed in the land of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem?
They have not been humbled even to this day, neither have they feared, nor walked in my law, nor in my statutes, which I set before you, and before your fathers.
Therefore thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I set my face against you for evil, even to cut off all Judah.
And I will take the remnant of Judah, that have set their faces to go into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, and they shall all be consumed; in the land of Egypt shall they fall; by the sword and by famine shall they be consumed, from the least to the greatest; by the sword and by famine shall they die; and they shall become an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach.
For I will punish them that dwell in the land of Egypt, as I have punished Jerusalem, by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence.
And none shall escape or remain of the remnant of Judah which are gone into the land of Egypt, to sojourn there, and to return into the land of Judah, to which they have a desire to return, to dwell there; for none shall return but a few fugitives that escape.
Then all the men who knew that their wives had burned incense to strange gods, and all the women that stood by, a great multitude, even all the people that dwelt in the land of Egypt, and in Pathros, answered Jeremiah, saying:
“As for the word which thou hast spoken to us in the name of Jehovah, we will not hearken to thee,
But whatever hath gone forth from our mouth, that will we do, to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings to her, as we have done, we and our fathers, our kings and our princes, in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem; for then we had plenty of bread, and were prosperous, and saw no calamity.
But from the time we left off to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings to her, we have been in want of all things, and have been consumed by the sword and by famine.
And when we [[said the women]] burned incense to the queen of heaven, and poured out drink-offerings to her, did we without the knowledge of our men make cakes to worship her, and pour out drink-offerings to her?”
Then spake Jeremiah to all the people, to the men, and to the women, and to all the people who had given him that answer, saying:
“The incense which ye burned in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, ye and your fathers, your kings and your princes, and the people of the land, did not Jehovah remember it, and came it not into his mind?
And Jehovah could no longer bear the evil of your doings, and the abominations which ye committed; therefore is your land a desolation, and an astonishment, and a curse, without an inhabitant at this day.
Because ye have burned incense, and because ye have sinned against Jehovah, and have not obeyed the voice of Jehovah, nor walked in his law, nor in his statutes, nor in his ordinances, therefore is this evil come upon you, at this day.”
And Jeremiah said to all the people and to all the women, Hear the word of Jehovah, all Judah, that are in the land of Egypt!
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Ye and your wives speak with your mouths, and fulfill with your hands; ye say, “We will keep our vows, which we have vowed, to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings to her”; ye will surely accomplish your vows; ye will surely perform your vows.
Therefore hear ye the word of Jehovah, all ye of Judah, that dwell in the land of Egypt! Behold, I swear by my great name, saith Jehovah, that my name shall no more be named in the mouth of any man of Judah in all the land of Egypt, saying, “As the Lord Jehovah liveth!”
Behold, I will watch over them for evil, and not for good; and all the men of Judah who are in the land of Egypt shall be consumed by the sword and by famine, until there be an end of them.
And they that escape the sword shall return out of the land of Egypt into the land of Judah, few in number; and all the remnant of Judah, that are gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall know whose words shall stand, mine or theirs.
And this shall be a sign to you, saith Jehovah, that I will punish you in this place, that ye may know that my words shall surely stand against you for evil.
Thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I will give Pharaoh Hophra, the king of Egypt, into the hand of his enemies, and into the hand of them that seek his life, as I gave Zedekiah, the king of Judah, into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, his enemy, that sought his life.”
The word which Jeremiah the prophet spake to Baruch, the son of Neriah, after he had written these words in a book from the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, the king of Judah, saying:—
Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel, to thee, O Baruch!
Thou sayest, “Woe now to me, for Jehovah hath added grief to my sorrow! I am weary with my sighing, and find no rest.”
Thus shalt thou say to him: Thus saith Jehovah: Behold, that which I myself have builded do I break down, and that which I myself have planted do I pluck up, even this whole land;
and seekest thou great things for thyself? Seek them not; for behold, I am about to bring evil upon all flesh, saith Jehovah; but thy life will I give thee, as a prey, in all places whither thou shalt go.
The word which came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning the nations.
Of Egypt. Concerning the army of Pharaoh-Necho, the king of Egypt, which was by the river Euphrates in Carchemish, which Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, smote, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah.
Prepare ye the buckler and shield, And move on to battle!
Harness the horses, and mount, ye riders! Stand forth in your helmets; Make bright the spears, And put on the coats of mail!
Wherefore do I see them dismayed, and turned back? Even their mighty ones are smitten; They flee apace; they look not back. Terror is on every side, saith Jehovah.
Let not the swift attempt to flee away, Nor the mighty man to escape; Toward the North by the river Euphrates shall they stumble and fall.
Who is he that riseth up like the Nile, Whose waters swell like floods?
Egypt riseth up like the Nile, And like floods do his waters swell. He saith, “I will arise, I will cover the land, I will destroy the city, and them that dwell therein.”
Come up, ye horses, and rage, ye chariots! And let the mighty men go forth, The Ethiopians, and the Libyans, that bear the shield, And the Lydians, that bear and bend the bow!
This is the day of the Lord Jehovah of hosts, A day of vengeance, to avenge himself of his enemies; And the sword shall devour, and satiate itself, And it shall be made drunk with their blood. For Jehovah of hosts hath a sacrifice In the North country, by the river Euphrates.
Go up to Gilead, and take balm, O virgin, daughter of Egypt! In vain shalt thou use many medicines; There is no cure for thee!
The nations have heard of thy shame, And thy cry hath filled the earth; For they have stumbled, the mighty against the mighty, And they are fallen both together.
The word which Jehovah spake to Jeremiah the prophet, concerning the coming of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, to smite the land of Egypt.
Declare ye in Egypt, and proclaim in Migdol, Proclaim ye also in Noph and Tahpanhes! Say ye, “Stand fast and prepare thyself, For the sword shall devour round about thee!”
Wherefore are thy mighty ones overthrown? They stood not, because Jehovah cast them down.
He caused many to fall; one fell upon another; And they said, “Arise, and let us go to our own people, And to the land of our nativity, from the overpowering sword.”
There they cry, “Pharaoh, king of Egypt, is undone! He hath let pass the appointed time.”
As I live, saith the King, Whose name is Jehovah of hosts: Like Tabor among the mountains, And like Carmel by the sea, he cometh! Prepare thyself travelling equipage,
Thou who dwellest in Egypt! For Noph shall become waste, Yea, desolate without an inhabitant.
Egypt is a fair heifer, But destruction cometh; it cometh from the North.
Her mercenaries also in the midst of her are like fatted bullocks; Yet they also turn back; they flee together; they stand not; For the day of their calamity is come upon them, And the time of their punishment.
Her voice shall be heard like that of a serpent, When they shall march against her with their forces, And come against her with axes like fellers of trees.
They shall cut down her forest, though it be impenetrable; For they exceed the locusts in multitude, And are innumerable.
The daughter of Egypt is brought to shame; She is given into the hand of the people of the North.
Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, saith: Behold, I will punish Ammon of No, And Pharaoh, and Egypt, with their gods and their kings; Even Pharaoh and all that trust in him.
And I will deliver them into the hands of those that seek their lives, And into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, And into the hand of his servants. But after this it shall be inhabited, As in the days of old, saith Jehovah.
But fear thou not, O my servant Jacob, And be not thou dismayed, O Israel! For, behold, I will bring thee safe from afar, And thy posterity from the land of their captivity; And Jacob shall return and be at rest, Yea, he shall be quiet, and none shall make him afraid.
Fear thou not, O Jacob, my servant, saith Jehovah, For I will be with thee; When I shall make a full end of all the nations Whither I have dispersed thee, Yet will I not make a full end of thee; I will correct thee in measure; Yet must I not leave thee wholly unpunished.
The word of Jehovah which came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning the Philistines, before Pharaoh had smitten Gaza.
Thus saith Jehovah: Behold, waters rise up out of the North, And they shall become an overflowing torrent, And shall overflow the land, and all that is therein,—The city, and them that dwell therein; And the men shall cry aloud, And all the inhabitants of the land shall wail.
At the noise of the stamping of the horses, At the rattling of his chariots, And at the rumbling of his wheels, Fathers look not back for their children, For feebleness of hands,
Because of the day which cometh, To lay waste all the Philistines, To cut off from Tyre and from Sidon Every helper that remaineth. For Jehovah will lay waste the Philistines, The remnant of the country of Caphtor.
Baldness is come upon Gaza, Askelon is in ruins, And the remnant of their valley! How long wilt thou cut thyself?
Ah! sword of Jehovah, How long ere thou wilt be quiet? Retire into thy scabbard, Rest, and be still!
But how canst thou be at rest, Since Jehovah hath given thee a charge against Askelon, And against the coast of the sea? There hath he appointed it.
Concerning Moab. Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Woe to Nebo, for it is laid waste! Kiriathaim is confounded, is taken. Misgab is confounded and dismayed.
Moab shall no more glory in Heshbon; They have devised evil against her; “Come, [[say they,]] and let us cut her off from being a nation!” Thou also shalt be cut down, O Madmena, The sword shall pursue thee!
A cry is heard from Horonaim, Desolation and great destruction.
Moab is destroyed; Her little ones raise a cry.
At the ascent of Luhith Weeping goeth up after weeping; At the descent of Horonaim is heard a bitter cry of despair.
Flee ye! save your lives! Be ye like one that has been stripped in the wilderness!
For, because thou hast trusted in thy substance and thy treasures, Thou also shalt be taken And Chemosh shall go into captivity, His priests and his princes together.
The spoiler shall come upon every city, And no city shall escape. The valley shall perish, And the plain shall be destroyed, As Jehovah hath spoken.
Give wings to Moab, That she may flee away; For her cities shall be a desolation, With none to dwell therein.
Cursed be he that doeth the work of Jehovah deceitfully, And cursed be he that keepeth back his sword from blood!
Moab hath been at ease from his youth, And he hath settled on his lees, And hath not been drawn off from vessel to vessel, Neither hath he gone into captivity; Therefore his taste hath remained in him, And his flavor hath not changed.
Therefore, behold, the days come, saith Jehovah, That I will send to him tilters, who shall tilt him up, And shall empty his vessels, and break his pitchers in pieces.
And Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh, As the house of Israel was ashamed of Bethel, their confidence.
How will ye say, “We are mighty, And strong men for war”?
Moab is destroyed; His cities have gone up in smoke, And his chosen young men have gone down to slaughter, Saith the King whose name is Jehovah of hosts.
The destruction of Moab is near at hand; His destruction hasteth fast.
All ye that are about him, bemoan him! And all ye that know him, say, “How is the strong sceptre broken, The splendid staff!”
Come down from thy glory and sit in thirst, O inhabitant of Dibon! For the destroyer of Moab shall come against thee! He shall destroy thy strongholds. Stand by the wayside, and look out,
O inhabitant of Aroer! Ask of him that fleeth, and of her that escapeth, And say, “What hath been done?”
Moab is confounded; for it is broken down; Howl ye, and cry! Tell ye it in Arnon, That Moab is destroyed!
And punishment hath come upon the plain country; Upon Holon, and upon Jahazah, and upon Mephaath,
And upon Dibon, and upon Nebo, and upon Beth-diblathaim.
And upon Kiriathaim, and upon Beth-gamul, and upon Beth-meon,
And upon Kerioth, and upon Bozrah, And upon all the cities of the land of Moab far and near.
The horn of Moab is cut off, And his arm is broken, saith Jehovah.
Make ye him drunken, for he hath exalted himself against Jehovah; That he also may wallow in his vomit, And be himself also in derision.
Was not Israel a derision to thee? Was he found among thieves, That, as often as thou spakest of him, thou shouldst shake thy head?
Leave the cities and dwell in the rock, O inhabitants of Moab! Be like the dove, that maketh her nest in the sides of the mouth of the pit!
We have heard of the pride of Moab; He hath been exceeding proud; His loftiness and his arrogance, His pride and the haughtiness of his heart.
I, too, know his insolence, saith Jehovah, And his vain boastings. They shall effect nothing.
Therefore will I wail for Moab, Even for all Moab will I cry out; For the men of Kir-heres shall there be mourning.
More than Jazer will I weep for thee, O vine of Sibmah! Thy branches have passed beyond the sea; They reach even to the sea of Jazer; Upon thy summer-fruits and thy vintage the spoiler falleth.
And joy and gladness are taken away from the fruitful field; And from the land of Moab, And from the presses, have I caused the wine to fail: No more shall they tread with shouting; The shouting shall be no shouting.
From wailing Heshbon to Elealeh, Even to Jahaz, is their voice heard, From Zoar even to Horonaim, To Eglath-shelishijah; For even the waters of Nimrim are desolate.
And I will cause to cease in Moab, saith Jehovah, Him that offereth in the high places, And him that burneth incense to his gods.
Therefore doth my heart sound like a flute for Moab, And for the men of Ker-heres doth my heart sound like a flute; For the remnant of their substance is perished.
Every head is bald, And every beard shorn; Upon all hands are cutting, And upon the loins sackcloth.
Upon all the house-tops of Moab, and in her streets, All is lamentation. For I have broken Moab, like a useless vessel, saith Jehovah.
Howl ye! How is he broken down! How hath Moab turned the back with shame! A derision and a consternation is Moab To all that are round him.
For thus saith Jehovah: Behold, like an eagle flieth an enemy, And spreadeth his wings over Moab.
Kerioth is taken, And the strongholds are seized; The hearts of the heroes of Moab in that day Shall be like the heart of a woman in her pangs.
And Moab shall be destroyed so as to be no more a people, Because he exalted himself against Jehovah.
Terror and the pit and the snare are upon thee, O inhabitant of Moab, saith Jehovah.
He that fleeth from the terror shall fall into the pit, And he that getteth up out of the pit shall be taken in the snare; For I will bring upon it, upon Moab, The year of their punishment, saith Jehovah.
In the valley of Heshbon the fugitives halted for want of strength; But a fire is gone forth from Heshbon, And a flame from the midst of Sihon, Which devoureth the region of Moab, And the heads of the sons of tumult.
Woe to thee, O Moab! Undone is the people of Chemosh! For thy sons are taken captives, And thy daughters are captives.
Yet will I bring back the captivity of Moab In future times, saith Jehovah. Thus far the judgment of Moab.
Concerning the children of Ammon. Thus saith Jehovah: Hath Israel no sons? Hath he not an heir? Why then doth Milcom inherit Gad, And his people dwell in his cities?
Therefore, behold, the days come, saith Jehovah, That I will cause a cry of war to be heard against Rabbah of the sons of Ammon, And she shall become a ruinous heap, And her daughters shall be burned with fire; And Israel shall take possession of their land, who took possession of his.
Howl, O Heshbon, for Ai is laid waste! Cry, ye daughters of Rabbah, Gird yourselves with sackcloth, lament, And run ye to and fro within the fences! For Milcom goeth into captivity, His priests and his princes together.
Wherefore dost thou glory in the valleys? Thy valley shall flow [[with blood]], O perverse daughter, That gloriest in thy treasures, [[Saying,]] “Who shall come against me?”
Behold, I will bring a terror upon thee, saith Jehovah of hosts, From all those that are around thee, And ye shall be driven out, every one right forth, And there shall be none to gather up the fugitives.
But after this will I bring back the captivity of the sons of Ammon, saith Jehovah.
Concerning the Edomites. Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Is wisdom no more in Teman? Is counsel passed away from the prudent? Is their wisdom vanished?
Flee ye, turn ye back, Dwell in deep places, O ye inhabitants of Dedan! For the destruction of Esau do I bring, The time of his punishment upon him.
If grape-gatherers had come upon thee, Would they not have left some gleanings? If thieves by night, They would have destroyed only till they had enough.
But I will make Esau bare; I will uncover his hiding-places, So that he shall not be able to hide himself. His offspring shall be destroyed, and his brethren, and his neighbors, And he shall be no more.
Leave thy fatherless children, I will preserve them alive, And thy widows, let them trust in me!
For thus saith Jehovah: Behold, they who ought not to have drunk the cup have deeply drunken, And shalt thou go altogether unpunished? Thou shalt not go unpunished; Thou shalt surely drink.
For by myself have I sworn, saith Jehovah, That Bozrah shall become an astonishment, A reproach, a desolation, and a curse; And all her cities shall be perpetual wastes.
I have heard a proclamation from Jehovah, And an ambassador hath been sent among the nations, [[Saying,]] “Assemble yourselves, and come against her, And arise to battle!”
For, behold, I will make thee small among the nations, Despised among men.
Thy terribleness hath deceived thee, The pride of thy heart, Because thou dwellest in the recesses of the rock, And holdest the height of the hill. Though thou set thy nest on high, like the eagle, From thence will I bring thee down, saith Jehovah.
And Edom shall be an astonishment: Every one that passeth by her shall be astonished, And shall hiss on account of all her plagues.
As in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, And their neighboring cities, saith Jehovah, There shall not a man abide there, Nor a son of man dwell within her.
Behold, he [[the enemy]] cometh up like a lion from the pride of Jordan against the habitation of the rock; Suddenly will I drive him [[Edom]] thence, And him who is chosen by me will I set over her. For who is like me, Or who will summon me to trial? Or who is the shepherd that will stand up against me?
Therefore, hear ye the purpose of Jehovah, Which he hath formed against Edom, And the designs which he meditateth against the inhabitants of Teman! Surely he [[the enemy]] shall drag them forth like feeble sheep; Surely he shall come upon them, And make their pastures desolate.
At the noise of their fall the earth trembleth, Even to the Red Sea is their cry heard.
Behold, like an eagle, he [[the enemy]] cometh up, And spreadeth his wings over Bozrah; And the hearts of the heroes of Edom, in that day, Shall be as the heart of a woman in her pangs.
Concerning Damascus. Hamath and Arpad are confounded; They faint, because they have heard evil tidings. There is anxiety at the sea; It cannot be at rest.
Damascus is faint-hearted; She turneth herself to flee; Trembling hath seized on her; Anguish and pangs have taken hold of her, as of a woman in travail.
“Why is not the praised city left, The city of my joy?”
Yea, her young men shall fall in her streets, And all her men of war shall be cut off in that day, Saith Jehovah of hosts.
Yea, I will kindle a fire in the wall of Damascus, Which shall consume the palaces of Benhadad.
Concerning Kedar, and concerning the kingdoms of Hazor, which Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, smote. Thus saith Jehovah: Arise ye, go up against Kedar, And spoil the sons of the East!
Their tents and their flocks shall they take away; They shall take to themselves their curtains, and all their furniture, and their camels, And men shall cry to them, “Terror is on every side.”
Flee, get you far off, dwell in deep places, O ye inhabitants of Hazor, saith Jehovah. For Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, meditates a design against you, And has formed a purpose against you.
Arise ye, go up against a nation at ease, That dwelleth securely, saith Jehovah; Which hath neither gates nor bars; Which dwelleth alone.
And their camels shall be a booty, And the multitude of their cattle a spoil; And I will scatter to all the winds them that shave the cheeks, And from every side will I bring their calamity, saith Jehovah.
And Hazor shall be a dwelling for jackals, A desolation forever. There shall not a man abide there, Nor any son of man dwell therein.
The word of Jehovah which came to Jeremiah the prophet against Elam, in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah, saying:—
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Behold, I break the bow of Elam, The chief part of their strength.
And I will bring against Elam The four winds from the four extremities of the heavens, And I will scatter them to all these winds, And there shall be no nation To which the outcasts of Elam shall not come.
For I will cause Elam to be dismayed before their enemies, And before them that seek their life. And I will bring evil upon them, The fierceness of my anger, saith Jehovah. And I will send after them the sword, Until I have consumed them.
And I will set up my throne in Elam, And I will destroy from thence king and princes, saith Jehovah.
But it shall come to pass in future times, That I will bring back the captivity of Elam, saith Jehovah.
The word which Jehovah spake concerning Babylon, and concerning the land of the Chaldaeans, by Jeremiah the prophet.
Tell ye among the nations, and proclaim, and lift up a standard! Proclaim ye; conceal it not; Say ye, “Babylon is taken, Bel is confounded, Merodach is in consternation, Her idols are confounded, Her images are in consternation.”
For out of the North cometh up against her a nation Which shall make her land desolate, So that none shall dwell therein; Both man and beast are fled, They are gone.
In those days, and at that time, saith Jehovah, The children of Israel shall come, They and the children of Judah together; They shall go weeping on their way, And shall seek Jehovah their God.
They shall ask the way to Zion, with their faces thitherward; They shall come, and shall join themselves to Jehovah In a perpetual covenant, that shall not be forgotten.
My people have been lost sheep; Their shepherds have caused them to go astray; They have caused them to wander upon the mountains; They have gone from mountain to hill, They have forgotten their fold.
All that found them devoured them; For their adversaries said, “We shall not be held guilty,” Because they had sinned against Jehovah, The fold of safety, and the hope of their fathers, Jehovah.
Flee ye out of Babylon, And go forth out of the land of the Chaldeans, And be ye like he-goats before the flock!
For, behold, I will raise up and bring against Babylon An assembly of great nations from the land of the North, And they shall set themselves in array against her, And then shall she be taken; Their arrows shall be as those of an expert warrior; None shall return in vain.
And Chaldaea shall be a spoil; All that spoil her shall have their fill, saith Jehovah.
Because ye rejoiced and exulted, O ye plunderers of my inheritance, Because ye wantoned like a thrashing heifer, And neighed like a stallion,
Your mother is utterly confounded; She that bore you is put to shame. Behold, the end of the nations, A wilderness, a dry land, a desert!
Because of the wrath of Jehovah, she shall not be inhabited, She shall be wholly desolate; Every one that passeth by Babylon shall be amazed, And hiss on account of all her plagues.
Put yourselves in array against Babylon round about: All ye that bend the bow, shoot at her; Spare not the arrows! For she hath sinned against Jehovah.
Raise the war-shout! She reacheth forth her hand; Her pillars are fallen; Her walls are thrown down; For it is the vengeance of Jehovah. Take ye vengeance upon her! As she hath done, do ye to her!
Cut ye off the sower from Babylon, And him that handleth the sickle in harvest-time! Because of the overpowering sword They shall turn every one to his own people, And they shall flee every one to his own land.
Israel hath been like scattered sheep, Which the lions have driven away; First the king of Assyria devoured him, And last, this Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, hath broken his bones.
Therefore thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will punish the king of Babylon and his land, As I have punished the king of Assyria.
And I will bring back Israel to his own pasture, And he shall feed upon Carmel and Bashan, And satiate himself upon mount Ephraim and Gilead.
In those days and at that time, saith Jehovah, The iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; And the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found; For I will pardon those whom I cause to be left.
Against the land of Rebellion go ye up, And against the inhabitants of Vengeance! Lay waste and utterly destroy after them, saith Jehovah, And do all which I have commanded thee!
The din of battle is in the land, And great destruction.
How is the battle-hammer of the whole earth cut asunder and broken! How is Babylon become an astonishment to all the nations!
I have laid a snare for thee, And thou hast been caught, O Babylon, When thou wast not aware! Thou hast been found and taken, Because thou hast contended against Jehovah.
Jehovah hath opened his armory, And hath brought out the weapons of his indignation; For the Lord Jehovah of hosts performeth a work against the land of the Chaldaeans.
Come against her from the utmost border! Open ye her barns, Cast her up into heaps, And destroy her utterly; Let nothing of her be left!
Slay all her bullocks, Let them go down to the slaughter! Woe unto them, For their day is come, The time of their punishment!
The voice of them that flee and escape is heard from the land of Babylon, To make known to Zion the vengeance of Jehovah, our God, The vengeance for his temple.
Call together the archers against Babylon, All ye that bend the bow, encamp ye round about her; Let no one escape; Recompense her according to her work; According to all that she hath done, do ye to her! For she hath exalted herself against Jehovah, Against the Holy One of Israel.
Therefore shall her young men fall in the streets, And all her men of war shall be cut off in that day, saith Jehovah.
Behold I am against thee, thou proud one, saith the Lord Jehovah of hosts; For thy day is come, The time of thy punishment.
And the proud one shall stumble and fall, And none shall raise him up; And I will kindle a fire in his cities, And it shall devour all round about him.
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: The children of Israel and the children of Judah are oppressed together, And all that took them captives hold them fast; They refuse to let them go.
But their redeemer is strong; Jehovah of hosts is his name. He will maintain their cause, So as to give rest to the land, And confusion to the inhabitants of Babylon.
The sword shall be upon the Chaldaeans, saith Jehovah, And upon the inhabitants of Babylon; And upon her princes, And upon her wise men;
The sword upon her lying prophets, and they shall be fools; The sword upon her heroes, and they shall be dismayed;
The sword upon her horses, and upon her chariots, And against all the allied multitude that is within her, And they shall become women. The sword is upon their treasures, and they shall be plundered;
A drought is upon her waters, and they shall be dried up; For it is a land of graven images, And they put a mad trust in idols.
Therefore the wild beasts of the desert, with the jackals, shall dwell there, And therein shall the ostrich dwell. And it shall be no more inhabited forever, Neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation.
As it was when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and the neighboring cities, saith Jehovah, There shall not a man abide there, Nor any son of man dwell therein.
Behold, a nation cometh from the North, And a great people and many kings shall rise up from the extremities of the earth.
They bear the bow and the javelin; They are cruel, and show no mercy; Their voice roareth like the sea, And they ride upon horses, arrayed like a warrior, Against thee, O daughter of Babylon!
The king of Babylon heareth the rumor concerning them, And his hands become feeble; Anguish taketh hold of him, Trembling, as of a woman in travail.
Behold, like a lion from the pride of Jordan, he cometh up against the habitation of the rock; Suddenly will I drive them from her; And him who is chosen by me will I appoint over her; For who is like me? And who will summon me to trial? And who is the shepherd that will stand up against me?
Therefore hear ye the purpose of Jehovah, which he hath formed against Babylon, And the designs which he meditateth against the land of the Chaldaeans; Surely he [[the enemy]] shall drag them forth like feeble sheep, Surely he will come upon them, and make their pastures desolate.
At the noise of the taking of Babylon, the earth trembleth, And the cry is heard among the nations.
Thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I will raise up against Babylon, And against them that dwell in the midst of mine adversaries, A destroying wind;
And I will send against Babylon winnowers, And they shall winnow her, and empty her land; For they shall come against her on every side.
Against him that bendeth, let the archer bend his bow, And against him that lifteth himself up in his brigandine! And spare ye not her young men; Destroy ye utterly her whole host!
Thus shall they fall down slain in the land of the Chaldaeans, And thrust through in her streets.
For Israel is not forsaken, nor Judah abandoned of his God, of Jehovah of hosts; For their land is full of guilt against the Holy One of Israel.
Flee ye out of Babylon, And save ye every man his life, That ye be not cut off in her punishment! For this is the time of Jehovah's vengeance; He will render to her a recompense.
Babylon has been a golden cup in the hand of Jehovah, That made all the earth drunken; The nations have drunken of her wine, Therefore the nations are mad.
Babylon is suddenly fallen, and broken; Howl ye over her; Bring ye balm for her wounds, If so be she may be healed.
“We would have healed Babylon, But she cannot be healed. Forsake her, and let us go every one to his own country! For her punishment reacheth to the heavens, And ascendeth even to the skies.”
Jehovah hath brought forth our deliverance; Come ye, and let us declare in Zion The work of Jehovah our God.
Make sharp the arrows; put on the shields! Jehovah hath roused up the spirit of the kings of the Medes; For his purpose is against Babylon, to destroy it; For this is the vengeance of Jehovah, The vengeance for his temple.
Against the walls of Babylon set up a standard, Make strong the guard, appoint the watchmen, prepare the ambush! For Jehovah deviseth and doeth that which he spake Against the inhabitants of Babylon.
O thou that dwellest by great waters, That aboundest in treasures, Thine end is come; The measure of thy rapaciousness is full!
Jehovah of hosts hath sworn by himself, [[saying,]] Surely I will fill thee with men, as with caterpillars, Who shall raise the war-shout against thee.
He made the earth by his power, He established the world by his wisdom, And by his understanding he spread out the heavens.
When he uttereth his voice there is an abundance of water in the heavens; He causeth clouds to ascend from the ends of the earth; He bringeth the wind from his storehouses.
Brutish is every man who hath not this knowledge; By his images is every founder put to shame; For his molten work is deceit; There is no breath in it.
They are vanity, deceptive work; In the time of their punishment shall they perish.
Not like them is he who is the portion of Jacob; He is the former of all things, And Israel is his allotted inheritance. Jehovah of hosts is his name.
Thou hast been to me my battle-hammer, My weapon of war. And with thee I broke in pieces the nations, And with thee I destroyed the kingdoms.
And with thee I broke in pieces the horse and his rider, And with thee I broke in pieces the chariot and its driver.
With thee I broke in pieces man and woman, And with thee I broke in pieces the old and the young, And with thee I broke in pieces the young man and the maiden.
With thee I broke in pieces the shepherd and his flock, And with thee I broke in pieces the husbandman and his team; And with thee I broke in pieces prefects and governors.
But now before your eyes will I repay to Babylon, And to all the inhabitants of Chaldaea, All the evil which they have done in Zion, saith Jehovah.
O thou destroying mountain, that destroyest the whole earth, Behold, I am against thee, saith Jehovah! And I will stretch out my hand against thee, And roll thee down from the rocks, And make thee a burnt mountain,
So that none shall take from thee a corner-stone, or a foundation-stone; But thou shalt be a perpetual desolation, saith Jehovah.
Set ye up a standard in the land, Sound a trumpet among the nations; Enlist the nations against Babylon, Call together against her the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashchenaz; Appoint captains against her, Cause the horses to come up like the bristled locusts!
Enlist ye against her the nations, The kings of the Medes, and their prefects, And all their governors, And all the lands under their dominion,
So that the earth shall tremble and quake! For the purpose of Jehovah against Babylon is to be fulfilled, To make the land of Babylon a desolation, without an inhabitant.
The mighty men of Babylon refuse to fight; They remain in their stronghold; Their strength hath failed; They have become women; Her habitations are burned; Her bars are broken.
Courier runs to meet courier, And messenger to meet messenger, To make known to the king of Babylon, That his city is taken from end to end;
That the passages are taken, That the reeds are burned with fire, And that the men of war are struck with terror.
For thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: The daughter of Babylon shall be like a thrashing-floor when it is thrashed; Yet a little while, and the time of harvest for her shall come.
Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, hath devoured us; He hath made an end of us; He hath made us empty vessels; He hath swallowed us up like a dragon; He hath filled his maw with our delicacies; He hath cast us out.
“The violence done to me and to my flesh be upon Babylon!” Shall the inhabitant of Zion say; And, “My blood be upon the inhabitants of Chaldaeans!” shall Jerusalem say.
Therefore, thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I will maintain thy cause, And take vengeance for thee; And I will dry up her sea, And make her springs dry.
And Babylon shall become heaps, The dwelling-place of jackals, An astonishment and a hissing, Without an inhabitant.
Together shall they roar like lions; They shall yell like lions' whelps.
In their heat I will prepare them a drink, And will make them drunk, so that they shall rejoice, And then sleep an everlasting sleep, And awake no more, saith Jehovah.
I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter, Like rams with he-goats.
How is Sheshach taken! How is the praise of the whole earth fallen! How is Babylon become an astonishment among the nations!
The sea is come up over Babylon; With the roaring of its waves is she covered.
Her cities have become a desolation, A dry land and a desert, A land in which no man dwelleth, And which no son of man passeth through.
I will punish Bel at Babylon, And bring forth from his mouth that which he hath swallowed, And the nations shall flow to him no more; Even the wall of Babylon shall fall.
Go ye out of her, my people, And save ye every man his life From the fierce anger of Jehovah!
And let not your heart faint, And fear ye not on account of the rumors which are heard in the land, When in one year a rumor cometh, And after it in another year another rumor, And violence is in the land, Ruler against ruler.
Therefore, behold the days come When I will punish the graven images of Babylon, And her whole land shall be confounded; And all her slain shall fall in the midst of her.
Then the heavens shall shout over Babylon, And the earth and all that is therein; For out of the North come spoilers against her, saith Jehovah.
As Babylon caused the slain of Israel to fall, So at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the land.
Ye that have escaped her sword, go! Tarry not! Remember Jehovah afar off, And let Jerusalem come into your mind!
We have been confounded, because we have heard reproach; Shame hath covered our faces, For strangers have come into the sanctuaries of the house of Jehovah.
Therefore, behold, the days come, saith Jehovah, When I will punish her graven images, And through all her land shall the wounded groan.
Though Babylon should mount up to the heavens, And make inaccessible the height of her strength, Yet from me shall spoilers come upon her, saith Jehovah.
Hark! a cry from Babylon, Of great destruction from the land of the Chaldaeans!
For Jehovah destroyeth Babylon, And bringeth to silence her loud tumult; Their waves roar like great waters; Their tumultuous noise resounds.
For the spoiler is come upon her, upon Babylon; And their mighty men are taken, And all their bows are broken; For Jehovah is a God of retribution; He will surely requite.
And I will make drunk her princes, and her wise men, Her prefects, and her governors, and her mighty men; And they shall sleep an everlasting sleep, And shall no more awake, saith the King, Whose name is Jehovah of hosts.
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: The broad walls of Babylon shall be razed to the foundations, And her high gates shall be burned with fire; So that nations shall have labored for naught, And kingdoms have wearied themselves for fire.
The word which Jeremiah the prophet commanded Seraiah, the son of Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, when he went with Zedekiah, the king of Judah, into Babylon, in the fourth year of his reign. This Seraiah was chief chamberlain.
And Jeremiah wrote all the evil that was to come upon Babylon in one book, all these words that are written concerning Babylon.
And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When thou comest to Babylon, see that thou read all these words,
and say, O Jehovah, thou hast spoken against this place to destroy it, so that none shall remain in it, neither man nor beast, but that it shall remain desolate forever!
And when thou hast made an end of reading this book, bind a stone upon it, and cast it into the midst of the Euphrates,
and say: So shall Babylon sink, and shall not rise again from the evil which I bring upon her. And they shall utterly fail. Thus far the words of Jeremiah.
Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. The name of his mother was Hamutal, the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.
And he did that which was evil in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that Jehoiakim had done.
For, through the anger of Jehovah, it was so with Judah and Jerusalem that at length he cast them forth from his presence. And Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.
And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, came, he and all his army, against Jerusalem, and encamped against it, and built forts against it round about.
And the city was besieged until the eleventh year of King Zedekiah.
And in the fourth month, in the ninth day of the month, the famine was sore in the city, so that there was no bread for the people of the land.
And the city was broken into; and all the men of war fled, and went out of the city by night, by the way of the gate between the two walls, which is by the king's garden, (whilst the Chaldaeans were by the city round about,) and they went toward the plain.
But the army of the Chaldaeans pursued the king, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; and all his army was scattered from him.
And they took the king, and carried him up to the king of Babylon, to Riblah, in the land of Hamath; where he gave judgment upon him.
And the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes. He slew also all the princes or Judah, in Riblah.
And he put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him in chains; and the king of Babylon carried him to Babylon, and put him in prison till the day of his death.
And in the fifth month, on the tenth day of the month, (it was the nineteenth year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon,) came Nebuzaradan, captain of the guard, one that stood in the presence of the king of Babylon, to Jerusalem.
And he burned the house of Jehovah, and the king's house; and all the houses at Jerusalem, all the great houses, burned he with fire.
And all the army of the Chaldaeans that was with the captain of the guard brake down all the walls of Jerusalem round about.
And some of the poor of the people, and the rest of the people that were left in the city, and the deserters that had gone over to the king of Babylon, even the remainder of the multitude, did Nebuzaradan, the captain of the guard, carry away captive.
But some of the poor of the land did Nebuzaradan, the captain of the guard, leave for vine-dressers and for husbandmen.
And the pillars of brass that were in the house of Jehovah, and the bases, and the brazen sea that was in the house of Jehovah, the Chaldaeans brake, and carried all the brass of them to Babylon.
The caldrons also, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the bowls, and the pans, and all the vessels of brass which were used in ministering, did they take away.
And the basins, and the fire-pans, and the bowls, and the caldrons, and the candlesticks, and the censers, and the cups, and whatever was of gold or silver, did the captain of the guard take away.
The two pillars, the sea, and the twelve brazen bulls that were under the bases, which King Solomon made in the house of Jehovah, the brass from all these was beyond weight.
For as to the pillars, eighteen cubits in height was the one pillar, and a line of twelve cubits measured it round, and their thickness was four fingers, being hollow.
And a chapiter of brass was upon them; and the height of one chapiter was five cubits; and there was network with pomegranates upon the chapiter all round, the whole of brass. The second pillar also, and the pomegranates, were like unto these.
And the pomegranates were ninety and six toward every wind; all the pomegranates were a hundred upon the network round about.
And the captain of the guard took Seraiah, the chief priest, and Zephaniah, the second priest, and the three keepers of the door;
and out of the city he took a eunuch who had charge over the men of war, and seven men of those that were near the king's person, who were found in the city, and the principal scribe of the host, who mustered the people of the land, and threescore men of the people of the land, who were found in the midst of the city;
these, Nebuzaradan, captain of the guard, took, and brought to the king of Babylon at Riblah.
And the king of Babylon smote them, and put them to death in Riblah in the land of Hamath. Thus was Judah carried away captive out of their own land.
This is the people whom Nebuchadnezzar carried away captive: in the seventh year, three thousand and twenty-three Jews;
in the eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar, he carried away captive from Jerusalem eight hundred and thirty-two persons;
in the three and twentieth year of Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuzaradan, captain of the guard, carried away captive of the Jews seven hundred forty and five persons. All the persons were four thousand and six hundred.
And it came to pass in the thirty and seventh year of the captivity of Jehoiachin, the king of Judah, in the twelfth month, on the twenty-fifth day of the month, that Evil-merodach, the king of Babylon, in the first year of his reign, lifted up the head of Jehoiachin, king of Judah, and brought him forth out of prison,
and spoke kindly to him, and set his seat above the seat of the kings that were with him in Babylon,
and changed his prison garments; and he ate bread before him all the days of his life.
And a constant allowance was given him by the king of Babylon, a portion every day, until the day of his death, all the days of his life.
How doth the city sit solitary, that was full of people! How is she become as a widow! She that was great among the nations, and princess among the provinces, How is she become tributary!
She weepeth bitterly in the night; tears are upon her cheeks; Among all her lovers she hath no comforter; All her friends have dealt treacherously with her; they have become her enemies.
Judah goeth into exile, because of affliction and because of great servitude; She dwelleth among the nations, she findeth no rest; All her pursuers overtake her in the straits.
The ways to Zion mourn, because none come to the solemn feasts; All her gates are desolate, her priests sigh, Her virgins wail, and she is in bitterness.
Her adversaries have become the head; her enemies prosper; For Jehovah hath afflicted her for the multitude of her transgressions; Her children are gone into captivity before the enemy.
From the daughter of Zion all her beauty is departed; Her princes are become like harts, that find no pasture; Without strength, they flee before the pursuer.
Jerusalem remembereth, in the days of her affliction and of her oppression, All her pleasant things, which she had in the days of old, When her people fell into the hand of the enemy, and she had no helper; Her adversaries saw her, and mocked at her destruction.
Jerusalem hath grievously sinned; therefore is she become vile; All that honored her despise her, because they have seen her shame; She sigheth, and turneth backward.
Her filthiness is upon her skirts; She thought not of her end, therefore is she brought down wonderfully; she hath no comforter. “Behold, O Jehovah, my affliction, for the enemy doth triumph!”
The adversary spreadeth his hands over all her pleasant things; Yea, she seeth the nations enter into her sanctuary, Concerning whom thou didst command that they should not enter into her congregation.
All her people sigh; they seek bread; They give their precious things for bread to sustain life. “Behold, O Jehovah, and consider, how I am become vile!”
“Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? Behold, and see, if there be any sorrow like to my sorrow, which is brought upon me, With which Jehovah hath afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger!
“From on high hath he sent fire into my bones, and it prevailed against them: He hath spread a net for my feet; he hath turned me back; He hath made me desolate, faint all the day long.
“The yoke of my transgressions is fastened in his hand; they are twisted together; They are laid upon my neck; he hath made my strength to fall; The Lord hath delivered me into their hands, against whom I cannot stand.
“The Lord hath trodden under foot all my mighty men in the midst of me; He hath called an assembly against me to crush my young men; The Lord hath trodden down the virgin, the daughter of Judah, as in a wine-vat.
“For these things do I weep; mine eye runneth down with water; For far from me are they that should comfort me, that should restore my strength; My children have perished, because the enemy prevailed.”
Zion spreadeth forth her hands, and there is none to comfort her; Jehovah hath given command against Jacob, that his adversaries should be round about him; Jerusalem is become an abhorrence among them.
“Righteous is Jehovah, for I have disobeyed his commandment; Hear, I pray you, all ye nations, and behold my sorrow! My virgins and my young men are gone into captivity.
“I called upon my lovers, but they have proved false to me; My priests and my elders have expired in the city, While they sought for food to sustain their lives.
“Behold, O Jehovah, how I am distressed! my bowels boil, My heart turneth itself within me; for I have grievously rebelled. Abroad the sword bereaveth; at home, Death.
“They hear how I sigh, yet none comforteth me; mine enemies have heard of my calamity; they rejoice that thou hast done it. O bring the day which thou hast appointed, that they shall be like me!
“Let all their wickedness come before thee, deal thou with them as thou hast dealt with me for all my transgressions! For my sighs are many, and my heart is faint.”
How hath the Lord in his anger covered with a cloud the daughter of Zion! He hath cast down from heaven to earth the glory of Israel, And hath not remembered his footstool in the day of his anger.
Lord hath swallowed up without pity all the habitations of Jacob; He hath thrown down in his wrath the strongholds of the daughter of Judah; He hath brought down to the ground, he hath profaned the kingdom and its princes.
He hath cut off, in his fierce anger, every horn of Israel; He hath drawn back his right hand from the face of the enemy, And hath burned against Jacob like a flaming fire, which devoureth round about.
He bent his bow like an enemy; He stood with his right hand as an adversary, and slew all that was pleasant to the eye; Upon the tent of the daughter of Zion he poured out his fury like fire.
The Lord is become as an enemy; he hath swallowed up Israel; He hath swallowed up all his palaces; he hath destroyed his strongholds; And hath multiplied in the daughter of Judah mourning and lamentation.
He hath violently torn away his hedge, like the hedge of a garden; he hath destroyed his place of congregation; Jehovah hath caused the solemn feast and the sabbath to be forgotten in Zion; He hath despised, in his fierce anger, the king and the priest.
The Lord hath cast off his altar; he hath abhorred his holy place; He hath given up into the hands of the enemy the walls of Zion's palaces; They have lifted up the voice in the house of Jehovah, as in the day of a solemn feast.
Jehovah hath purposed to destroy the wall of the daughter of Zion; He hath stretched out the line, he hath not withdrawn his hand from destroying; He hath made the rampart and the wall to lament; They languish together.
Her gates are sunk into the earth; he hath destroyed and broken her bars; Her king and her princes are among the nations; The law is no more; Her prophets also find no vision from Jehovah.
The elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground in silence; They have cast dust upon their heads; they have girded themselves with sackcloth; The virgins of Jerusalem hang down their heads to the ground.
Mine eyes do fail with tears; my bowels boil; My liver is poured out upon the ground on account of the destruction of the daughter of my people; For the children and sucklings faint in the streets of the city.
They say to their mothers, “Where is corn and wine?” While they faint, as one wounded, in the streets of the city; While their life is poured out into their mother's bosom.
How shall I address thee? what shall I liken to thee, O daughter of Jerusalem? With what shall I compare thee, so as to comfort thee, O virgin daughter of Zion? Surely thy breach is wide, like the sea; who can heal thee?
Thy prophets declare to thee that which is vain and false; They lay not open to thee thine iniquity, to bring back thy captivity; They pronounce to thee prophecies of falsehood and seduction.
All that that pass by clap their hands at thee; They hiss, and shake their heads at the daughter of Jerusalem. “Is this the city that men called the perfection of beauty, The joy of the whole earth?”
All thine enemies open their mouths against thee; They hiss and gnash the teeth; They say: “We have swallowed her up; Yea, this is the day that we looked for; we have found, we have seen it.”
Jehovah hath accomplished that which he had devised; He hath fulfilled his word, which he had commanded in the days of old; He hath thrown down and hath not pitied; He hath caused thine enemy to rejoice over thee; he hath exalted the horn of thine adversaries.
Their heart crieth out to the Lord. O wall of the daughter of Zion, let thy tears run down like a river day and night! Give thyself no rest! let not the apple of thine eye cease!
Arise, cry aloud in the night at the beginning of the watches! Pour out thy heart like water before the face of Jehovah! Lift up thy hands to him for the life of thy young children, That faint for hunger at the head of all the streets!
“Behold, O Jehovah, and consider! With whom hast thou dealt thus? Shall women eat the fruit of the womb, children borne in the arms? Shall the priest and the prophet be slain in the holy place of the Lord?
“The boy and the old man lie on the ground in the streets; My virgins and my young men are fallen by the sword; Thou hast slain them in the day of thine anger; Thou hast killed, and hast shown no mercy.
“Thou hast called, as on a festal day, my terrors around me; There was not one, in the day of Jehovah's anger, that escaped or was left; Those whom I have borne in my arms and brought up hath my enemy consumed.”
I am the man that hath seen affliction under the rod of His wrath;
He hath led me and brought me into darkness, and not into light;
Yea, against me doth he again and again turn his hand all the day long.
My flesh and my skin hath he made old; he hath broken my bones.
He hath builded against me, and encompassed me with bitterness and woe.
He hath set me in dark places, as those that have long been dead.
He hath hedged me about, so that I cannot get out; he hath made my chain heavy;
Yea, when I cry and call aloud, he shutteth out my prayer.
He blocketh up my way with hewn stone; he maketh my paths crooked.
A bear lying in wait hath he been to me, a lion in lurking-places.
He hath turned aside my ways, and torn me in pieces; he hath made me desolate.
He hath bent his bow, and set me as a mark for the arrow.
He hath caused the sons of his quiver to pierce my reins.
I have been a laughing-stock to all my people, their song all the day.
He hath filled me with bitterness; he hath made me drunk with wormwood.
He hath also broken my teeth with gravel-stones; He hath covered me with ashes.
Yea, thou hast removed my soul far from peace; I have forgotten prosperity.
And I say, “My confidence and my hope in Jehovah are gone!”
Remember my affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the gall!
Yea, thou wilt remember them, for my soul sinketh within me!
This I recall to my mind; therefore have I hope;
It is of the mercy of Jehovah that we are not consumed; yea, his compassion faileth not;
It is new every morning; great is thy faithfulness.
Jehovah is my portion, saith my soul, therefore do I hope in him.
Jehovah is good to them that trust in him, to the soul that seeketh him.
It is good that a man hope, and quietly wait for salvation from Jehovah.
It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth;
That he sit alone and keep silence, since He layeth it upon him;
That he put his mouth in the dust, [[saying to himself,]] “Perhaps there may be hope!”
That he offer his cheek to the smiter; that he be filled with reproach.
For the Lord will not cast off forever;
For though he cause grief, yet doth he have compassion according to his great mercy;
For he doth not willingly afflict and grieve the children of men.
Doth one trample under foot all the prisoners of the earth,
Doth he bend the right of a man before the face of the Most High,
Doth he subvert a man in his cause, and shall not the Lord behold it?
Who is he that saith, and it cometh to pass, when the Lord hath not commanded?
Cometh not evil, as well as good, from the mouth of the Most High?
Wherefore then murmureth the living man? Let him murmur at his own sin!
Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to Jehovah!
Let us lift up our hearts with our hands to God in the heavens!
We have transgressed; we have rebelled; thou hast not forgiven!
Thou hast hidden thyself in anger, and hast pursued us; thou hast slain and hast not spared;
Thou hast hidden thyself in a cloud, that our prayer may not pass through;
Thou hast made us the offscouring and refuse in the midst of the nations.
All our enemies have opened their mouths against us;
Terror and the pit have come upon us, desolation and destruction;
Mine eye runneth down with streams of water for the destruction of the daughter of my people.
Mine eye trickleth down and ceaseth not, without any intermission,
Until Jehovah look down and behold from heaven.
Mine eye is painful to me on account of all the daughters of my city.
They that are my enemies without cause hunt me down like a bird;
They take away my life in the dungeon; they cast a stone upon me;
Waters flow over my head; I say, “I am undone!”
I call upon thy name, O Jehovah, from the deep dungeon;
Hear thou my voice! hide not thine ear from my cry for relief!
Be near to me, when I call upon thee! Say, “Fear not!”
Thou maintainest my cause, O Lord; thou redeemest my life!
Thou, O Jehovah, seest the wrong done to me; Maintain thou my cause!
Thou seest all their vengeance, all their devices against me.
Thou hearest their reproach, O Jehovah, all their devices against me,
The words of my adversaries, and their machinations against me all the day long!
Behold their sitting down and their rising up! I am their song.
Render to them a recompense, O Jehovah, according to the work of their hands!
Give them blindness of mind! thy curse be upon them!
Pursue them in thine anger, and destroy them from under Jehovah's heaven!
How is the gold become dim! how is the most fine gold changed! The hallowed stones are cast forth at the head of every street.
The noble sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold, How are they esteemed as earthen pitchers, the work of the hands of the potter!
The very jackals reach forth the breast; they suckle their young; But the daughter of my people is become cruel, like the ostriches of the desert.
The tongue of the sucking child cleaveth to the roof of his mouth for thirst; Young children ask for bread, and no man breaketh it for them.
Those that fed on dainties are desolate in the streets; Those that have been brought up in scarlet embrace the dunghill.
The punishment of the daughter of my people is greater than the punishment of Sodom, Which was overthrown in a moment, though no hands came against her.
Her princes were purer than snow, whiter than milk; More ruddy than coral was their body; Their visage was of sapphire.
Now darker than a coal is their countenance; they are not known in the streets. Their skin cleaveth to their bones; it is become dry, like wood.
More fortunate are the slain by the sword than the slain by famine; For these pine away, stricken through for want of the fruits of the field.
The hands of tender-hearted women cooked their own children; They were their food, in the destruction of the daughter of my people.
Jehovah hath spent upon them his fury; he hath poured out his fierce anger; He hath kindled a fire in Zion, which hath devoured its foundations.
The kings of the earth believed not, nor all the inhabitants of the world, That the adversary would enter, and the enemy, within the gates of Jerusalem.
It was on account of the sins of her prophets, and the iniquities of her priests, Who shed in the midst of her the blood of the righteous.
They stumbled like blind men through the streets, polluted with blood, So that men could not touch their garments.
“Depart! unclean!” men cried to them. “Depart, depart, touch not!” As they fled, they stumbled; men said among the nations, “They shall dwell there no more.”
The anger of Jehovah hath scattered them; he will no more care for them; They paid no regard to the priests, they had no compassion for the elders.
Still did our eyes fail, looking for help in vain; On our watch-tower did we watch for a nation that could not save us.
They laid snares for our steps, so that we could not go in our streets; Our end is near; our days are accomplished, yea, our end is come!
Swifter were our pursuers than the eagles of heaven; They chased us upon the mountains; they laid wait for us in the wilderness.
The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of Jehovah, was taken in their pits, Under whose shadow we said that we should live among the nations.
Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of Edom, that dwellest in the land of Uz! Yet to thee also shall the cup come! thou shalt be drunken, and shalt expose thy nakedness.
Thy punishment is at an end, O daughter of Zion! no more will he carry thee into captivity; But thine iniquity will he punish, O daughter of Edom! he will uncover thy sins.
Remember, O Jehovah, what is come upon us! Look down and behold our reproach!
Our inheritance is fallen to strangers, Our houses to aliens.
We are orphans; we are without a father; Our mothers are as widows.
Our water we drink for money; Our wood is sold to us.
With the yoke upon our necks, we are driven; We are wearied, and have no rest.
We have given the hand to the Egyptians, And to the Assyrians, to be satisfied with bread.
Our fathers sinned; they are no more, And we bear their iniquities.
Servants rule over us; There is none that delivereth out of their hand.
With the peril of our lives we get our bread, Because of the sword of the wilderness.
Our skin is parched like an oven Because of the burnings of hunger.
Matrons in Zion have they ravished, And maidens in the cities of Judah.
Princes were hanged up by their hand; The faces of the elders were not honored.
Young men carried millstones, And boys fell under burdens of wood.
The elders sit no more at the gate; The young men have ceased from their music.
The joy of our heart is at an end; Our dancing is turned into mourning.
The crown is fallen from our head; Woe unto us, that we have sinned!
For this is our heart faint, For these things our eyes are dim;
On account of mount Zion, which is desolate; Foxes roam over it.
But thou, O Jehovah, sittest as king forever; Thy throne endureth from generation to generation.
Wherefore dost thou wholly forget us, And abandon us, for so long a time?
Turn us again to thee, O Jehovah, that we may be restored! Renew our days as of old!
For shouldst thou utterly reject us? Shouldst thou be so exceedingly wroth against us?
Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month, in the fifth day of the month, as I was among the captives by the river Chebar, that the heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God.
On the fifth day of the month, in the fifth year of the captivity of King Jehoiachin,
the word of Jehovah came to Ezekiel, the son of Buzi, the priest, in the land of the Chaldaeans, by the river Chebar; and the hand of Jehovah was there upon him.
And I looked, and behold, a stormy wind came from the north, a great cloud, and a mass of fire; and a brightness was round about it, and in the midst of it the appearance of bright brass, in the midst of the fire.
And in the midst of it were the forms of four living creatures. And this was their appearance. They had the form of a man.
And every one had four faces, and every one had four wings.
And their feet were upright; and the sole of their feet was as the sole of a calf's foot; and they sparkled like polished brass.
And they had the hands of a man under their wings on their four sides, and all four had faces and wings.
Their wings were joined one to another; they turned not about when they went; they went every one straight forward.
As for the form of their faces, all four had the face of a man, and the face of a lion on the right side, and all four had the face of an ox on the left side, and all four had also the face of an eagle.
Thus were their faces. And their wings were expanded upward; two wings of every one were joined, and two covered their bodies.
And they went every one straight forward; whither the spirit was to go, they went, and they turned not about when they went.
And the appearance of the living creatures was as coals of fire, burning like torches; and the fire moved about among the living creatures, and shone forth brightly; and out of the fire came forth lightning.
And the living creatures ran backward and forward like a flash of lightning.
Now as I beheld the living creatures, behold, there stood a wheel upon the earth by each of the living creatures, with its four sides.
The appearance of the wheels, and their work, was like that of a chrysolite, and all four had one form, and their appearance and their work was as if a wheel had been within a wheel.
When they went, they went upon their four sides, and they turned not about when they went.
As for their felloes, they were high and terrible; and their felloes were full of eyes round about upon all four of them.
And when the living creatures went, the wheels went beside them; and when the living creatures were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up.
Whithersoever the spirit was to go, they went, whithersoever the spirit was to go; and the wheels were lifted up beside them; for the spirit of the living creatures was in the wheels.
When those went, these went; and when those stood, these stood; and when those were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up beside them; for the spirit of the living creatures was in the wheels.
And over the heads of the living creatures was the appearance of a firmament, like crystal, terrible, spread out over their heads above.
And under the firmament were their wings upright, the one toward the other; and every one had two, which covered his body.
And I heard the sound of their wings, as the sound of great waters, as the voice of the Almighty, when they went,—a sound like the noise of a host. And when they stood still, they let down their wings.
And there was a voice from the firmament, that was over their heads; and they stood still, and let down their wings.
And above the firmament over their heads was an appearance like a sapphire-stone, the form of a throne; and upon the form of the throne there was a form like that of a man above.
And I saw what had the appearance of bright brass, what had the appearance of fire round about within it, from the appearance of his loins and upward. And from the appearance of his loins downward I saw what had the appearance of fire, and its brightness was round about him.
As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness round about. This was the appearance of the glory of Jehovah. And when I saw it I fell upon my face, and I heard the voice of one who spoke.
And he said to me, Son of man, stand upon thy feet, and I will speak with thee.
And the spirit entered into me when he spoke to me, and set me upon my feet; and I heard him that spake with me.
And he said to me, Son of man, I send thee to the sons of Israel, to a rebellious nation, that hath rebelled against me; they and their fathers have rebelled against me to this very day.
Brazen-faced and stiff-hearted are the sons to whom I send thee. And thou shalt say to them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah.
And whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, for they are a rebellious house, yet shall they know that a prophet is in the midst of them.
And thou, son of man, be not afraid of them, and of their words be not afraid, though they be briers and thorns toward thee, and though thou dwell among scorpions; be not afraid of their words, nor be dismayed at their looks, for they are a rebellious house.
Speak thou my words to them, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, for they are most rebellious.
But thou, son of man, hear what I say to thee! Be not thou rebellious, like that rebellious house. Open thy mouth, and eat that which I give thee.
And when I looked, behold, a hand was put forth to me; and lo, a book-roll was therein.
And he spread it before me, and it was written within and without. And therein was written lamentation and mourning and woe.
And he said to me, Son of man, eat that which thou findest; eat this roll, and go, speak to the house of Israel!
So I opened my mouth, and he gave me the roll to eat.
And he said to me, Son of man, let thy stomach eat, and fill thy body with this roll which I give thee! Then I ate it, and it was in my mouth as honey for sweetness.
And he said to me: Son of man, go, get thee to the house of Israel, and speak my words to them!
For not to a people of a dark speech and a hard language art thou sent, but to the house of Israel;
not to many nations of a dark speech and a hard language, whose words thou canst not understand. Truly, had I sent thee to them, they would have hearkened to thee.
But the house of Israel will not hearken to thee, for they will not hearken to me. For the whole house of Israel is brazen-faced and stiff-hearted.
Behold, I have made thy face strong against their faces, and thy forehead strong against their foreheads.
As an adamant, harder than flint, have I made thy forehead; fear them not, nor be dismayed at their looks; for they are a rebellious house.
Moreover, he said to me: Son of man, all my words, which I shall speak to thee, receive in thy heart, and hear with thine ears!
And go, get thee to them of the captivity, to the children of thy people, and speak to them, and say to them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah; whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear.
Then the spirit lifted me up, and I heard behind me the sound, as of a great rushing, saying, “Praised be the majesty of Jehovah from his place!”
I heard also the noise of the wings of the living creatures, that touched one another, and the noise of the wheels beside them, even a noise of a great rushing.
So the spirit lifted me up, and took me away, and I went in bitterness, in the heat of my spirit; but the hand of Jehovah was strong upon me.
Then I came to them of the captivity at Tel-abib, that dwelt by the river Chebar; and I dwelt where they dwelt; I even dwelt astonished among them seven days.
And at the end of seven days, the word of Jehovah came to me, and said:
Son of man, I have set thee as a watchman to the house of Israel; therefore hear the word from my mouth, and warn them from me!
When I say to the wicked, Thou shalt surely die! and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wicked from his wicked way, so that he may live, that wicked man shall die for his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thy hand.
Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, and from his wicked way, he shall die for his iniquity, but thou hast delivered thy soul.
Again, when a righteous man turneth from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and I lay a stumbling-block before him, and he shall die because thou hast not given him warning, he will die for his sin; and his righteousness which he hath done will not be remembered; but his blood will I require at thy hand.
Yet if thou warn the righteous man, that he sin not, and the righteous man doth not sin, he shall surely live, because he hath received warning; and thou hast delivered thy soul.
And the hand of Jehovah was there upon me, and he said to me, Arise, go forth into the plain, and there will I speak with thee.
Then I arose, and went forth into the plain, and lo, the glory of Jehovah stood there, as the glory which I saw by the river Chebar; and I fell upon my face.
Then the spirit entered into me, and set me upon my feet. And he spake with me, and said to me: Go, shut thyself within thy house.
And behold, O son of man, bands shall be put upon thee, and thou shalt be bound therewith; and thou shalt not go out among them.
And I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, that thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not be to them a reprover; for they are a rebellious house.
But when I speak with thee, I will open thy mouth, and thou shalt say to them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: He that will hear, let him hear, and he that will forbear, let him forbear; for they are a rebellious house.
And thou, son of man, take thee a tile, and lay it before thee, and portray upon it a city, even Jerusalem.
And lay siege against it, and build a tower against it, and cast up a mound against it; set a camp also against it, and place battering-rams against it round about.
Moreover, take thou an iron pan, and set it for a wall of iron between thee and the city; and set thy face against it, that it may be besieged; and lay siege against it. This shall be a sign to the house of Israel.
Lie thou also upon thy left side, and lay the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it. According to the number of days that thou shalt lie upon it, thou shalt bear their iniquity.
But for the years of their iniquity I appoint thee days, three hundred and ninety days; so long shalt thou bear the iniquity of the house of Israel.
And when thou hast brought them to an end, then lie upon thy right side, and bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days. I have appointed thee a day for a year.
And set thy face against besieged Jerusalem, and uncover thine arm, and prophesy against it!
And behold, I will lay bands upon thee, and thou shalt not turn thee from one side to another till thou hast ended the days of thy siege.
Take thou also wheat, and barley, and beans, and lentiles, and millet, and spelt, and put them into one vessel, and make thereof thy bread for the number of days that thou shalt lie upon thy side; three hundred and ninety days shalt thou eat thereof.
And thy food which thou eatest shall be by weight, twenty shekels a day; from time to time shalt thou eat it.
Thou shalt also drink water by measure, the sixth part of a hin; from time to time shalt thou drink.
Thou shalt also eat barley-cakes; and with dung that cometh out of man shalt thou bake them in their sight.
And Jehovah said, Even thus shall the sons of Israel eat their polluted food among the nations, whither I will drive them.
Then said I: Ah! Lord Jehovah, behold, I have never been polluted; for from my youth until now have I not eaten that which died of itself, or was torn in pieces; neither hath unclean food come into my mouth.
Then he said to me: Behold, I give thee cow's dung for man's dung; and with that shalt thou prepare thy food.
And he said to me: Son of man, behold, I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem, and they shall eat bread by weight and with care, and they shall drink water by measure and in amazement;
so that they shall be in want of bread and water, and be astonished one at another, and consume away for their iniquity.
And thou, son of man, take thee a sharp instrument, even a barber's razor, and cause it to pass upon thy head and thy beard; and take thee weighing-balances, and divide the hair.
A third part shalt thou burn with fire in the midst of the city, when the days of the siege are fulfilled; and thou shalt take a third part and smite it round about with the sword; and a third part shalt thou scatter in the wind, and I will draw out a sword after them.
Thou shalt also take thereof a small number, and bind them in thy skirts.
And of these again take some and cast them into the fire, and burn them in the fire. From them shall a fire come forth upon the whole house of Israel.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: This is Jerusalem; in the midst of the nations have I set her, and countries are round about her.
But she hath wickedly resisted my ordinances more than the nations, and my statutes more than the countries, that are round about her. For they have refused my ordinances, and have not walked in my statutes.
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because ye have been rebellious more than the nations that are round about you, and have not walked in my statutes, nor kept my ordinances, but have done according to the ordinances of the nations which are round about you,
therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold I, even I, am against thee, and will execute judgments against thee in the sight of the nations.
I will do to thee that which I have not yet done, and the like of which I shall not do again, because of all thine iniquities.
Therefore the fathers shall eat the sons in the midst of thee, and the sons shall eat their fathers; and I will execute judgments in thee, and I will scatter the whole remnant of thee to all the winds.
Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, because thou hast polluted my sanctuary with all thy detestable things, and with all thine abominations, therefore will I also withdraw mine eye from thee; neither will I spare, neither will I have any pity.
A third part of thee shall die by the pestilence, or be consumed with hunger in the midst of thee; and a third part shall die by the sword round about thee; and a third part will I scatter to all the winds, and I will draw out a sword after them.
Thus shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will satiate my fury upon them, and receive satisfaction; and they shall know that I, Jehovah, have spoken it in my zeal, when I shall have accomplished my fury upon them.
Moreover, I will make thee a waste, and a reproach among the nations that are round about thee, in the sight of all that pass by.
And thou shalt be a reproach, and a reviling, and a warning, and an astonishment to the nations that are round about thee, when I shall execute judgments upon thee in anger, and in fury, and in furious rebukes;—I, Jehovah, have spoken it;—
when I shall send upon you the evil arrows of famine which bring destruction, which I send to destroy you, and increase the famine upon you, and break your staff of bread.
And I will send upon you famine, and evil beasts, which shall make thee childless; and pestilence and blood shall pass through thee; and the sword will I bring upon thee. I, Jehovah, have spoken it.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, set thy face against the mountains of Israel, and prophesy against them!
And say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord Jehovah! Thus saith the Lord Jehovah to the mountains and to the hills, to the plains and to the valleys: Behold, I, even I, will bring the sword upon you, and I will destroy your high places;
and your altars shall be desolate, and your sun-images shall be broken; and I will cast down your slain before your idols.
And I will lay the carcasses of the sons of Israel before their idols; and I will scatter your bones round about your altars.
In all places where ye dwell shall the cities be laid waste, and the high places be desolate; that your altars may be laid waste and made desolate, and your idols may be broken, and cease, and your sun-images may be cut down, and your works may be destroyed.
And the slain shall fall in the midst of you, that ye may know that I am Jehovah.
Yet will I leave a remnant, that ye may have some that shall have escaped the sword among the nations, when ye shall be scattered through the countries.
And they of you that escape shall remember me among the nations whither they shall be carried captives, when I have broken their whorish heart which departed from me, and their eyes which went lusting after their idols; and they shall loathe themselves for the evils which they have committed in all their abominations.
Then shall they know that I am Jehovah, and that I have not said in vain, that I would do all this evil to them.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Smite upon thy hand, and stamp with thy foot, and say, Alas for all the evil abominations of the house of Israel! for by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence shall they fall.
He that is far off shall die by pestilence, and he that is near shall fall by the sword, and he that remaineth and is preserved shall die by famine. Thus will I accomplish my fury upon them.
Then shall ye know that I am Jehovah, when their slain men shall be among their idols round about their altars, upon every high hill, upon all the tops of the mountains, and under every green tree, and under every thick oak, in every place where they offered sweet savor to all their idols.
So will I stretch out my hand against them, and make the land desolate; yea, more desolate than the wilderness toward Diblath, in all their habitations; and they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Moreover, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Thou son of man, thus saith the Lord Jehovah concerning the land of Israel:—
The end cometh, the end cometh, Upon the four corners of the land! Now cometh the end upon thee! For I will send my anger upon thee, And will judge thee according to thy ways, And will recompense upon thee all thine abominations.
And mine eye shall not spare thee, neither will I have pity; But I will recompense thy ways upon thee, And thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee; And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: An evil, an unheard-of evil, behold, it cometh!
The end cometh, the end cometh! It awaketh against thee, behold, it cometh!
Thy fate cometh upon thee, thou that dwellest in the land! The time is come, The day of tumult is near, When no sound of joy shall be upon the mountains.
Now will I shortly pour out my fury upon thee, And accomplish mine anger against thee; And I will judge thee according to thy ways, And recompense upon thee all thine abominations.
And mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity; I will recompense thee according to thy ways, And thine abominations shall come upon thee; And ye shall know that I, Jehovah, smite you.
Behold, the day, behold, it cometh! The destiny draweth near; The rod hath blossomed, pride hath flourished.
Violence is risen up into a rod of wickedness; None of them shall remain, none of their multitude, none of their crowd; Nor shall there be wailing for them.
The time cometh, the day draweth near! Let not the buyer rejoice, Nor the seller mourn; For wrath is against their whole multitude.
For the seller shall not return to that which is sold, Though he be yet alive; For the vision against their whole multitude shall not return void, And none that liveth in his iniquity shall strengthen himself
“Blow ye the trumpet, and let all be ready!” Yet none goeth to the battle; For mine anger is against their whole multitude.
The sword is without, and pestilence and famine within; He that is in the field shall die by the sword; And he that is in the city, famine and pestilence shall devour him.
And those of them that escape shall be upon the mountains like doves of the valleys, All of them mourning, every one for his iniquity.
All hands shall be feeble, And all knees shall flow with water.
They shall also gird themselves with sackcloth, And horror shall cover them. And upon all their faces shall be shame, And upon all their heads baldness.
Their silver shall they cast into the streets, And their gold shall be as an unclean thing. Their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them In the day of the wrath of Jehovah; Their hunger shall not be satisfied, Nor their body filled with it; For it was the stumbling-block of their iniquity.
For the beauty of their ornaments they turned into pride, And the images of their abominations and of their detestable things they made with it; Therefore will I make it to them as an unclean thing.
And I will give it into the hands of strangers for a prey, And to the wicked of the earth for a spoil, And they shall pollute it.
And I will turn my face from them, So that my secret place shall be polluted; Robbers shall enter into it, and pollute it.
Make a chain! For the land is full of blood-guiltiness, And the city is full of violence.
Therefore will I bring the most cruel among the nations, And they shall possess your houses; I will also make the pride of the strong to cease, And their holy places shall be defiled.
Destruction cometh; And they shall seek peace, and not find it.
Calamity shall come upon calamity, And rumor shall be upon rumor; And they shall seek a vision from the prophet in vain; Instruction shall perish from the priests, And counsel from the elders.
The king shall mourn, And the prince shall be clothed with amazement; And the hands of the people of the land shall be troubled. I will do to them according to their way, and according to their deserts will I judge them, And they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Now it came to pass in the sixth year, in the sixth month, on the fifth day of the month, as I sat in my house, and the elders of Judah sat before me, that the hand of the Lord Jehovah fell there upon me.
And I looked, and lo, a form having the appearance of fire; from the appearance of his loins downward, of fire; and from his loins upward, of a bright light, like the splendor of shining brass.
And he put forth the form of a hand, and took me by a lock of my head. And the spirit lifted me up between the earth and the heaven, and brought me, in the visions of God, to Jerusalem, to the door of the inner gate, that looketh toward the north, where stood the idol of jealousy, which provoketh to jealousy.
And behold, the glory of the God of Israel was there, according to the vision which I saw in the plain.
Then said he to me, Son of man, lift up thine eyes toward the north! And I lifted up my eyes toward the north, and behold, northward from the gate of the altar was this idol of jealousy, at the entrance.
And he said to me: Son of man, seest thou what they do? Great are the abominations which the house of Israel commit here, that I should go far off from my sanctuary. But thou shalt yet again see great abominations.
And he brought me to the door of the court, and I looked, and behold, a hole in the wall.
And he said to me, Son of man, break now through the wall. And when I had broken through the wall, behold, a door.
And he said to me, Go in, and behold the wicked abominations which they practise here.
So I went in and saw, and behold, every form of creeping things, and of abominable beasts, and all the idols of the house of Israel, portrayed upon the wall round about.
And there stood before them seventy men of the elders of the house of Israel, Jaazaniah, the son of Shaphan, standing in the midst of them, with every man his censer in his hand; and a thick cloud of incense went up.
Then said he to me: Son of man, seest thou what the elders of the house of Israel do in the dark, each one in his image-chamber? For they say, “Jehovah seeth us not; Jehovah hath forsaken the land.”
And he said to me, Thou shalt yet again see the great abominations which they practise.
Then he brought me to the entrance of the gate of the house of Jehovah, which was toward the north, and behold, there sat women, weeping for Thammuz.
And he said to me, Seest thou this, O son of man? Thou shalt yet again see greater abominations than these.
And he brought me into the inner court of the house of Jehovah, and behold, at the entrance of the temple of Jehovah, between the porch and the altar, were about five and twenty men, with their backs toward the temple of Jehovah, and their faces toward the east; and they bowed themselves eastward toward the sun.
And he said to me: Seest thou, O son of man? Is it a light thing to the house of Judah, that they commit the abominations which they commit here, that they fill the land with violence, and continually provoke me to anger? And behold, they put the blanch to their nostrils.
Therefore will I also deal with them in fury; mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity; and though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them.
He cried also, in my hearing, with a loud voice, saying: Bring ye near the punishments of the city, every one his weapon of destruction in his hand.
And lo, six men came from the way of the higher gate, which looketh toward the north, every one with his slaughter-weapon in his hand; and one man among them was clothed with linen, with a writer's ink-horn by his side; and they went in, and stood beside the brazen altar.
And the glory of the God of Israel went up from the cherub upon which it was to the threshold of the house; and he called to the man clothed with linen, who had the writer's ink-horn by his side;
and Jehovah said to him, Go through the midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and that wail for all the abominations that are done in the midst thereof.
And to the others he said, in my hearing, Go ye after him through the city, and smite! let not your eyes spare, neither have ye pity!
The old man, the youth, the virgin, little children and women, slay and destroy; but come not near any one upon whom is the mark; and begin at my sanctuary. Then began they at the elders that were before the house.
And he said to them, Pollute the house, and fill the courts with the slain, then go ye forth. And they went forth, and slew in the city.
And while they were smiting them, I alone was left; and I fell upon my face, and cried, and said, Ah, Lord Jehovah! wilt thou destroy all the remnant of Israel, while thou pourest out thy fury upon Jerusalem?
And he said to me: The iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah is exceedingly great, and the land is full of blood, and the city full of perverseness. For they say, “Jehovah hath forsaken the land”; and, “Jehovah seeth not.”
Therefore mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity. Their way will I recompense upon their head.
And lo, the man clothed with linen, who had the ink-horn by his side, returned answer, saying, I have done as thou hast commanded me.
Then I looked, and lo, in the firmament that was above the head of the cherubs there appeared over them as it were a sapphire-stone, in form like a throne;
and He spake to the man that was clothed with linen, and said, Go in between the wheels under the cherub, and fill thy hands with coals of fire, which are between the cherubs, and scatter them over the city. And he went in before my eyes.
Now the cherubs stood upon the right side of the house when the man went in; and the cloud filled the inner court.
And the glory of Jehovah was lifted up from the cherub to the threshold of the house; and the house was filled with the cloud, and the court was filled with the brightness of the glory of Jehovah.
And the sound of the wings of the cherubs was heard even to the outer court, as the voice of God, the Almighty, when he speaketh.
And when he commanded the man clothed with linen, saying, Take fire from between the wheels, from between the cherubs, he went in and stood beside the wheels.
And one cherub stretched forth his hand from between the cherubs to the fire that was between the cherubs, and took thereof, and put it into the hands of him that was clothed with linen, who took it, and went out.
And there was seen in the cherubs the form of a man's hand under their wings.
And when I looked, behold, four wheels were by the cherubs, one wheel by one cherub, and another wheel by another cherub; and the appearance of the wheels was like that of a chrysolite.
And as to their appearance, all four had one form, as if a wheel were in the midst of a wheel.
When they went, they went upon their four sides; they turned not about when they went; but to the place whither the head looked they followed it, they turned not about when they went.
And their whole body, and their backs, and their hands, and their wings, and the wheels, were full of eyes round about, even the wheels which they four had.
And as to these wheels, each one of them in my hearing was called Whirlwind.
And every one had four faces. The first face was the face of a cherub, and the second face was the face of a man, and the third the face of a lion, and the fourth the face of an eagle.
And the cherubs were lifted up. They were the living creatures which I saw by the river Chebar.
And when the cherubs went, the wheels went with them; and when the cherubs lifted up their wings to mount up from the earth, the wheels turned not away from their side.
When they stood, these stood; and when they were lifted up, these were liked up with them. For the spirit of the living creatures was in them.
Then the glory of Jehovah departed from the threshold of the house, and stood over the cherubs.
And the cherubs lifted up their wings, and mounted up from the earth in my sight, as they went out, and the wheels were beside them. And they stood at the entrance of the east gate of the house of Jehovah, and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.
They were the living creatures which I saw under the God of Israel by the river Chebar; and I knew that they were the cherubs.
Every one had four faces, and every one four wings, and the form of a man's hand was under their wings.
And as for the form of their faces, they were the faces which I saw by the river Chebar, their appearances and themselves. They went every one straight forward.
Then the spirit lifted me up, and brought me to the east gate of the house of Jehovah, that looketh toward the east; and behold, at the entrance of the gate were five and twenty men; among whom I saw Jaazaniah, the son of Azur, and Pelatiah, the son of Benaiah, princes of the people.
Then said He to me: These are the men that devise mischief, and form evil designs in this city;
who say, “The time is not near that we should build houses. This city is the caldron, and we are the flesh.”
Therefore, prophesy against them, prophesy, O son of man!
And the spirit of Jehovah fell upon me, and he said to me, Speak: Thus saith Jehovah: Thus have ye said, O house of Israel! For I know the things that come into your mind, every one of them.
Ye have multiplied your slain in this city, and ye have filled the streets thereof with the slain.
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Your slain, whom ye have laid in the midst of it, they are the flesh, and this city is the caldron; but you will I bring forth out of the midst of it.
Ye have feared the sword, and the sword will I bring upon you, saith the Lord Jehovah.
And I will bring you out of the midst thereof, and deliver you into the hands of strangers, and execute judgments upon you.
Ye shall fall by the sword; on the borders of Israel will I judge you, that ye may know that I am Jehovah.
This city shall not be your caldron, neither shall ye be the flesh in the midst thereof. On the borders of Israel will I judge you,
that ye may know that I am Jehovah, in whose statutes ye have not walked, and whose ordinances ye have not observed, but have done according to the manners of the nations, that are round about you.
And it came to pass, when I prophesied, that Pelatiah, the son of Benaiah, died. Then I fell down on my face, and cried with a loud voice, and said, Ah, Lord Jehovah, wilt thou make a full end of the remnant of Israel?
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, thy brethren, even thy brethren, the men of thy near kindred, and the whole house of Israel, are they to whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem say, “Remove ye far from Jehovah; to us is the land given in possession!”
Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Though I have cast them far off among the nations, and scattered them among the countries, yet I will be to them as a sanctuary for a short time in the countries whither they are come.
Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will gather you from the nations, and assemble you from the countries where ye have been scattered, and I will give you the land of Israel.
And they shall come thither, and they shall take away from thence all the detestable things thereof, and all the abominations thereof.
And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within them; and I will take out of them the heart of stone, and will give them a heart of flesh,
that they may walk in my statutes, and observe my ordinances, and keep them; and they shall be my people, and I will be their God.
But as for them whose heart walketh according to the pleasure of their detestable things and their abominations, I will recompense their way upon their heads, saith the Lord Jehovah.
Then did the cherubs lift up their wings, and the wheels were beside them; and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.
And the glory of Jehovah went up from the midst of the city, and stood upon the mountain which is on the east side of the city.
Then the spirit took me up, and brought me to Chaldaea, to them of the captivity, in vision, by the spirit of God. And the vision which I had seen went up from me.
Then I spake to them of the captivity all the words of Jehovah which he had showed me.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, thou dwellest in the midst of a rebellious house; they have eyes to see, and see not; they have ears to hear, and hear not; for they are a rebellious house.
Therefore, thou son of man, prepare thee stuff for removing from the land; and remove by day in their sight, and remove from thy place to another place before their eyes. It may be they will consider, though they be a rebellious house.
And carry forth thy stuff, as stuff for removing, by day in their sight, and go forth at even in their sight, as they that go forth into captivity.
Before their eyes break thou through the wall, and carry forth thereby.
In their sight bear it upon thy shoulders, and carry it forth in the twilight. Cover thy face, so that thou see not the ground; for I have made thee a sign to the house of Israel.
And I did as I was commanded, I carried forth my stuff, as stuff for removing from the land, by day; and in the evening I broke through the wall with my hand; I carried it forth in the twilight; I took it upon my shoulder before their eyes.
And the word of Jehovah came to me in the morning, and said:
Son of man, hath not the house of Israel, the rebellious house, said to thee, “What doest thou?”
Say to them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: This burden concerneth the prince in Jerusalem, and all the house of Israel that is therein.
Say, I am your sign. As I have done, so shall it be done to them. They shall remove and go into captivity.
And the prince that is among them shall bear upon his shoulder in the twilight, and shall go forth. They shall break through the wall to carry forth thereby; he shall cover his face, that he see not the ground with his eyes.
I will also spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare, and I will bring him to Babylon, into the land of the Chaldaeans; yet he shall not see it, though he shall die there.
And all that are round about him to help him, and all his bands, will I scatter to every wind; and I will draw out the sword after them.
And they shall know that I am Jehovah, when I shall disperse them among the nations, and scatter them in the countries.
But I will leave a few men of them from the sword, from the famine, and from the pestilence; that they may declare all their abominations among the heathen, whither they come; and they shall know that I am Jehovah.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, eat thy bread with quaking, and drink thy water with trembling and with carefulness;
and say to the people of the land: Thus saith the Lord Jehovah concerning the inhabitants of Jerusalem in the land of Israel; their bread shall they eat with carefulness, and their water shall they drink with astonishment; that their land may be desolate from all that is therein, because of the violence of them that dwell in it.
And the inhabited cities shall be laid waste, and the land shall be desolate, that ye may know that I am Jehovah.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, what meaneth that proverb which ye have in the land of Israel, saying, “The days are delayed, and every vision faileth”?
Therefore say to them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will make this proverb to cease, and they shall no more use it as a proverb in Israel. But say to them, The days are at hand, and what is declared in every vision.
For there shall be no longer any vain vision or deceptive divination within the house of Israel.
For I am Jehovah; I speak, and the word which I speak shall come to pass; it shall no more be delayed. In your own days, ye rebellious house, will I speak the word and perform it, saith the Lord Jehovah.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, behold, they of the house of Israel say, “The vision which he seeth is for many days to come, and he prophesieth of times that are far off.”
Therefore say to them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: There shall none of my words be deferred any more; what I speak shall be done, saith the Lord Jehovah.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel that prophesy, and say to them that prophesy out of their own hearts, Hear ye the word of Jehovah!
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Woe to the foolish prophets, that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing!
Thy prophets, O Israel, are like the foxes in the deserts.
Ye have not gone up into the breaches, nor built a wall around the house of Israel, to stand in battle in the day of Jehovah.
They see falsehood, and lying divination. They say, “Jehovah hath spoken,” when Jehovah hath not sent them; and they cause men to hope for the fulfilment of the word.
Have ye not seen a false vision, and have ye not spoken a lying divination, and said, “Jehovah hath spoken,” when I have not spoken?
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because ye have spoken falsehood and have seen a lie, therefore, behold, I am against you, saith the Lord Jehovah.
My hand shall be against the prophets that see falsehood and divine lies. They shall not be in the assembly of my people, neither shall they be written in the register of the house of Israel, neither shall they enter into the land of Israel: and ye shall know that I am the Lord Jehovah.
Because, yea, because they seduce my people, and say, “Peace!” when there is no peace; and one buildeth up a wall, and, behold, they daub it with untempered mortar;
say to them which daub it with untempered mortar, that it shall fall; there shall be an overflowing shower, and ye, O great hailstones, shall fall, and a stormy wind shall rend it.
So when the wall is fallen, shall not men say to you, “Where is the daubing wherewith ye have daubed it?”
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will even rend it with a stormy wind in my fury, and there shall be an overflowing shower in mine anger, and great hailstones in my fury to consume it.
Thus I will break down the wall which ye have daubed with untempered mortar, and will bring it down to the ground, so that the foundation thereof shall be discovered; it shall fall, and ye shall be consumed in the midst thereof, that ye may know that I am Jehovah.
Thus will I accomplish my fury upon the wall, and upon them that daubed it with untempered mortar; and I will say to you, The wall is no more, nor they that daubed it;
even the prophets of Israel, who prophesy concerning Jerusalem, and see visions of peace for her when there is no peace, saith the Lord Jehovah.
Likewise, son of man, set thou thy face against the daughters of thy people, who prophesy out of their own heart; and prophesy thou against them.
And say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Woe to the women that sew cushions for all elbows, and make pillows for heads of every stature, to ensnare men to destruction! Will ye hunt the lives of my people, and shall ye save your own?
And will ye pollute me among my people for handfuls of barley, and for pieces of bread, slaying them that should not die, and saving them alive that should not live, by lying to my people, who hearken to your lies?
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I will set myself against the cushions with which ye ensnare men to destruction, so that they shall escape you; and I will tear them from your arms, and make them free whom ye would ensnare, so that they shall escape you.
Your pillows also will I tear, and deliver my people out of your hand, and they shall no more be in your hand to be ensnared, and ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Because with lies ye have made sad the heart of the righteous, whom I have not made sad, and have strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, by promising him life;
therefore shall ye no more see falsehood, nor divine divinations; but I will deliver my people out of your hand, and ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Now certain men of the elders of Israel came to me, and sat before me.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, these men have set up their idols in their heart, and have put the stumbling-block of their iniquity before their face; shall I hear them when they inquire of me?
Therefore speak with them, and say to them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Every man of the house of Israel that setteth up his idols in his heart, and putteth the stumbling-block of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to the prophet,—I, Jehovah, will answer him according to the multitude of his idols;
that I may lay hold of the house of Israel in their hearts, because they are all estranged from me through their idols.
Therefore say to the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Turn ye, even turn yourselves from your idols, and from all your abominations turn ye your faces!
For every one of the house of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn in Israel, who separateth himself from me, and setteth up his idols in his heart, and putteth the stumbling-block of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to the prophet to inquire of me through him,—I, Jehovah, will answer him by myself.
And I will set my face against that man, and will make him a sign and a proverb, and will cut him off from the midst of my people; and ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
And when the prophet is deceived when he speaketh anything, I, Jehovah, have deceived that prophet; and I will stretch out my hand upon him, and will destroy him from the midst of my people Israel.
And they shall bear the punishment of their iniquity; the punishment of the prophet shall be even as the punishment of him that inquireth of him;
that the house of Israel may no more go astray from me, nor be polluted any more with all their transgressions; but that they may be my people, and I may be their God, saith the Lord Jehovah.
Again the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, when a land sinneth against me, and grievously transgresseth, and I stretch out my hand against it, and break the staff of its bread, and send famine upon it, and cut off from it man and beast,
though these three men were in it, Noah, Daniel, and Job, they should deliver only themselves by their righteousness, saith the Lord Jehovah.
When I cause wild beasts to pass through the land, and they spoil it, and it be desolate so that none passeth through it because of the beasts,
though these three men were in it, as I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, they should deliver neither sons nor daughters; they only should be delivered, but the land should be desolate.
Or when I bring a sword upon that land, and say, Sword, go through the land so that I cut off from it man and beast,
though these three men were in it, as I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, they should deliver neither sons nor daughters, but they only should be delivered themselves.
Or when I send a pestilence upon that land, and pour out my fury upon it in blood, to cut off from it man and beast,
though Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, as I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, they should deliver neither son nor daughter; they should deliver only themselves by their righteousness.
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: How much more, when I send my four grievous judgments against Jerusalem, the sword, and the famine, and the wild beast, and the pestilence, to cut off from it man and beast?
Yet behold, therein shall be left a remnant that shall be brought forth, sons and daughters. Behold, they shall come forth to you, and ye shall see their way and their doings, and ye shall be comforted concerning the evil which I have brought upon Jerusalem, even concerning all which I have brought upon her.
They shall comfort you, when ye see their ways and their doings; and ye shall know that not without cause I have done all that I have done to her, saith the Lord Jehovah.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, what is the wood of the vine more than any wood,—a branch, that is among the trees of the forest?
Shall wood be taken from it to be wrought into any work? Or will men take a pin of it to hang a vessel upon?
Behold, it is cast into the fire for fuel; the fire devoureth both the ends of it, and the middle of it is burned. Is it then fit for any work?
Behold, when it was whole, nothing could be made of it; how much less can anything be made of it when the fire hath devoured it and it is burned!
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: As the wood of the vine among the trees of the forest, which I have given to the fire for fuel, so will I give to it the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
And I will set my face against them; they shall go out from one fire, and another fire shall devour them; and ye shall know that I am Jehovah, when I set my face against them.
And I will make the land desolate, because they have grievously trespassed, saith the Lord Jehovah.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations,
and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah to Jerusalem: Thine origin and thy nativity were of the land of Canaan. Thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother a Hittite.
And as to thy nativity, in the day thou wast born thy navel was not cut, neither wast thou washed in water so as to be cleansed. Thou wast not sprinkled with salt, nor wrapped in swaddling-clothes.
No eye pitied thee, to do to thee any of these things, to have compassion upon thee; but thou wast cast out into the open field, so as to loathe thyself, on the day thou wast born.
And when I passed by thee, and saw thee in danger of being trodden under foot in thy blood, I said to thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live! yea, I said to thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live!
I caused thee to increase like the plant of the field, and thou didst grow, and become tall, and didst attain to distinguished charms. Thy breasts swelled, and thy hair grew, whereas thou wast naked and bare.
And when I passed by thee, and saw thee, behold, it was thy time, the time of love. And I spread my skirt over thee and covered thy nakedness; and I swore to thee, and entered into covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine.
Then I washed thee with water, yea, I thoroughly washed away thy blood from thee, and I anointed thee with oil.
I clothed thee also with broidered work, and gave thee shoes of seal's skin, and wrapped thee about with fine linen, and covered thee with silk.
And I decked thee with ornaments, and put bracelets upon thy hands, and a chain upon thy neck.
And I put a jewel in thy nostril, and ear-rings in thine ears, and a beautiful crown upon thy head.
Thus wast thou adorned with gold and silver, and thy raiment was of fine linen, and silk, and broidered work. Fine flour and honey and oil didst thou eat; and thou wast exceedingly beautiful, and didst prosper so as to become a queen.
And thy renown went forth among the nations for thy beauty; for it was perfect through my comeliness, which I had put upon thee, saith the Lord Jehovah.
But thou didst trust in thy beauty, and didst play the harlot because of thy renown, and didst lavish thy fornications on every one that passed by; his was it.
And of thy garments thou didst take, and didst make thee high places, spread with divers colors, and didst play the harlot thereon, the like things to which shall not come to pass, neither shall they be.
Thou didst take also thy fair jewels of my gold and my silver, which I gave thee, and didst make to thyself images of men, and didst commit fornication with them;
and thou didst take thy broidered garments and cover them; and thou didst set mine oil and mine incense before them.
My food also, which I gave thee, fine flour and oil and honey, wherewith I fed thee, thou didst set it before them with a sweet savor; even thus it was, saith the Lord Jehovah.
Moreover thou didst take thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou didst bear to me, and these didst thou sacrifice to them to be devoured. Was it not enough for thee to commit fornication,
that thou didst slay my children, and deliver them up to cause them to pass through the fire to them?
And in all thine abominations and thy fornications, thou didst not remember the days of thy youth, when thou wast naked and bare, and in danger of being trampled under foot in thy blood.
And it came to pass, after all thy wickedness, (woe, woe to thee! saith the Lord Jehovah,)
that thou didst build for thee an arched place, and make thee a high place in every street;
at every head of the way didst thou build thy high place, and didst make thy beauty to be abhorred, and didst open thy feet to every one that passed by, and didst multiply thy fornications.
Thou hast also committed fornication with the Egyptians, thy neighbors, having great members, and hast multiplied thy fornications to provoke me to anger.
Therefore, behold, I have stretched out my hand against thee, and have diminished thine allowance, and delivered thee to the will of them that hate thee, the daughters of the Philistines, who are ashamed of thy lewd way.
Thou hast also committed fornication with the Assyrians, because thou wast insatiable; yea, thou hast played the harlot with them, and yet couldst not be satisfied.
Thou hast also multiplied thy fornication with the land of Canaan, even to Chaldaea; and yet wast thou not satisfied therewith.
How faint was thy heart, saith the Lord Jehovah, that thou didst all those things which an imperious whorish wife doeth,
in that thou didst build thine arched place at the head of every way, and make thy high place in every street! Thou wast not like a harlot, who scoffeth at her hire,
but as an adulterous wife, that taketh strangers instead of her husband.
To all women that commit fornication men give a reward; but thou gavest thy gifts to all thy lovers, and hiredst them to come to thee from every side to commit fornication with thee.
Thou wast the reverse of other women in thy fornications. None followed after thee to commit fornication, but thou gavest the reward, and no reward was given thee,—therefore thou wast the reverse.
Wherefore, O harlot, hear the word of Jehovah!
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because thy treasure was poured out, and thy nakedness discovered for fornication before thy lovers, and all thine abominable idols, and because of the blood of thy children, which thou didst give to them,
therefore, behold, I will gather all thy lovers, to whom thou wast pleasing, all them that thou hast loved, with all them that thou hast hated, I will gather them against thee round about, and will uncover thy nakedness to them, that they may see all thy nakedness.
And I will judge thee as women that break wedlock and shed blood are judged, and I will cause thy blood to flow in fury and jealousy.
And I will give thee into their hand, and they shall throw down thine arched place, and break down thy high places. They shall also strip thee of thy clothes, and leave thee naked and bare.
They shall also bring up a company against thee, and they shall stone thee with stones, and thrust thee through with their swords;
and they shall burn thine houses with fire, and execute judgments upon thee in the sight of many women; and I will cause thee to cease from playing the harlot, and thou shalt give hire no more.
So will I make my fury toward thee to rest, and my jealousy shall depart from thee; and I will be quiet, and will be no more angry.
Because thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, but hast raged against me in all these things, therefore I also will recompense thy way upon thy head, saith the Lord Jehovah, so that thou shalt not commit this wickedness in addition to all thy abominations.
Behold, all they that use proverbs shall utter this proverb concerning thee: “As the mother, so the daughter.”
Thou art the daughter of thy mother, that loathed her husband and her children; and thou art the sister of thy sisters, that loathed their husbands and their children; your mother was a Hittite, and your father an Amorite.
And thine elder sister is Samaria, with her daughters, that dwelleth at thy left hand; and thy younger sister, that dwelleth at thy right hand, is Sodom, with her daughters.
Yet thou hast not walked in their ways, nor done according to their abominations: that was disdained by you, as a very little thing; thou hast been more corrupt than they in all thy ways.
As I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, Sodom, thy sister, hath not done, she nor her daughters, as thou hast done, thou and thy daughters.
Behold, this was the iniquity of Sodom, thy sister: in pride, superabundance, and careless ease did she live, she and her daughters, and the hand of the poor and needy she did not strengthen;
and they were haughty, and committed abomination before me; therefore I took them away when I saw it.
Neither hath Samaria committed half of thy sins; but thou hast multiplied thine abominations more than they, and hast justified thy sisters in all thine abominations which thou hast done.
Now, therefore, bear thou thy shame, to which thou hast condemned thy sisters, since by thy sins which thou hast committed, more abominable than they, they are more righteous than thou. Yea, be thou confounded and bear thy shame, in that thou hast justified thy sisters.
Yet I will bring them back from their captivity, even Sodom and her daughters from their captivity, and Samaria and her daughters from their captivity; thee also will I bring back from thy captivity in the midst of them;
that thou mayst bear thy shame, and mayst be confounded on account of all which thou hast done, in that thou art a comfort to them.
And thy sisters, Sodom and her daughters, shall return to their former estate, and Samaria and her daughters shall return to their former estate, and thou and thy daughters shall return to your former estate.
And yet Sodom, thy sister, was not mentioned by thy mouth in the day of thy pride
before thy wickedness was discovered, as in the time of thy reproach from the daughters of Syria, and from all that were round about her, and from the daughters of the Philistines, who despised thee round about.
Thy wickedness and thine abominations must thou now bear, saith the Lord Jehovah.
For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will do to thee as thou hast done, who hast despised the oath and hast broken the covenant.
But I will remember my covenant with thee in the days of thy youth, and I will establish with thee an everlasting covenant.
Then shalt thou remember thy ways, and be ashamed, when thou shalt receive thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger, and I shall give them to thee for daughters, but not by thy observance of thy covenant.
But I will establish my covenant with thee, and thou shalt know that I am Jehovah;
that thou mayst remember and be confounded, and not open thy mouth any more for shame, when I forgive thee all which thou hast done, saith the Lord Jehovah.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, put forth a riddle, and speak a parable to the house of Israel;
and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: A great eagle, with great wings, with long feathers, full of plumage, which had divers colors, came to Lebanon, and took the highest branch of a cedar.
He cropped off the top of its young twigs, and carried it into a land of traffic; he set it in a city of merchants.
He took also one of the shoots of the land, and put it in a fruitful field; he placed it by great waters, and set it as a willow-tree.
And it grew and became a spreading vine of low stature, whose branches turned towards him, and whose roots were under him. It became a vine, that brought forth branches, and shot forth boughs.
There was also another great eagle, with great wings and many feathers; and, behold, this vine bent its roots toward him, and shot forth its branches toward him, that he might water it from the beds where it was planted.
And yet it was planted in a good soil, by great waters, that it might bring forth branches, and that it might bear fruit, and be a goodly vine.
Say thou, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Shall it prosper? Shall not he pull up its roots, and cut off its fruit, that it wither? In all the leaves of its branching shall it wither; even without a mighty arm, or many people, shall he pluck it up by the roots.
Yea, behold, it is planted; but shall it prosper? Shall it not utterly wither, when the east wind toucheth it? It shall wither in the beds where it grew.
Moreover, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Say now to the rebellious house, Know ye not what these things mean? Say, behold, the king of Babylon came to Jerusalem, and took her king and her princes, and led them with him to Babylon,
and took one of the king's offspring, and made a covenant with him, and took an oath of him, and the mighty of the land he took away,
that the kingdom might be brought low, so as not to lift itself up; that the covenant might be kept, and stand.
But he rebelled against him, in sending his ambassadors into Egypt, that they might give him horses and much people. Shall he prosper? Shall he escape that doeth such things? Shall he break the covenant and be delivered?
As I live saith the Lord Jehovah, surely in the place where the king dwelleth that made him king, whose oath he despised, and whose covenant he broke, even with him in the midst of Babylon shall he die.
Neither shall Pharaoh with his mighty army and great multitude accomplish anything for him in war, when they shall cast up mounds, and build forts to cut off many persons,
he hath despised the oath, and broken the covenant; behold, he hath given the hand, and yet done all these things; he shall not escape!
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: As I live, surely mine oath, which he hath despised, and my covenant, which he hath broken, will I recompense upon his own head.
And I will spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare, and I will bring him to Babylon, and will contend with him there for his trespass which he hath committed against me.
And all his fugitives with all his hosts shall fall by the sword, and they that remain shall be scattered to all the winds; and ye shall know that I, Jehovah, have spoken it.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I also will take from the top of the high cedar, and will get it; and from the highest of its twigs will I crop a tender one, and plant it upon a high and lofty mountain.
Upon a high mountain of Israel will I plant it, and it shall bring forth boughs, and bear fruit, and be a goodly cedar; and under it shall dwell birds of every wing; in the shadow of its branches shall they dwell.
And all the trees of the field shall know that I, Jehovah, have brought down the high tree, and exalted the low tree; that I have dried up the green tree, and made the dry tree green. I, Jehovah, have spoken, and will do it.
The word of Jehovah came to me again, saying:
What mean ye, that ye use this proverb concerning the land of Israel, saying, “The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge”?
As I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, ye shall not have occasion any more to use this proverb in Israel.
Behold, all souls are mine; as the soul of the father, so also the soul of the son, is mine; the soul that sinneth, it shall die.
But if a man be just, and do that which is lawful and right;
if he eat not upon the mountains, and lift not up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, and defile not his neighbor's wife, and come not near a woman during her uncleanness;
if he oppress not any, if he restore to the debtor his pledge, spoil none by violence, give his bread to the hungry, and cover the naked with a garment;
if he give not forth upon usury, and take not increase; if he withdraw his hand from iniquity, and give true judgment between man and man;
if he walk in my statutes and keep my commandments, to deal uprightly,—he is just; he shall surely live, saith the Lord Jehovah.
But if he have a son that is a robber, a shedder of blood, and that doeth to his brother any of these things,
and doeth not all those duties, but eateth upon the mountains, and defileth his neighbor's wife,
oppresseth the poor and needy, spoileth by violence, restoreth not the pledge, lifteth up his eyes to idols, and committeth abomination,
giveth forth upon usury, and taketh increase, shall he live? No! he shall not live. He hath done all these abominations; he shall surely die; his blood shall be upon him.
Yet lo, if he have a son that seeth all the sins which his father committed, that seeth them and doeth not such like,
that eateth not upon the mountains, nor lifteth up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, nor defileth his neighbor's wife,
nor oppresseth any, nor taketh a pledge, nor spoileth by violence, but giveth his food to the hungry, and covereth the naked with a garment,
keepeth back his hand from the poor, and taketh no usury or increase, keepeth my commandments, and walketh in my statutes, he shall not die for the iniquity of his father; he shall surely live.
As for his father, because he cruelly oppressed, spoiled his brother by violence, and did that which is not good among his people, lo, he shall die for his iniquity.
Yet say ye, “Why? Doth not the son bear the iniquity of the father?” When the son doeth that which is lawful and right, keepeth all my statutes and doeth them, he shall surely live.
The soul that sinneth, it shall die. The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son. The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.
But if the wicked will turn from all his sins which he hath committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die.
None of his transgressions which he hath committed shall be remembered unto him; for his righteousness, which he hath done, he shall live.
Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die, saith the Lord Jehovah, and not that he should turn from his ways and live?
But when the righteous turneth from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and doeth according to all the abominations which the wicked man doeth, shall he live? All his righteousness which he hath done shall not be remembered; for his trespass which he hath trespassed, and for his sin which he hath sinned, for them shall he die.
Yet ye say, “The way of the Lord is not right.” Hear now, O house of Israel! “Is not my way right?” Is it not your ways that are not right?
When a righteous man turneth from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and on this account dieth, for his iniquity which he hath done doth he die.
And when the wicked man turneth from his iniquity which he hath committed, and doeth that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive.
Because he considereth and turneth from all his transgressions which he hath committed, he shall surely live, he shall not die.
Yet saith the house of Israel, “The way of the Lord is not right.” O house of Israel, are not my ways right? Is it not your ways that are not right?
Therefore I will judge you, O house of Israel, every one according to his ways, saith the Lord Jehovah. Turn ye, turn yourselves from all your transgressions, so that iniquity may not be your ruin.
Cast away from you all your transgressions which ye have committed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit! For why will ye die, O house of Israel?
For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord Jehovah. Wherefore turn yourselves and live!
Moreover, take thou up a lamentation for the princes of Israel,
and say:—How lay thy mother at ease, a lioness among lions! Among young lions she nourished her whelps;
And she brought up one of her whelps; He became a young lion, And he learned to seize the prey; he devoured men.
And when the nations heard of him, he was taken in their pit, And they brought him with nose-rings to the land of Egypt.
And when she saw that she waited in vain, and that her hope was lost, She took another of her whelps, and she made him a young lion.
And he went up and down among the lions; he became a young lion, And he learned to seize the prey; he devoured men.
He knew their widows, and laid waste their cities, And the land was desolate, and all that was therein, before the voice of his roaring.
Then the nations set themselves against him on every side from the provinces, And spread their net over him; He was taken in their pit.
And they put him with nose rings into a cage, And carried him to the king of Babylon. And they carried him to a stronghold, That his voice might be heard no more Upon the mountains of Israel.
Thy mother was like a vine planted like thyself by the waters; She was fruitful and full of branches by reason of many waters;
She had strong rods for sceptres of rulers, And her stature was high among the thick branches, So that she was conspicuous in her height, And the multitude of her branches.
But she was plucked up in fury, She was cast down to the ground, And the east wind dried up her fruit. Her strong rods were broken and withered; The fire consumed them.
And now she is planted in the desert, In a dry and thirsty land.
And a fire is gone forth out of a rod of her branches, Which hath devoured her fruit, So that she hath no strong rod for a ruler's sceptre. This is a lamentation, and it shall be for a lamentation.
And it came to pass in the seventh year, in the fifth month, on the tenth day of the month, that certain of the elders of Israel came to inquire of Jehovah, and sat before me.
Then came the word of Jehovah to me, saying:
Son of man, speak to the elders of Israel, and say to them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Are ye come to inquire of me? As I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, I will not be inquired of by you.
Punish them, punish them, son of man, cause them to know the abominations of their fathers, and say to them,
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: At the time when I chose Israel, I lifted up my hand to the race of the house of Jacob, and made myself known to them in the land of Egypt; I lifted up my hand to them, and said, I am Jehovah, your God.
At that time I lifted up my hand to them, that I would bring them forth out of the land of Egypt, into a land which I had looked out for them, flowing with milk and honey, the glory of all lands.
And I said to them, Cast ye away from you every one the abomination of his eyes, and defile not yourselves with the idols of Egypt! I am Jehovah, your God.
But they rebelled against me, and would not hearken to me; they did not cast away every one the abominations of his eyes, neither did they forsake the idols of Egypt. Then I said that I would pour out my fury upon them, that I would accomplish mine anger against them in the midst of the land of Egypt.
But I acted for my name's sake, that it might not be polluted in the sight of the nations, in the midst of whom they were; and before their eyes I made myself known to them, in bringing them forth out of the land of Egypt.
And I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, and led them into the wilderness.
And I gave them my statutes, and made known to them my laws, through which the man that keepeth them shall live.
Also I gave them my sabbaths, that they might be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I, Jehovah, sanctify them.
But the house of Israel rebelled against me in the desert; they walked not in my statutes, and they despised my laws, through which the man that keepeth them shall live, and my sabbaths they greatly polluted. Then I said that I would pour out my fury upon them in the desert, to consume them.
But I acted for my name's sake, that it might not be polluted before the nations, in whose sight I brought them forth.
Yet I lifted up my hand to them in the desert, that I would not bring them into the land which I had given them, flowing with milk and honey, the beauty of all lands;
because they despised my laws, and walked not in my statutes, but polluted my sabbaths; for their heart went after their idols.
Nevertheless mine eye spared them, so that I did not destroy them; neither did I make an end of them in the desert.
And I said to their sons in the desert, Walk ye not in the statutes of your fathers, neither observe their ordinances, nor defile yourselves with their idols!
I am Jehovah, your God; walk in my statutes, and keep my ordinances, and do them.
And hallow my sabbaths, that they may be a sign between me and you, that ye may know that I am Jehovah, your God.
But the sons rebelled against me; they walked not in my statutes, neither kept they my ordinances to do them, through which the man that doeth them shall live, and they polluted my sabbaths. Then I said that I would pour out my fury upon them, and accomplish mine anger upon them in the desert.
Nevertheless I held back my hand, and acted for my name's sake, that it should not be polluted before the nations, in whose sight I brought them forth.
I also lifted up my hand against them in the desert, that I would scatter them among the nations, and disperse them through the countries,
because they did not observe mine ordinances, but despised my statutes, and polluted my sabbaths, and their eyes were after the idols of their fathers.
Moreover I gave them statutes that were not good, and ordinances by which they should not live.
And I polluted them in their offerings, in that they caused every first-born child to pass through the fire, that I might destroy them, to the end that they might know that I am Jehovah.
Therefore speak to the house of Israel, O son of man, and say to them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Yet in this your fathers dishonored me, and trespassed against me.
For when I had brought them into the land concerning which I lifted up my hand, that I would give it to them, then they saw every high hill, and all the thick tree's, and there they offered their sacrifices, and there they presented their provoking oblation, and there they brought their sweet savor, and there they poured out their drink-offerings.
Then I said to them, What is the high place to which ye go? And it is called The High Place unto this day.
Therefore say to the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Are ye polluted after the manner of your fathers, and do ye commit fornication according to their abominations,
and by offering your gifts, and causing your sons to pass through the fire,—are ye polluted with all your idols even to this day, and shall I be inquired of by you, O house of Israel? As I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, I will not be inquired of by you!
And that which cometh into your mind shall not come to pass, when ye say, “We will be as the nations, as the families of the countries, worshipping wood and stone.”
As I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, surely with a mighty hand, and with a stretched out arm, and with fury poured out will I rule over you.
And I will bring you forth from the nations, and gather you from the countries, wherein ye are scattered, with a mighty hand, and with a stretched out arm, and with fury poured out.
And I will bring you into the desert of the nations, and there will I contend with you face to face.
Even as I contended with your fathers in the desert of the land of Egypt, so also will I contend with you, saith the Lord Jehovah.
And I will cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you into the bond of the covenant.
And I will purge out from among you the rebels, and them that transgress against me; out of the country where they sojourn will I bring them forth, but they shall not enter into the land of Israel; and ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
As for you, O house of Israel, thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Go ye, serve ye every one his idols in future also, if ye will not obey me! But pollute ye my holy name no more with your gifts and your idols!
For upon my holy mountain, upon the lofty mountain of Israel, there shall all the house of Israel, all that are in the land, serve me; there will I accept them, and there will I require your offerings, and the first fruits of your oblations, with all things which ye consecrate to me.
I will accept you as a sweet savor, when I bring you forth from the nations, and gather you from the countries, wherein ye have been scattered, and will through you be honored before the eyes of the nations.
And ye shall know that I am Jehovah, when I bring you into the land of Israel, into the country concerning which I lifted up my hand, that I would give it to your fathers.
And there shall ye remember your ways, and all your doings, wherein ye have been polluted; and ye shall loathe yourselves for all your evil deeds which ye have committed.
And ye shall know that I am Jehovah, when I deal with you for my name's sake, not according to your evil ways, nor according to your corrupt doings, O ye house of Israel, saith the Lord Jehovah.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, set thy face toward the south, and drop thy word against the South, and prophesy against the forest of the field in the South;
and say to the forest of the South, Hear the word of Jehovah! Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I will kindle in thee a fire, which shall devour every green tree and every dry tree within thee; the fierce flame shall not be quenched, and all parts from the south to the north shall be burned therein.
And all flesh shall see that I, Jehovah, have kindled it; it shall not be quenched.
And I said, Ah, Lord Jehovah, they say of me, “Doth he not speak in parables?”
Then came the word of Jehovah to me, saying:
Son of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem, and drop thy word toward the holy places, and prophesy against the land of Israel,
and say to the land of Israel, Thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, and I will draw forth my sword out of its sheath, and will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked.
Seeing then that I cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked, therefore shall my sword go forth out of its sheath against all flesh from the south to the north.
And all flesh shall know that I, Jehovah, have drawn forth my sword out of its sheath; it shall not return any more.
Thou, therefore, O son of man, sigh! With the breaking of thy loins, and with bitterness, sigh before their eyes!
And when they shall say to thee, “Wherefore sighest thou?” thou shalt say, “For the rumor, because it cometh; and every heart shall melt, and all hands shall be feeble, and every spirit shall fail, and all knees shall flow with water. Behold it cometh, it shall be brought to pass, saith the Lord Jehovah.”
Also the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, prophesy, and say, Thus saith Jehovah: Say, The sword, the sword is sharpened and furbished.
It is sharpened, that it may make sore slaughter; it is furbished that it may glitter. Or shall we make mirth? The staff of my son despiseth every rod.
And he gave it to be furbished that it might be handled. The sword is sharpened and furbished, to be given into the hand of the slayer.
Cry and howl, son of man! for it cometh upon my people, upon all the princes of Israel. They are given up to the sword with my people. Therefore smite upon thy thigh.
The trial is made. And what if even the contemning staff should be no more? saith the Lord Jehovah.
Thou, therefore, son of man, prophesy, and smite thine hands together! for twice, yea thrice, cometh the sword, a sword of slaughter, a sword of great slaughter, that besetteth them on every side.
That their hearts may faint, and their overthrown may be multiplied, I have set the terror of the sword against all their gates. Ah, how is it made to glitter, polished for slaughter!
Unite thyself, smite to the right, prepare thyself, smite to the left, whithersoever thine edge is turned!
I also will smite my hands together, and cause mine anger to cease. I, Jehovah, have spoken it.
The word of Jehovah came to me again, saying:
Do thou, son of man, appoint thee two ways by which the sword of the king of Babylon may come; from one land shall both of them come; and choose thou a place, choose it at the head of the way to the city.
Appoint a way, that the sword may come towards Rabbath of the sons of Ammon, and towards Judah, to Jerusalem, the fenced city.
For the king of Babylon shall stand at the parting of the way, at the head of the two ways, to use divination; he shall shake together his arrows, he shall consult the teraphim, he shall look at the liver.
In his right hand shall be the lot: Jerusalem, to set battering-rams, to open the mouth with the war-cry, to lift up the voice in shouting, to set battering-rams against the gates, to cast up a mound, to build a tower.
And this shall appear a false divination in their sight, because they swore oaths to them. But he shall call to remembrance their iniquity, that they may be taken.
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because ye make your iniquity to be remembered, in that your transgressions are discovered, so that in all your doings your sins do appear,—because, I say, ye bring yourselves into remembrance, ye shall be taken with that hand.
And thou, profane, wicked prince of Israel, whose day cometh in the time when iniquity bringeth destruction!
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will remove the diadem, and take away the crown! This shall no more be this. I exalt him that is low, and abase him that is high.
I will destroy, destroy, destroy it; and it shall be no more until he come to whom the right belongeth, and to whom I will give it.
And thou, son of man, prophesy, and say: Thus saith the Lord Jehovah concerning the sons of Ammon and their scorn; even say thou, The sword, the sword is drawn; to slay, to consume, is it furbished, so that it glittereth;
while they see deceit for thee, and prophesy falsehood, that it may bring thee to the necks of the wicked that are slain, whose day cometh in the time when iniquity bringeth destruction.
Return the sword into its sheath! In the place where thou wast created, in the land of thy nativity, I will judge thee,
and I will pour upon thee my indignation, I will blow upon thee in the fire of my wrath, and deliver thee into the hands of brutal men, skilful to destroy.
Thou shalt be fuel for the fire; thy blood shall be in the midst of the land; men shall no more remember thee. I, Jehovah, have spoken it.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Punish, punish, son of man, the city of blood, and show her all her abominations, and say,
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: O city that sheddest blood in the midst of thee, that thy time may come, and makest idols to defile thyself!
Through the blood which thou sheddest thou bringest guilt upon thyself, and through the idols which thou makest thou pollutest thyself, and thou causest thy days to draw near, and comest to thy years. Therefore do I make thee a reproach to the nations, and a derision to all countries.
Those that are near, and those that are far from thee, shall mock thee as infamous, full of confusion.
Behold the princes of Israel are engaged every one according to his strength within thee to shed blood.
In thee they set light by father and mother; in thee are they guilty of oppression to the stranger; in thee do they oppress the fatherless and the widow.
Thou hast despised my holy things, and profaned my sabbaths.
In thee are men who carry tales, that they may shed blood; in thee do they eat upon the mountains; in the midst of thee do they commit lewdness.
In thee doth the son uncover the father's nakedness; in thee do they lie with a woman in her uncleanness.
And one committeth abomination with his neighbor's wife; and another, with incestuous lewdness, defileth his daughter-in-law; and in thee another lieth with his sister, his father's daughter.
In thee do they take a reward to shed blood. Thou takest usury and increase, and thou hast enriched thyself from thy neighbor by extortion, and hast forgotten me, saith the Lord Jehovah.
Therefore, behold, I have smitten my hands together at thy dishonest gain which thou hast made, and at the blood which hath been shed in the midst of thee.
Can thy heart endure, or can thy hands be strong, in the day when I shall deal with thee? I, Jehovah, have spoken it, and will do it.
I will scatter thee among the nations, and disperse thee in the countries, and will consume thine impurity out of thee;
and thou shalt through thyself be profaned before the eyes of the nations, and thou shalt know that I am Jehovah.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, the house of Israel is become dross to me; all of them are brass, and tin, and iron, and lead, in the midst of the furnace; they are the dross of silver.
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because ye are all of you become dross, therefore, behold, I will gather you into the midst of Jerusalem.
As men gather silver, and brass, and iron, and lead, and tin, into the midst of the furnace, to blow the fire upon it, to melt it, so will I gather you in my anger and in my fury, and I will place you there and melt you.
Yea, I will gather you, and blow upon you with the fire of my wrath, and ye shall be melted in the midst thereof.
As silver is melted in the midst of the furnace, so shall ye be melted in the midst thereof; and ye shall know that I, Jehovah, have poured out my fury upon you.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, say to her, Thou art a land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of indignation.
There is a conspiracy of her prophets in the midst of her; like a roaring lion tearing the prey, they devour the lives of men; they take possession of treasures, and precious things, and make many widows in the midst of her.
Her priests violate my law, and profane my holy things. They make no distinction between the holy and profane, and show not the difference between the clean and the unclean; and they hide their eyes from my sabbaths, and I am profaned among them.
Her princes in the midst of her are like wolves tearing the prey. They shed blood, they destroy life, that they may get gain.
Her prophets daub for them with untempered mortar, seeing falsehood, and divining to them, saying, “Thus saith the Lord Jehovah,” when Jehovah hath not spoken.
The people of the land are guilty of oppression, and practise robbery, and distress the poor and needy; yea, they oppress the stranger, and have no justice.
I have sought for a man among them that should make a wall, and stand in the gap before me for the land, that I might not destroy it; but I found none.
Therefore will I pour out my indignation upon them; I will consume them with the fire of my wrath; I will bring their way upon their heads, saith the Lord Jehovah.
The word of Jehovah came to me again, saying:
Son of man, there were two women, daughters of one mother;
and they committed fornication in Egypt; in their youth they committed fornication. There they allowed their breasts to be pressed, and their virgin teats to be handled.
Their names were Aholah, the elder, and Aholibah, her sister; and they became mine, and bore sons and daughters; as to their names, moreover, Aholah is Samaria, and Aholibah, Jerusalem.
And Aholah played the harlot when she was mine; and she doted on her lovers, on the Assyrians, her neighbors
who were clothed with blue, captains and rulers, all of them desirable young men, horsemen, riding on horses.
Thus she committed fornication with them, with all the choice young men of Assyria, and with all on whom she doted; with all their idols she defiled herself.
Neither forsook she her whoredoms brought from Egypt; for they lay with her in her youth, and handled the breasts of her virginity, and poured their fornication upon her.
Wherefore I delivered her into the hand of her lovers, into the hand of the Assyrians, upon whom she doted.
These uncovered her nakedness; they took her sons and her daughters, and slew her with the sword; and she became famous among women, when they had executed judgment upon her.
And her sister, Aholibah, saw this, but she was more corrupt in her inordinate love than she, and in her whoredoms more than her sister in her whoredoms.
She doted upon the Assyrians, her neighbors, prefects and rulers clothed most gorgeously, horsemen riding upon horses, all of them desirable young men.
Then I saw that she was defiled; that they both took one way.
But she added to her whoredoms; for she saw men portrayed upon the wall, images of Chaldaeans portrayed with vermilion,
girded with girdles upon their loins, and having long mitres hanging down from their heads, in their appearance all of them princes, after the manner of the sons of Babylon, of Chaldaea, the land of their nativity;
and as soon as she cast her eyes upon them, she doted on them, and sent messengers to them into Chaldaea.
And the sons of Babylon came to her into the bed of love, and they defiled her with their whoredoms, and she was polluted with them. She then became alienated from them.
So she discovered her fornications, and discovered her nakedness. Then my mind was alienated from her, as it had been alienated from her sister.
For she multiplied her whoredoms in calling to remembrance the days of her youth, wherein she played the harlot in the land of Egypt;
for she doted on their paramours, whose members were as the members of asses, and whose issue was as the issue of horses.
Thus thou calledst to remembrance the lewdness of thy youth, when thy teats were handled by the Egyptians, on account of the paps of thy youth.
Therefore, O Aholibah, thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I will raise up against thee thy lovers, from whom thou art alienated, and I will bring them against thee on every side,
the Babylonians and all the Chaldaeans, prefects, rich men, and nobles, and all the Assyrians with them, all of them desirable young men, prefects and rulers, captains and men of renown, all of them riding upon horses.
And they shall come against thee with arms, chariots and wheels, and with hosts of people; with buckler and shield and helmet shall they set themselves against thee on every side. And I will commit to them judgment, and they shall punish thee according to their punishments.
And I will set my jealousy against thee, and they shall deal with thee in fury; they shall take away thy nose and thine ears, and thy posterity shall fall by the sword. They shall take away thy sons and thy daughters, and thy posterity shall be consumed with fire.
They shall also strip thee of thy garments, and take away thy fair jewels.
Thus will I make thy lewdness to cease from thee, and thy whoredom brought from the land of Egypt, so that thou shalt not lift thine eyes to them, nor remember Egypt any more.
For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I will deliver thee into the hand of them whom thou hatest, into the hand of them from whom thou art alienated.
And they shall deal with thee in hatred, and take away all the fruits of thy labor from thee, and shall leave thee naked and bare; and thy nakedness shall be uncovered, with which thou hast committed lewdness and fornication and foul whoredom.
These things will I do to thee, because thou hast committed whoredom with the nations, and hast been polluted with their idols.
Thou hast walked in the way of thy sister, therefore will I give her cup into thy hand.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Thou shalt drink of thy sister's cup, which is deep and large; it shall make thee a laughing-stock and a derision, for it containeth much.
Thou shalt be filled with drunkenness and sorrow. A cup of astonishment and amazement is the cup of thy sister Samaria.
Thou shalt even drink it and suck it out, and lick the sherds, and thou shalt tear thy breasts. For I have spoken it, saith the Lord Jehovah.
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because thou hast forgotten me, and cast me behind thy back, therefore bear thou thy lewdness and thy whoredoms.
Moreover, Jehovah said to me, Son of man, punish Aholah and Aholibah; yea, declare to them their abominations;
that they have committed adultery, and blood is upon their hands, and that with their idols they have committed adultery, and have also caused their sons, whom they bore to me, to pass through the fire to them for food.
This also have they done to me: they have defiled my sanctuary in the same day, and have profaned my sabbaths.
For when they had slain their children to their idols, then they came into my sanctuary the same day to profane it; behold, thus have they done in my house.
Yea, ye sent for men to come from afar; messengers were sent to them, and behold, they came; for them didst thou wash thyself, and paint thine eyes, and deck thyself with ornaments.
And thou didst seat thyself upon a stately bed before which a table was prepared, and thereon didst thou set my incense and my oil.
Also the voice of a multitude at ease was with her; and together with men from the common multitude were brought deep-drinkers from the desert, who put bracelets upon their hands, and beautiful crowns upon their heads.
Then said I concerning her that was worn out with adulteries, Will they now commit whoredoms with her, even with her?
They went in to her, as men go to a harlot; so went they in to Aholah and to Aholibah, the lewd women.
But righteous men shall judge them, as adulteresses are judged, and as women that shed blood are judged; for they are adulteresses, and blood is upon their hands.
For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will bring a great company against them, and will give them up to be harassed and spoiled,
and the company shall stone them with stones, and cut them in pieces with their swords; they shall slay their sons and their daughters, and burn their houses with fire.
Thus will I cause lewdness to cease out of the land, that all women may take warning, and not follow them in their lewdness.
And they shall recompense your lewdness upon you, and ye shall bear the sins of your idols; that ye may know that I am the Lord Jehovah.
Moreover, the word of Jehovah came to me in the ninth year, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, and said:
Son of man, write the name of the day, even of this same day. The king of Babylon draweth near to Jerusalem this same day.
Utter a parable to the rebellious house, and say to them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Set on a caldron, set it on, and also pour water into it.
Gather the pieces thereof into it, even every good piece, the thigh and the shoulder; fill it with the choice bones.
Take the choice of the flock, and make under it a pile for the bones, and make it boil well, that the bones therein may be seethed.
Wherefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Woe to the city of blood, to the caldron in which is rust, and whose rust goeth not out of it! bring it out piece by piece; let no lot fall upon it.
For blood is in the midst of her; upon the bare rock hath she shed it; she poured it not upon the ground, that it might be covered with dust.
To cause fury and to take vengeance, I have set the blood shed by her upon the bare rock, that it might not be covered.
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Woe to the city of blood! Now will I make the pile for fire great.
Heap on wood, kindle the fire, cook the flesh, put in spices, and let the bones be burned.
Then set it empty upon the coals, that its brass may be hot and may burn, and that its impurity may be dissolved in it, and its rust be consumed.
It hath wearied me with labors, yet its thick rust goeth not from it; its rust remaineth in the midst of the fire.
In thy filthiness is gross wickedness, because, when I would have cleansed thee, thou wouldst not be cleansed. Thou shalt not be cleansed from thy filthiness any more, till I have quieted my fury toward thee.
I, Jehovah, have spoken it; it shall come to pass, and I will do it. I will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent. According to thy ways and according to thy doings shall they judge thee, saith the Lord Jehovah.
Also the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, behold, I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes with one blow; yet thou shalt not mourn, nor weep, nor shall thy tears run down.
Sigh thou in silence, make no mourning for the dead; bind thy head-dress upon thee, and thy shoes on thy feet; cover not thy lips, and eat not the bread of wretched men.
So I spake to the people in the morning, and my wife died in the evening; and I did in the morning as I was commanded.
And the people said to me, Wilt thou not tell us what those things which thou doest denote to us?
Then I answered them: The word of Jehovah came to me and said:
Say to the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I will profane my sanctuary, the pride of your confidence, the desire of your eyes, and the longing of your souls; and your sons and daughters that are left to you shall fall by the sword.
And ye shall do as I have done; ye shall not cover your mouths, nor eat the bread of wretched men;
and your head-dresses shall be upon your heads, and your shoes upon your feet; ye shall not mourn nor weep; but ye shall pine away for your iniquities, and moan one to another.
Thus Ezekiel shall be to you a sign; according to all that he hath done shall ye do, when this cometh; and ye shall know that I am the Lord Jehovah.
And thou, son of man, behold, in the day when I take from them their strength, the joy of their glory, the desire of their eyes, and the longing of their souls, their sons and their daughters, in that day shall one
that is escaped come to thee, to cause thee to hear it with thine ears.
In that day shall thy mouth be opened to him that is escaped, and thou shalt speak, and be no more dumb; and thou shalt be a sign to them, and they shall know that I am Jehovah.
The word of Jehovah came again to me, saying:
Son of man, set thy face against the Ammonites, and prophesy against them;
and say to the Ammonites, Hear the word of the Lord Jehovah! Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because thou saidst, “Aha!” against my sanctuary when it was profaned, and against the land of Israel when it was desolate, and against the house of Judah when they went into captivity, therefore,
behold, I will deliver thee to the sons of the East for a possession, and they shall set their folds in thee, and make their dwellings in thee; they shall eat thy fruit, and they shall drink thy milk.
And I will make Rabbah a stable for camels, and the land of the Ammonites a couching-place for flocks; and ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because thou hast clapped thy hands, and stamped with thy feet, and rejoiced with all thy despite from the heart, against the land of Israel,
therefore, behold, I will stretch out my hand upon thee, and will deliver thee for a spoil to the nations; I will cut thee off from the nations, and cause thee to perish from the countries; I will destroy thee; and thou shalt know that I am Jehovah.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because Moab and Seir say, “Behold, the house of Judah is like all the nations,”
therefore, behold, I will open the side of Moab from his cities, which are on his borders, the glory of the country, Beth-jeshimoth, Baal-meon, and Kiriathaim.
To the sons of the East will I give it for a possession, together with the sons of Ammon, that the sons of Ammon may be no more remembered among the nations;
and on Moab will I execute judgments, and they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because Edom hath dealt against the house of Judah by taking vengeance, and hath greatly offended, and revenged himself upon them,
therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will stretch out my hand upon Edom, and will cut off from it man and beast; and I will make it desolate from Teman; and unto Dedan shall they fall by the sword.
And I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people Israel; and they shall deal with Edom according to mine anger, and according to my fury; and they shall know my vengeance, saith the Lord Jehovah.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because the Philistines have dealt with revenge, and have taken vengeance, with a despiteful heart, even to destruction, from the old hatred;
therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I will stretch out my hand upon the Philistines, and I will cut off the Cherethites, and destroy the remnant upon the sea-coasts.
And I will execute great vengeance upon them with furious rebukes; and they shall know that I am Jehovah when I lay my vengeance upon them.
And it came to pass in the eleventh year, on the first day of the month, that the word bf Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, because Tyre hath said against Jerusalem, “Aha! she is broken that was the gate of the nations; now is all transferred to me; I shall be full, now that she is desolate!”
therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, O Tyre, and I will cause many nations to come up against thee, as the sea causeth his waves to come up.
And they shall destroy the walls of Tyre, and break down her towers; and I will scrape off her earth from her, and make her like a naked rock.
She shall be a place for the spreading of nets in the midst of the sea; for I have spoken it, saith the Lord Jehovah. And she shall be to the nations for a spoil;
and her daughters that are upon the land shall be slain by the sword; and they shall know that I am Jehovah.
For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I will bring against Tyre Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, a king of kings from the North, with horses, and with chariots, and with horsemen, and a vast multitude of people.
Thy daughters upon the land shall he slay with the sword; and he shall set a tower against thee, and cast up a mound against thee, and lift up the buckler against thee;
and his battering-rams shall be set against thy walls, and thy towers shall he break down with axes.
By reason of the great number of his horses, their dust shall cover thee; thy walls shall shake at the noise of the horsemen, and of the wheels, and of the chariots, when he entereth into thy gates, as men enter into a city that is broken through.
With the hoofs of his horses shall he tread down all thy streets; thy people he shall slay with the sword; and the idols of thy strength shall fall to the ground.
And they shall make a spoil of thy riches, and make a prey of thy merchandise; and they shall break down thy walls, and destroy thy beautiful houses; and thy stones and thy timber and thine earth shall they lay in the midst of the waters.
And I will cause the noise of thy songs to cease, and the sound of thy harps shall be no more heard.
And I will make thee like a naked rock; thou shalt be a place to spread nets upon; thou shalt be built no more; for I, Jehovah, have spoken it, saith the Lord Jehovah.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah to Tyre: Behold, the isles shall shake at the sound of thy fall, at the groaning of the wounded, and at the slaughter which is made in the midst of thee.
And all the princes of the sea shall come down from their thrones, and lay aside their mantles, and put off their embroidered garments. They shall clothe themselves with trembling, and sit on the ground, and tremble every moment, and be astonished at thee.
And they shall utter a lamentation over thee, and say to thee, “How art thou destroyed, thou that wast peopled from the seas, the renowned city, that wast mighty upon the sea, thou and thine inhabitants, causing terror to all that dwelt near thee!”
Now shall the isles tremble in the day of thy fall; yea, the isles that are in the sea shall quake at thy departure.
For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: When I shall make thee a desolate city, like the cities that are not inhabited, when I shall bring up the deep upon thee, and great waters shall cover thee,
I will bring thee down to them that have gone down to the pit, to the people of old time, and I will cause thee to dwell in the lower parts of the earth, amid the ruins of ancient times, with them that have gone down to the pit, that thou be no more inhabited; but I will set glory in the land of the living.
I will make thee a desolation, and thou shalt be no more; though thou be sought for, thou shalt be found no more forever, saith the Lord Jehovah.
The word of Jehovah came again to me, saying:
Son of man, take up a lamentation over Tyre,
and say to Tyre, O thou that didst dwell at the entrance of the sea, the merchant of the nations to many coasts! thus saith the Lord Jehovah: O Tyre, thou hast said, “I am perfect in beauty.”
Thy borders are in the midst of the seas; thy builders have perfected thy beauty.
They made all thy ship-boards of cypresses of Senir; they took cedars from Lebanon to make masts for thee.
Of oaks of Bashan they made thine oars; thy benches they made of ivory inlaid in cedar from the coasts of the Chittaeans.
Fine linen with broidered work from Egypt was that which thou didst spread forth to be thy sail; blue and purple from the coasts of Elisha were thy covering.
The inhabitants of Zidon and Arvad were thy rowers; thy wise men, O Tyre, that were in thee, were thy pilots.
The ancients of Gebal and the skilful men thereof were in thee, thy calkers; all the ships of the sea, with their mariners, were in thee, to traffic in thy merchandise.
Persians, and Lydians, and Lybians were in thine army, thy men of war; they hung up the shield and helmet in thee; they set forth thy glory.
The men of Arvad and thine own army were upon thy walls round about, and brave warriors were in thy towers; they hung their shields upon thy walls round about; they made thy beauty perfect.
Tarshish trafficked with thee on account of the abundance of all kinds of goods; with silver, iron, tin, and lead they traded in thy fairs.
Javan, Tubal, and Meshech trafficked with thee; the persons of men and vessels of brass they sold in thy market.
They of the house of Togarmah traded in thy fairs with horses and horsemen and mules.
The men of Dedan trafficked with thee; many islands were at hand to thee for trade; they brought thee, for payment, horns of ivory, and ebony-wood.
Syria trafficked with thee by reason of the multitude of the wares of thy making; with carbuncles, purple and embroidered work, and fine linen, and corals, and rubies, they traded in thy fairs.
Judah and the land of Israel trafficked with thee; with wheat of Minnith, and pastry, and syrup, and oil, and balm they traded in thy market.
Damascus trafficked with thee on account of the multitude of the wares of thy making, on account of the abundance of all kinds of goods, in the wine of Helbon, and in white wool.
Vedan and Javan brought thread to thy market; wrought iron, cassia, and sweet reed were in thy fairs.
Dedan brought cloth for riding, in traffic with thee.
Arabia and all the princes of Kedar were at hand to traffic with thee; they traded with thee in lambs and rams and goats.
The merchants of Sheba and Raamah trafficked with thee with all kinds of precious spices, and with all kinds of precious stones, and gold.
Haran, and Canneh, and Eden, the merchants of Sheba, Assyria, and Chilmad,
trafficked with thee in splendid apparel, in mantles of blue and embroidered work, in chests of damask bound with cords and made of cedar, in thy market.
The ships of Tarshish were the caravans for thy traffic; and thou wast replenished and made very glorious in the midst of the seas.
Thy rowers have brought thee into great waters; the east wind hath broken thee in the midst of the seas.
Thy riches, and thy fairs, and thy merchandise, thy mariners, and thy pilots, thy calkers, and the traders in thy merchandise, and all thy men of war within thee, and all thy multitude that is in the midst of thee, shall fall into the midst of the seas in the day of thy ruin.
At the sound of the cry of thy pilots the pastures around thee shall shake.
And all that handle the oar, the mariners, and all the pilots of the sea, shall come down from their ships; they shall stand upon the land,
and shall cause their voice to be heard for thee, and shall cry bitterly, and shall cast dust upon their heads, and roll themselves in ashes.
And they shall make themselves utterly bald for thee, and gird themselves with sackcloth; and they shall weep for thee with bitterness of heart and bitter wailing.
And in their wailing they shall take up for thee a lamentation, and shall lament over thee, saying: “What city is like Tyre, like the Destroyed in the midst of the sea?
When thy wares went forth from the seas, thou didst satisfy many nations; thou didst enrich the kings of the earth with the abundance of thy riches and thy merchandise.
Now thou art broken by the seas in the depth of the waters, and thy merchandise and all thy multitude in the midst of thee are fallen.
All the inhabitants of the isles are astonished at thee, and their kings shudder; they are troubled in their countenance.
The merchants among the nations hiss at thee. Thou art a desolation, and shalt exist no more forever.”
The word of Jehovah came again to me, saying:
Son of man, say to the prince of Tyre, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because thy heart is lifted up, and thou hast said, “I am a god, I sit in the seat of a god, in the midst of the seas”; and though thou art man, not God, yet settest thy heart as the heart of a god,—
behold, thou art wiser than Daniel; there is no secret which can be hidden from thee;
by thy wisdom and by thine understanding thou hast gotten thee riches, and hast gotten gold and silver in thy treasures;
by thy great wisdom, by thy traffic, thou hast increased thy riches, and thy heart is lifted up because of thy wealth,—
therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because thou settest thy heart as the heart of a god, therefore,
behold, I will bring upon thee strangers, the terrible of the nations; and they shall draw their swords against the beauty of thy wisdom, and they shall defile thy brightness.
They shall bring thee down to the pit, and thou shalt die the death of the slain, in the midst of the seas.
Wilt thou yet say, “I am a god,” before him that slayeth thee? Thou shalt be man, and not God, in the hand of him that slayeth thee.
Thou shalt die the death of the uncircumcised, by the hand of strangers; for I have spoken it, saith the Lord Jehovah.
Moreover, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, take up a lamentation upon the king of Tyre, and say to him, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah:—Thou wast a finished signet, Full of wisdom and perfect in beauty;
In Eden, the garden of God, thou didst dwell; Every precious stone was thy covering, The ruby, the topaz, and the diamond, The chrysolite, the onyx, and the jasper, The sapphire, the carbuncle, and the emerald, and gold. The workmanship of thy jewel-holes was within thee; On the day when thou wast born were they prepared.
Thou wast an outspread, covering cherub; I set thee upon the holy mountain of God; Thou didst walk in the midst of the stones of fire.
Thou wast prosperous in thy ways from the day that thou wast born Until iniquity was found in thee.
Through the abundance of thy merchandise thou art full of injustice; And thou hast sinned; Therefore I will cast thee as profane out of the mountain of God, And I will destroy thee, O covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire.
Thy heart was lifted up because of thy beauty; Thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy splendor; I will cast thee to the ground; I will give thee up to kings to be their gazing-stock.
By the multitude of thine iniquities, by the unrighteousness of thy traffic, Thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries. Therefore will I bring forth a fire from the midst of thee, which shall devour thee, And I will bring thee to ashes upon the earth, In the sight of all them that behold thee.
All they that know thee among the nations shall be astonished at thee; Thou art become a desolation, and shalt exist no more forever.
Again the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, set thy face against Sidon, and prophesy against her,
and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, O Sidon, and I will be glorified in the midst of thee, and they shall know that I am Jehovah, when I execute judgments in her, and am sanctified in her.
I will send upon her pestilence, and blood into her streets, and the wounded shall fall in the midst of her by the sword which is against her on every side; and they shall know that I am Jehovah.
And there shall be no more to the house of Israel a pricking brier, or a grieving thorn of all that are round about them, that despised them; and they shall know that I am the Lord Jehovah.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: When I shall gather the house of Israel from the nations among which they are scattered, then shall I be sanctified through them in the sight of the nations, and they shall dwell in the land which I gave to my servant Jacob.
They shall dwell therein securely, and shall build houses, and plant vineyards, yea, they shall dwell securely when I have executed judgments on all that despised them round about; and they shall know that I am Jehovah, their God.
In the tenth year, in the tenth month, in the twelfth day of the month, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, set thy face against Pharaoh, the king of Egypt, and prophesy against him, and against all Egypt;
Speak, and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, Pharaoh, king of Egypt, thou great dragon, that liest in the midst of thy rivers, and sayest, “My river is my own, and I have made it for myself.”
And I will put hooks in thy jaws, and I will cause the fish of thy rivers to cleave to thy scales, and I will draw thee forth from the midst of thy rivers, and all the fish of thy rivers which cleave to thy scales.
And I will cast thee into the desert, thee and all the fish of thy rivers; thou shalt fall upon the open fields; thou shalt not be brought together, nor gathered; to the beasts of the field and the birds of heaven I have given thee for food.
And all the inhabitants of Egypt shall know that I am Jehovah; because they have been a staff of reed to the house of Israel.
When they took hold of thee by thy handle, thou didst break and pierce their whole shoulder; and when they leaned upon thee, thou didst go to pieces, and madest all their loins to shake.
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I will bring a sword upon thee, and cut off man and beast out of thee;
and the land of Egypt shall be desolate and waste; and they shall know that I am Jehovah, because he hath said, “The river is mine, and I have made it.”
Therefore, behold, I am against thee, and against thy rivers; and I will make the land of Egypt utterly waste and desolate, from Migdol even to Syene, and to the borders of Ethiopia.
There shall not pass through it the foot of man, and the foot of beast shall not pass through it, neither shall it be inhabited forty years.
I will make the land of Egypt desolate amidst the lands that are desolate, and her cities, among the cities that are laid waste, shall be desolate forty years; and I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and will disperse them through the countries.
Yet thus saith the Lord Jehovah: At the end of forty years will I gather the Egyptians from the nations whither they are scattered;
and I will bring back the captives of Egypt, and will cause them to return into the land of Pathros, into the land of their origin; and they shall be there a mean kingdom;
it shall be the meanest of all kingdoms; it shall no more exalt itself above the nations; for I will diminish them, that they shall no more rule over the nations.
And it shall be no more the confidence of the house of Israel, bringing to my remembrance their iniquity in looking to them for help; and they shall know that I am the Lord Jehovah.
And it came to pass in the twenty-seventh year, in the first month, on the first day of the month, that the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, caused his army to serve a great service against Tyre; every head was made bald, and every shoulder was peeled; yet neither he nor his army had wages from Tyre for the service which he served against it.
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I will give the land of Egypt to Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, and he shall take her multitude, and take her spoil, and take her plunder; and it shall be wages for his army.
For his wages for his service I will give him the land of Egypt; for they wrought for me, saith the Lord Jehovah.
In that day will I cause a horn to grow forth to the house of Israel, and I will give thee to open the mouth in the midst of them; and they shall know that I am Jehovah.
The word of Jehovah came again to me, saying:
Son of man, prophesy, and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Howl ye, Alas! alas for the day!
For the day is near, the day of Jehovah is near! A day of clouds, the time of the nations is come.
The sword shall come upon Egypt, and anguish shall be in Ethiopia, when the slain shall fall in Egypt, and they shall take away her multitude, and her foundations shall be destroyed.
Ethiopia, and Lybia, and Lydia, and all her auxiliaries, and Chub, and the men of every country that is in league, shall fall with them by the sword.
Thus saith Jehovah: They that uphold Egypt shall fall, and the pride of her power shall come down; from Migdol to Syene shall they fall in her by the sword, saith the Lord Jehovah.
And they shall be laid waste in the midst of the lands that are laid waste, and her cities shall be amongst the cities that are desolate.
And they shall know that I am Jehovah, when I have brought a fire into Egypt, and all her helpers shall be destroyed.
In that day shall messengers go forth from me in ships, to make the confident Ethiopians afraid; and anguish shall come upon them, as in the day of Egypt; for behold, it cometh!
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will make the multitude of Egypt to cease by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon.
He and his people with him, the terrible of the nations, shall be brought to make the land desolate; and they shall draw their swords against Egypt, and fill the land with the slain.
And I will make the rivers dry, and I will sell the land into the hand of evil men; and I will lay waste the land and all that is therein, by the hand of strangers; I, Jehovah, have spoken it.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will destroy the idols, and cause the images to cease out of Noph; and there shall be no more a prince of the land of Egypt; and I will bring fear upon the land of Egypt:
And I will lay waste Pathros, and bring a fire upon Zoan, and execute judgments upon No.
And I will pour out my fury upon Sin, the strength of Egypt, and I will cut off the multitude of No.
And I will bring a fire upon Egypt; Sin shall tremble, and No shall be broken through, and Noph shall be plundered by day.
The young men of On and of Pibeseth shall fall by the sword, and the women shall go into captivity.
At Tahpanhes also the day shall be darkened, when I shall break there the yoke of Egypt, and the pride of her strength shall cease within her. A cloud shall cover her, and her daughters shall go into captivity.
Thus will I execute judgments upon Egypt; and they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Now it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first month, on the seventh day of the month, that the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and lo, it is not bound up, so as to have medicines applied to it; a bandage is not applied to it, to make it strong to hold the sword.
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against Pharaoh, the king of Egypt; and I will break his arms, both the strong one, and that which was broken, and I will cause the sword to fall out of his hand.
And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and disperse them through the countries.
But I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and will put my sword into his hand, and break the arms of Pharaoh, so that he shall groan before him with the groanings of a deadly wounded man.
Yea, I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and the arms of Pharaoh shall fall down; and they shall know that I am Jehovah, when I shall put my sword into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall stretch it out upon the land of Egypt.
And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and disperse them among the countries, and they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Now it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the third month, on the first day of the month, that the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, say to Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and to his multitude: To whom art thou like in thy greatness?
Behold, the Assyrian was a cedar upon Lebanon, with fair branches; An overshadowing thicket, high of stature; And his top was among thick boughs.
The waters made him great; the deep waters made him high; Their streams went around their plantation, And sent forth their channels to all the trees of the field.
Therefore his height was exalted Above all the trees of the field. And his boughs were multiplied, and his branches became long, Because of the abundance of water when he shot forth.
In his boughs all the birds of heaven made their nests, And under his branches all the beasts of the field brought forth their young; And under his shadow dwelt all the great nations.
Thus was he beautiful in his greatness, in the length of his branches; For his root was by many waters.
The cedars in the garden of God could not hide him; The cypress-trees were not like his boughs, And the plane-trees were not like his branches. Not any tree in the garden of God Was like to him in his beauty.
I made him beautiful in the multitude of his branches, So that all the trees of Eden, which were in the garden of God, envied him.
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because he lifted himself up in stature, And shot up his top among the thick boughs, And his heart was lifted up on account of his height,
Therefore I delivered him into the hand of the mighty one of the nations, To deal hardly with him; I drave him out for his wickedness;
And strangers, the terrible of the nations, cut him off and cast him away. Upon the mountains and in all the valleys his branches fell; And his boughs were broken in all the valleys of the land. And all the nations of the earth withdrew from his shadow and left him;
Upon his ruin dwelt all the birds of the heavens, And upon his branches were all the beasts of the forest.
To the end that none of all the trees by the waters Might exalt themselves for their stature, Nor shoot up their top among the thick boughs, And that none of the trees that drink water should cleave to them on account of their height; For all of them are delivered to death, to the lower parts of the earth, In the midst of the sons of men, To them that have gone down to the pit.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: In the day when he went down to the grave, I caused the deep to mourn, I covered it for him; I restrained on account of him the streams, and the great waters were kept back; And I caused Lebanon to mourn for him, And all the trees of the field fainted for him.
At the sound of his fall I made the nations to shake, When I cast him down to the grave, To them that have gone down to the pit; And all the trees of Eden, The choice and best of Lebanon, Even all that drink water, Were comforted in the lower parts of the earth.
They also went down into the grave with him, To them that have been slain with the sword; They also that were his arm, That dwelt under his shadow among the nations.
To whom art thou thus like in glory and greatness among the trees of Eden? Thou shalt be brought down with the trees of Eden To the lower parts of the earth; Thou shalt lie down in the midst of the uncircumcised, With them that are slain by the sword. Thus shall it be with Pharaoh and all his multitude, Saith the Lord Jehovah.
And it came to pass in the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, on the first day of the month, that the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, take up a lamentation over Pharaoh, the king of Egypt, and say to him:—Thou art like a young lion among the nations; Thou art like a dragon in the seas; And thou camest forth into thy rivers, And troubledst the waters with thy feet, And didst disturb their rivers.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will therefore spread my net over thee, Amidst an assembly of many nations; And they shall draw thee up in my net.
And I will throw thee upon the land, I will cast thee forth upon the open field, And I will cause all the birds of heaven to remain upon thee. And I will fill the beasts of the whole earth with thee;
And I will lay thy flesh upon the mountains, And fill the valleys with thy heaps.
And I will water the land in which thou swimmest with thy blood, even to the mountains, And the streams shall be full of thee.
And I will cover the heavens, when I quench thee, And make the stars thereof dark; I will cover the sun with a cloud, And the moon shall not give her light.
All the bright lights of heaven will I make dark over thee, And bring darkness upon thy land, Saith the Lord Jehovah.
And I will grieve the hearts of many nations, When I bring thy destruction among the nations, In lands which thou knowest not.
Yea, I will make many people amazed at thee, And their kings shall shudder on account of thee, When I brandish my sword before them; And they shall tremble every moment, every one for his life, in the day of thy fall.
For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: The sword of the king of Babylon shall come upon thee;
By the swords of the mighty will I cause thy multitude to fall, All of them the terrible of the nations. And they shall bring to nothing the pride of Egypt, And all her multitude shall be destroyed.
I will also destroy all her beasts From beside the great waters; Neither shall the foot of man trouble them any more, Nor shall the hoofs of beasts trouble them.
Then will I make their waters clear, And cause their rivers to run like oil, Saith the Lord Jehovah,
When I shall make the land of Egypt desolate, And the country shall be destitute of all that was therein, When I shall smite all that dwell therein, That they may know that I am Jehovah.
This is the lamentation which they shall utter; the daughters of the nations shall utter it. For Egypt and for all her multitude shall they utter it, saith the Lord Jehovah.
It came to pass also in the twelfth year, [[in the twelfth month,]] on the fifteenth day of the month, that the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, wail for the multitude of Egypt, and cast her down, even her and the daughters of the famous nations, to the lower parts of the earth, to them that have gone down to the pit.
Art thou more beautiful than another? Come down and be laid with the uncircumcised!
They shall fall in the midst of them that are slain by the sword. The sword is given; drag her away and all her multitudes!
The mightiest heroes from the midst of the pit shall speak to him and his helpers; For they are gone down, they lie uncircumcised, slain by the sword.
There is Assyria and all her company; Her graves are round about her; All of them are slain, fallen by the sword;
Her grave is made in the depths of the pit, And her company is round about her grave, All of them slain, fallen by the sword, They who caused terror in the land of the living.
There is Elam and all her company round about her grave, All of them slain, fallen by the sword; They are gone down uncircumcised to the lower parts of the earth, Who caused terror in the land of the living; They bear their shame with them that have gone down to the pit.
Among the slain have they set her a bed with all her multitude; Her graves are round about her, All of them slain, uncircumcised, by the sword. Though they caused terror in the land of the living, Yet they bear their shame with them that have gone down to the pit; They are laid in the midst of the slain.
There is Meshech, Tubal, and all their multitude; Their graves are around them; All of them slain, uncircumcised, by the sword, Though they caused terror in the land of the living.
Shall they not lie with the mighty of the uncircumcised that are fallen, Who have gone down to the pit with their weapons of war, Having their swords laid under their heads, And their iniquity resting upon their bones, Though they were the terror of the mighty in the land of the living?
And thou also shalt be broken in the midst of the uncircumcised, And shalt lie down with them that are slain by the sword.
There is Edom, her kings and all her princes, Who in their might are laid with them that are slain by the sword; They lie down with the uncircumcised, With them that have gone down to the pit.
There are the princes of the North, All of them, and all the Sidonians, Who have gone down to the slain; In the midst of the terror of their might they are put to shame; They lie down uncircumcised with them that are slain by the sword, And bear their shame with them that have gone down to the pit.
Pharaoh shall see them, And shall comfort himself over all his multitude; Even Pharaoh and all his army are slain by the sword, Saith the Lord Jehovah.
Though I suffered him to spread terror in the land of the living, Yet is he laid in the midst of the uncircumcised, With them that are slain by the sword, Even Pharaoh and all his multitude, Saith the Lord Jehovah.
Again the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, speak to the children of thy people, and say to them, When I bring the sword upon a land, and the people of the land take a man out of their whole number, and set him for their watchman,
and he seeth the sword coming on the land, and bloweth the trumpet, and warneth the people,
then whoever heareth the sound of the trumpet, and taketh not warning, and the sword cometh and taketh him away, his blood shall be upon his own head.
He heard the sound of the trumpet, and took not warning. His blood shall be upon him. But he that taketh warning shall save his life.
But if the watchman see the sword coming, and blow not the trumpet, and the people be not warned, and the sword come and take away any person from among them, he is taken away for his iniquity, but his blood will I require at the watchman's hand.
So thou, son of man, I have set thee a watchman to the house of Israel, that thou shouldst hear the word from my mouth, and warn them from me.
When I say to the wicked, “O wicked man, thou shalt surely die!” and thou speakest not to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die for his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hand.
Yet if thou warn the wicked of his way, to turn from it, and he turneth not from his way, he shall die for his iniquity, but thou hast delivered thyself.
Thou, therefore, O son of man, say to the house of Israel: Rightly do ye say, “Our transgressions and our sins are upon us, and through them we pine away. How then can we live?”
Say to them, As I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live; turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways! for why will ye die, O house of Israel?
Thou also, son of man, say to the sons of thy people, The righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him in the day of his transgression; and through his wickedness shall not the wicked man fall in the day when he turneth from his wickedness; neither shall the righteous be able to live in the day when he sinneth.
When I say concerning the righteous, “He shall surely live,” and he trusteth in his righteousness, and doeth iniquity, all his righteousness shall not be remembered, but for his iniquity which he hath committed shall he die.
Again, when I say concerning the wicked, “He shall surely die,” and he turneth from his sin, and doeth that which is just and right,
and the wicked restoreth the pledge, giveth back that which he hath taken by violence, and walketh in the statutes of life without committing iniquity, he shall surely live, he shall not die.
None of his sins which he hath committed shall be mentioned to him; he hath done that which is just and right; he shall surely live.
And yet the sons of thy people say, “The way of the Lord is not right!” But it is their way which is not right.
When the righteous man turneth from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, he dieth because of it.
And when the wicked turneth from his wickedness, and doeth that which is just and right, he shall live thereby.
And yet ye say, “The way of the Lord is not right!” O house of Israel, I will judge you every one according to his ways!
And it came to pass in the twelfth year of our captivity, in the tenth month, on the fifth day of the month, that one who had escaped from Jerusalem came to me, saying, “The city is smitten!”
Now the hand of Jehovah had been upon me in the evening before he that had escaped came; and he opened my mouth, until he came to me in the morning; he opened my mouth, so that I was no longer dumb.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, they that inhabit those wastes in the land of Israel say, “Abraham was but one, and he inherited the land; but we are many; to us is the land given for an inheritance.”
Therefore say to them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Ye eat with the blood, and life up your eyes to your idols, and shed blood; and shall ye possess the land?
Ye trust to your swords, ye commit abomination, and ye defile, every one, his neighbor's wife; and shall ye possess the land?
Say thou thus to them: Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: As I live, surely they that are in the wastes shall fall by the sword, and him that is in the open country will I give to the beasts to be devoured, and they that are in the forts and caves shall fall by the pestilence.
And I will make the land an utter desolation; and the pride of her strength shall cease; and the mountains of Israel shall be desolate, so that none shall pass through.
Then shall they know that I am Jehovah, when I have made the land an utter desolation, on account of all the abominations which they practise.
As for thee, O son of man, the sons of thy people speak concerning thee by the walls, and in the doors of houses; and speak one to another, every man to his neighbor, saying, “Come, I pray you, and hear what is the word that goeth forth from Jehovah.”
And they come to thee, as the people assembleth, and they sit before thee, as my people, and they hear thy words: but will not do them; for with their mouth they do what is lovely, but their heart goeth after gain.
And behold, thou art to them as a very lovely song of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument; for they hear thy words, but do them not.
But when this cometh to pass, (and behold, it shall come to pass,) then shall they know that a prophet hath been among them.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel; prophesy, and say to them, to the shepherds, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Woe to the shepherds of Israel, who feed themselves! Should not the shepherds feed the flocks?
Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the wool, ye kill that which is fatted; but ye feed not the flock.
The weak do ye not strengthen, and the sick do ye not heal, and the wounded do ye not bind up; ye bring not back that which hath been driven away, neither seek ye that which hath been lost; but with force and with cruelty do ye rule them.
Therefore are they scattered abroad, because there is no shepherd, and they are food to all the beasts of the field, or are scattered abroad.
My sheep wander through all the mountains, and upon every high hill; yea, over the whole face of the land is my flock scattered, and none careth for them, or seeketh them.
Therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of Jehovah:
As I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, surely, because my flock is become a prey, and my flock is become meat to all the beasts of the field because there is no shepherd, and because my shepherds search not for my flock, and feed themselves, and feed not my flock,—
therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of Jehovah.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against the shepherds, and I will require my flock at their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock; neither shall the shepherds feed themselves any more; for I will deliver my flock from their mouth, and they shall not be meat for them.
For thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold I, even I, will seek my flock, and look after them;
as a shepherd looketh after his flock in the day when he is among his sheep that are scattered, so will I look after my sheep, and will deliver them out of all the places where they have been scattered in the day of clouds and darkness.
And I will bring them out from the nations, and gather them from the countries; and I will bring them to their own land, and feed them upon the mountains of Israel, in the valleys, and in all the dwelling-places of the land.
I will feed them in a good pasture, and upon the high mountains of Israel shall their fold be; there shall they lie down in a good fold, and in a fat pasture shall they feed upon the mountains of Israel.
I will feed my flock, and I will cause them to lie down, saith the Lord Jehovah.
I will seek that which was lost, and bring back that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen the sick; but the fat and the strong will I destroy; I will feed them as they deserve.
And as for you, O my sheep, thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I will judge between the weak of the flock and the strong ones, even the rams and the he-goats.
Seemeth it a small thing to you to eat up the good pasture, but ye must tread down with your feet the residue of your pastures? and to drink of the clear waters, but ye must foul the residue with your feet?
and that my sheep eat that which ye have trodden with your feet, and drink that which ye have fouled with your feet?
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah to them: Behold I, even I, will judge between the fat and the lean of the flock.
Because ye thrust with your side and with your shoulder, and push all the weak with your horns, till ye scatter them abroad,
therefore will I save my sheep, and they shall no more be a prey; and I will judge between sheep and sheep.
And I will raise up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David; he shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd.
And I, Jehovah, will be their God, and my servant David a prince among them. I, Jehovah, have spoken it.
And I will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause evil beasts to cease out of the land, so that they shall dwell safely in the desert, and sleep in the woods.
And I will make them, and the places round about my hill, a blessing; and I will cause the shower to come down in its season; showers rich in blessings shall there be.
And the tree of the field shall yield her fruit, and the earth shall yield her increase; and they shall be secure in their land, and shall know that I am Jehovah, when I shall break the bands of their yoke and deliver them out of the hand of them that made them servants.
And they shall no more be a prey to the nations, neither shall the beasts of the land devour them; but they shall dwell in security, and none shall make them afraid.
And I will raise up for them a plantation for my glory; and they shall no more be consumed with hunger in the land, neither shall they bear the reproach of the nations any more.
Then shall they know, that I, Jehovah, their God, am with them, and that they, the house of Israel, are my people, saith the Lord Jehovah.
For ye, my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men, and I am your God, saith the Lord Jehovah.
Moreover, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, set thy face against Mount Seir, and prophesy against it,
and say to it, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, O Mount Seir, and I will stretch out my hand against thee, and I will make thee an utter desolation;
I will lay thy cities waste, and thou shalt be desolate, and thou shalt know that I am Jehovah.
Because thou bearest a perpetual hatred, and deliverest up the sons of Israel to the sword in the time of their calamity, in the time when iniquity bringeth destruction:
therefore, as I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, surely, to blood will I bring thee, and blood shall pursue thee; since thou hast not hated blood, blood shall pursue thee.
Thus will I make Mount Seir an utter desolation, and cut off from it him that passeth out, and him that returneth.
And I will fill his valleys with the slain. Upon thy hills and in thy plains and in thy valleys shall fall they that are slain with the sword.
I will make thee a perpetual desolation, and thy cities shall not be inhabited; and ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Because thou hast said, “These two nations and these two countries shall be mine, and we shall possess them,” whereas Jehovah was there;
therefore, as I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, I will do according to thine anger and according to thine envy which in thy hatred against them thou hast practised, and I will make myself known to them when I judge thee.
And thou shalt know that I am Jehovah, and that I have heard all thy blasphemies which thou hast spoken against the mountains of Israel, saying: “They are laid desolate; to us are they given to be devoured.”
Thus with your mouth have ye magnified yourselves against me, and multiplied your words against me; I have heard them.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: When the whole land rejoiceth, I will prepare desolation for thee.
As thou didst rejoice over my inheritance, the house of Israel, because it was desolate, so will I do to thee! Mount Seir shall be desolate, and all Edom, even all of it; and they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Also, thou son of man, prophesy to the mountains of Israel, and say: Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of Jehovah.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because the enemy hath said concerning you, “Aha! the everlasting heights have become our possession”;
therefore prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because, yea, because they have made you desolate, and swallowed you up on every side, so that ye have become a possession to the residue of the nations, and a subject for the lips of talkers, and a derision to the people;
therefore, ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord Jehovah. Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, to the mountains and the hills, the valleys and the plain, to the desolate wastes and to the forsaken cities, which are become a prey and a derision to the residue of the nations which are round about,—
therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Surely in the fire of my jealousy have I spoken against the residue of the nations, and against all Edom, who have allotted my land to themselves for a possession, with joy of their whole heart, and with a despiteful mind, to cast it out for a prey.
Prophesy, therefore, concerning the land of Israel, and say to the mountains and to the hills, to the valleys and the plains, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I have spoken in my jealousy and in my fury, because ye have borne the reproach of the nations.
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I have lifted up my hand, that the nations that are round about you, that they shall bear their reproach.
But ye, O mountains of Israel, shall shoot forth your branches, and bear your fruit for my people Israel; for they are near coming.
For behold, I am for you, and I will turn to you, and ye shall be tilled and sown;
and I will multiply men upon you, even all the house of Israel, all of it; and the cities shall be inhabited, and the waste places shall be built.
I will multiply men upon you, and beasts; and they shall increase and be fruitful; and I will cause you to be inhabited as of old, and will do better to you than in the ancient time; and ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Yea, I will cause men, even my people Israel, to walk upon you, and they shall possess thee, and thou shalt be their inheritance, and thou shalt no more henceforth bereave them of children.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Because they say of you, “Thou hast devoured men, and made thy people childless!”
therefore thou shalt devour men no more, and no more make thy people childless, saith the Lord Jehovah.
Neither will I cause the reproach of the nations to be heard against thee any more, neither shalt thou bear the derision of the nations any more, neither shalt thou make thy nation childless any more, saith the lord Jehovah.
Moreover, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, when the house of Israel dwelt in their own land, they defiled it by their way and by their doings; their way before me was as the impurity of an unclean woman.
Wherefore I poured my fury upon them for the blood which they had shed in the land, and because they had polluted it with their idols.
And I scattered them among the nations, and they were dispersed through the countries; according to their way and according to their doings I judged them.
And when they came to the nations whither they went, they polluted my holy name, in that it was said of them, “These are the people of Jehovah, and they are gone forth out of his land.”
Therefore I will have regard to my holy name, which the house of Israel have polluted among the nations whither they are gone.
Therefore say to the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Not for your own sakes do I this, O house of Israel, but for my holy name, which ye have polluted among the nations whither ye are gone.
And I will sanctify my great name, which hath been polluted among the nations, which ye have profaned in the midst of them; and the nations shall know that I am Jehovah, when I shall be sanctified in regard to you, before their eyes, saith the Lord Jehovah.
For I will take you from among the nations, and gather you out of all countries, and bring you into your own land.
Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean. From all your uncleanness and from all your idols will I cleanse you.
A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will take out of your body the heart of stone, and I will give you a heart of flesh.
And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my commandments and do them.
And ye shall dwell in the land which I gave to your fathers, and ye shall be my people, and I will be your God.
And I will save you from all your uncleanness. And I will call for the corn, and will increase it, and bring no famine upon you.
And I will multiply the fruit of the tree, and the increase of the field, that ye may receive no more the reproach of famine among the nations.
Then shall ye remember your evil ways, and your doings which were not good, and ye shall loathe yourselves for your iniquities, and for your abominations.
Not for your own sakes do I this, saith the Lord Jehovah, be it known to you. Be ye ashamed and confounded for your ways, O house of Israel!
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: In the day when I shall cleanse you from all your iniquities, then will I cause the cities to be inhabited, and the waste places to be rebuilt;
and the desolate land shall be tilled, whereas it lay desolate in the sight of all that passed by.
Then shall it be said, “This land, that was desolate, is become as the garden of Eden; and the waste and desolate and ruined cities are become fenced, and are inhabited.”
Then the nations that are left around you shall know that I, Jehovah, have built that which was ruined, and planted that which was desolate. I, Jehovah, have spoken it, and I will do it.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Yet will I listen to the house of Israel, and do this for them. I will increase
them with men like a flock; as the holy flock, as the flock of Jerusalem in her solemn feasts; so shall the waste cities be filled with flocks of men; and they shall know that I am Jehovah.
The hand of Jehovah was upon me, and he carried me out in the spirit of Jehovah, and set me in the midst of a valley, which was full of bones,
and caused me to pass by them round about; and behold, there were very many upon the surface of the valley, and lo, they were very dry.
And he said to me, Son of man, can these bones live? And I answered, O Lord Jehovah, thou knowest!
Then he said to me, Prophesy to these dry bones, and say to them, O ye dry bones, hear the word of Jehovah!
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah to these bones: Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live;
and I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath into you, and ye shall live; and ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
So I prophesied, as I was commanded; and as I prophesied, a voice was heard, and behold, a shaking, and the bones came together, bone to its bone.
And when I looked, behold, there were sinews upon them, and the flesh grew, and the skin covered them above; but there was no breath in them.
Then said he to me, Prophesy to breath, prophesy, O son of man, and say to breath, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they may live!
So I prophesied, as he commanded me; and the breath came into them, and they lived and stood on their feet, an exceedingly great host.
And he said to me, Son of man, these bones denote the whole house of Israel. Behold, they say, “Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost, and we are cut off.”
Therefore prophesy, and say to them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, O my people, and bring you into the land of Israel.
And ye shall know that I am Jehovah, when I open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, O my people,
and put my breath within you, and ye live, and I place you in your own land; then shall ye know that I, Jehovah, have spoken it, and done it, saith Jehovah.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, “For Judah, and for the sons of Israel, his companions”; and take another stick, and write upon it, “For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and the whole house of Israel, his companions.”
Then join them one to another into one stick, that they may become one in thy hand.
And when the sons of thy people say to thee. “Wilt thou not show us what thou meanest by these?”
say to them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and of the tribes of Israel, his companions, and will unite them and him with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall be one in my hand.
And let the sticks whereon thou writest be in thy hand before their eyes;
and say thou to them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I will take the sons of Israel from among the nations whither they are gone, and will gather them from every side, and bring them into their own land.
And I will make them one nation in the land, upon the mountains of Israel; and one king shall be king over them all; and they shall no more be two nations, and no more shall they be divided into two kingdoms.
Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their idols, nor with their abominations, nor with any of their transgressions; but I will save them from all their dwelling-places wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse them; and they shall be my people, and I will be their God.
And my servant David shall be king over them, and they shall have one shepherd; and they shall walk in my commandments, and observe my statutes, and do them.
And they shall dwell in the land which I gave to my servant Jacob, wherein your fathers dwelt; they shall dwell therein, and their sons and their son's sons forever; and David, my servant, shall be their prince forever.
And I will make with them a covenant of peace; it shall be an everlasting covenant with them. And I will place them [[in the land]], and multiply them, and set my sanctuary in the midst of them forever.
And my dwelling-place shall be with them; yea, I will be their God, and they shall be my people;
and the nations shall know that I, Jehovah, do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them forevermore.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Son of man, set thy face against Gog, of the land of Magog, prince of Resh, Meshech, and Tubal, and prophesy against him,
and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, prince of Resh, Meshech, and Tubal!
And I will turn thee about, and put rings into thy jaws; and I will bring thee forth, thee and all thine army, horses and horsemen, all of them clothed in gorgeous apparel, even a great multitude with bucklers and shields, all of them handling swords.
Persians, Ethiopians, and Lybians are with them, all of them with shields and helmets.
Gomer and all his bands, the house of Togarmah from the north quarters, and all their hosts, many nations are with thee.
Be prepared, and prepare for thyself, thou and all thy host that are assembled unto thee, and be thou their leader!
After many days shalt thou be appointed over them. In the latter years shalt thou come into a land that is brought back from the sword, gathered out of many nations upon the mountains of Israel, which had been long desolate; but it is brought forth out of the nations, and they shall dwell securely, all of them.
Thou shalt go up like a storm, thou shalt come like a cloud, to cover the land, thou and all thy bands, and many nations with thee.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: At the same time shall thoughts come into thy mind, and thou shalt meditate an evil design,
and shalt say, “I will go up to the land of unwalled villages; I will go to them that are at rest, that dwell securely, all of them dwelling without walls, and having neither bars nor gates,
to take a spoil and to divide a prey, to turn my hand against the desolated places that have become inhabited, and against a people gathered out of the nations, possessing cattle and goods, dwelling in the heights of the earth.”
Sheba, and Dedan, and the merchants of Tarshish, and all the chiefs thereof, shall say to thee, “Art thou come to take a spoil? Hast thou gathered thy company to divide a prey? to carry away silver and gold, to take away cattle and goods, and to divide great spoil?”
Therefore prophesy, son of man, and say to Gog, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: In that day when my people Israel dwelleth securely, thou shalt observe it,
and thou shalt come up from the regions of the North, thou and many nations with thee, all of them riding upon horses, a great company, and a mighty host;
thou shalt come up against my people Israel like a cloud, to cover the land; in the latter days it shall come to pass, that I will bring thee against my land, that the nations may know me, when I shall be sanctified in regard to thee, before their eyes, O Gog!
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Art thou not he of whom I spoke in old time by my servants, the prophets of Israel, who prophesied in those days and years, that I would bring thee against them?
And it shall come to pass in that day, in the day when Gog shall come against the land of Israel, saith the Lord Jehovah, that my anger shall ascend in fury.
For in my jealousy, in the fire of my wrath, have I spoken, Surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel,
so that the fishes of the sea, and the birds of the heavens, and the beasts of the field; and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the ground, and all the men that are upon the face of the earth, shall shake at my presence; and the mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground.
And I will call for a sword against him throughout all my mountains, saith the Lord Jehovah, and they shall all turn their swords against each other,
And I will contend against him with pestilence, and with blood; and overflowing showers, and great hailstones, fire and brimstone, will I rain upon him and his hosts, and the many nations that are with him.
Thus will I show myself in my greatness and glory, and make myself known before the eyes of many nations, and they shall know that I am Jehovah.
And do thou, son of man, prophesy against Gog, and say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, prince of Resh, Meshech, and Tubal!
I will turn thee, and lead thee about, and cause thee to come up from the regions of the North. and bring thee upon the mountains of Israel.
And I will smite thy bow out of thy left hand, and cause thine arrows to fall out of thy right hand.
Thou shalt fall upon the mountains of Israel, thou and all thy hosts, and the nations that are with thee. To the ravenous birds of every wing, and to the beasts of the forest, give I thee to be devoured.
Thou shalt fall upon the open field; for I have spoken it, saith the Lord Jehovah.
And I will send a fire upon Magog, and upon them that dwell in security in the sea-coasts; and they shall know that I am Jehovah.
So will I make my holy name known in the midst of my people Israel, and I will not suffer my holy name to be polluted any more; and the nations shall
know that I am Jehovah, the Holy One of Israel. Behold it cometh, and shall be done, saith the Lord Jehovah. This is the day of which I spake.
Then shall the inhabitants of the cities of Israel go forth, and set on fire and burn the weapons, the shields and the bucklers, the bows and the arrows, the hand-staves and the spears, and they shall make fires of them seven years.
They shall take no wood from the field, neither shall they cut down any from the forests; for they shall make their fires of the weapons. And they shall spoil those that spoiled them, and plunder those that plundered them, saith the Lord Jehovah.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will give to Gog a place there, a grave in Israel, the valley of the passengers on the east of the sea; and it shall stop the way of passengers. There shall they bury Gog and all his multitude, and they shall call it “The valley of the multitude of Gog.”
And seven months shall the house of Israel be burying them, that they may cleanse the land.
Yea, all the people of the land shall bury them; and it shall be renown to them, in the day when I shall be glorified, saith the Lord Jehovah.
And they shall set apart men to be constantly employed, who, passing through the land, with the aid of those that pass by, shall bury those that remain upon the face of the land to cleanse it; at the end of the seven months shall they search.
And when any of the travellers that pass through the land shall see a man's bone, they shall set up a sign by it, till the buriers have buried it in the valley of the multitude of Gog.
Also the name of a city shall be Multitude. Thus shall they cleanse the land.
And thou, son of man, thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Say to the birds of every wing, and to every beast of the field, Assemble yourselves and come, gather yourselves from every side to my sacrifice which I make for you, a great sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel; and ye shall eat flesh and drink blood;
the flesh of the mighty shall ye eat, and the blood of the princes of the earth shall ye drink, of rams, of lambs, and of goats, of bullocks, all of them fatted in Bashan.
And ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and drink blood till ye be drunken, of my sacrifice which I make for you.
Thus shall ye be filled at my table with horses and riders, and mighty men and warriors of all kinds, saith the Lord Jehovah.
And I will set my glory among the nations, and all the nations shall see my judgment which I have executed, and my hand which I have laid upon them.
And the house of Israel shall know that I am Jehovah, their God, from that day and forward.
And the nations shall know that the house of Israel were carried into captivity for their iniquity. Because they trespassed against me, therefore hid I my face from them, and gave them into the hand of their enemies, so that they all fell by the sword.
According to their uncleanness and according to their transgressions have I dealt with them, and hid my face from them.
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: I will bring back the captives of Jacob, and have compassion upon the whole house of Israel, and be jealous for my holy name.
Then shall they forget their shame and all their trespasses with which they trespassed against me, when they dwell in security in their own land, and none maketh them afraid.
When I bring them back from the nations, and gather them from the lands of their enemies, then will I be glorified in regard to them before the eyes of many nations.
And they shall know that I am Jehovah their God, in that I caused them to be carried into captivity among the nations, and gathered them into their own land, and left none of them there.
And I will hide my face from them no more; for I have poured out my spirit upon the house of Israel, saith the Lord Jehovah.
In the five and twentieth year of our captivity, in the first month, on the tenth day of the month, in the fourteenth year after that the city was smitten, on the selfsame day the hand of Jehovah was upon me, and he brought me [[thither into the city]].
In the visions of God he brought me into the land of Israel, and set me upon a very high mountain, upon which was, as it were, the frame of a city toward the south.
And when he had brought me thither, behold, there was a man, whose appearance was as the appearance of brass, with a line of flax in his hand, and a measuring-reed, and he stood in the gate.
And the man said to me, Son of man, behold with thine eyes and hear with thine ears, and give heed to all which I shall show thee; for to the intent that I might show them to thee art thou brought hither; declare all which thou seest to the house of Israel!
And behold, a wall on the outside of the house round about, and in the man's hand a measuring reed, in length six cubits of a cubit and a handbreadth; and he measured the breadth of the wall, one reed; and the height, one reed.
Then came he to the gate, which looked toward the east, and went up the steps thereof, and measured the upper threshold of the gate, one reed broad, and the other threshold of the gate one reed broad.
And every chamber was one reed long, and one reed broad; and between the chambers were five cubits; and the threshold of the gate by the porch of the gate within was one reed.
He measured also the porch of the gate within, one reed.
Then he measured the porch of the gate, eight cubits; and the border thereof, two cubits; now the porch of the gate was inward.
And the chambers of the gate eastward were three on this side, and three on that side; they three were of one measure, and the projecting wall-pillars were of one measure on this side, and on that side.
And he measured the breadth of the entry of the gate, ten cubits; and the length of the entry of the gate, thirteen cubits.
There was also a space before the chambers one cubit on this side, and a space one cubit on that side; and every chamber was six cubits on this side, and six cubits on that side.
Then he measured the gate from the roof of one chamber to the roof of another; the breadth was five and twenty cubits, and door was over against door.
He made also wall-pillars sixty cubits, and toward the pillars, was the court of the gate round about on every side.
And from the front of the gate of the entrance to the front of the porch of the inner gate were fifty cubits.
And there were closed windows to the chambers and to their wall-pillars inward toward the gate round about, and likewise to the cornices; there were windows round about within, and upon the wall-pillars were palm-trees.
Then he brought me into the outer court, and behold, there were rooms, and a pavement made for the court round about; thirty rooms were upon the pavement.
And the pavement at the sides of the gates, by the length of the gates, was the lower pavement.
Then he measured the breadth from the front of the lower gate to the front of the inner court without, a hundred cubits toward the east and toward the north.
And as for the gate that looked toward the north in the outer court, he measured the length thereof, and the breadth thereof.
And the chambers thereof were three on this side, and three on that side. And the border thereof, and the cornices thereof, were of the same measure as the former gate; the length thereof was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.
And the windows thereof, and the cornices thereof, and the palm-trees thereof were of the same measure as the gate which looked toward the east, and they went up to it by seven steps, and the cornices thereof were before them.
And the gate of the inner court was over against the gate toward the north and east. And he measured from gate to gate a hundred cubits.
Then he led me toward the south; and behold, there was a gate toward the south; and he measured the border thereof and the cornices thereof according to those measures.
And there were windows in it, and within the cornices thereof round about, like those windows; the length was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.
And there were seven steps to go up to it, and the cornices thereof were before them; and it had palm-trees, one on this side and another on that side, upon the wall-pillars thereof.
And there was a gate in the inner court toward the south; and he measured from gate to gate toward the south a hundred cubits.
And he brought me to the inner court through the south gate; and he measured the south gate according to the same measures.
And the chambers thereof, and the border thereof, and the cornices thereof were according to those measures. And there were windows in it, and within the cornices thereof, round about; it was fifty cubits long, and five and twenty cubits broad.
And the cornices round about were five and twenty cubits long, and five cubits broad.
And the cornices thereof were toward the outer court; and palm-trees were upon the wall-pillars thereof; and in going up to it there were eight steps.
And he brought me to the inner court toward the east; and he measured the gate according to those measures.
And the chambers thereof, and the border thereof, and the cornices thereof, were according to those measures; and there were windows in it, and in the cornices thereof, round about; the length was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.
And the cornices thereof were toward the outer court; and palm-trees were upon the wall-pillars thereof, on this side and on that side; and in going up to it there were eight steps.
And he brought me to the north gate, and measured it according to those measures;
the chambers thereof, and the border thereof, and the cornices thereof; and there were windows to it, round about; the length was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.
And the cornices thereof were toward the outer court; and palm-trees were upon the wall-pillars thereof, on this side and on that side; and in going up to it there were eight steps.
And a room with its doors was by the borders of the gates, where they washed the burnt-offering.
And in the porch of the gate were two tables on this side, and two tables on that side, to slay thereon the burnt-offering, and the sin-offering, and the trespass-offering.
And at the side without, as one goeth up to the entrance of the north gate, were two tables; and on the other side, which was at the porch of the gate, were two tables;
four tables were on this side, and four tables on that side; on the other side of the gate eight tables, whereon they slew their sacrifices.
And the four tables for the burnt-offering were of hewn stone; their length was a cubit and a half, and their breadth a cubit and a half, and their height a cubit. Thereon they laid the instruments with which they slew the burnt-offering and the sacrifice.
And there were edging-boards of a handbreadth, prepared within round about; and upon the tables was the flesh of the offering.
And without the inner gate were rooms for the singers in the inner court; they were at the side of the north gate, and their prospect was toward the south; one at the side of the east gate having the prospect toward the north.
And he said to me, This room, whose prospect is toward the south, is for the priests that keep the charge of the house.
And the room whose prospect is toward the north is for the priests that keep the charge of the altar. These are the sons of Zadok, who, among the sons of Levi, come near to Jehovah to minister to him.
Then he measured the court; its length was a hundred cubits, and its breadth a hundred cubits, being square. And the altar stood before the house.
Then he brought me to the porch of the temple, and he measured the door-border of the porch, five cubits on this side, and five cubits on that side. And the breadth of the gate was three cubits on this side, and three cubits on that side.
The length of the porch was twenty cubits, and the breadth eleven cubits; and they went up to it by steps. And there were columns by the door-border, one on this side, and another on that side.
Afterwards he brought me to the temple; and he measured the projecting wall-pillars, six cubits broad on this side, and six cubits broad on that side, according to the breadth of the house.
And the breadth of the door was ten cubits; and the sides of the door were five cubits on this side; and five cubits on that side. Then he measured the length, forty cubits, and the breadth, twenty cubits.
And he went inward, and measured the border of the door, two cubits; and the door, six cubits; and the breadth of the door, seven cubits.
Then he measured twenty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth in the temple, and said to me, This is the most holy place.
And he measured the wall of the house, six cubits; and the breadth of every side-chamber, four cubits round about, round about the house:
And the side-chambers were chamber to chamber, three and thirty times; and they entered into the wall of the house of the side-chambers round about, and were connected with it; but they were not connected with the wall of the house.
And, the side-chambers became wider upward, having a winding ascent. For the circuit of the house went still upward, round about the house; therefore the greater breadth of the house was upward; and so they ascended from the lowest story to the highest through the middle story.
I saw also the height of the house round about; the foundations of the side-chambers were a full reed, six cubits to the knuckles.
The thickness of the wall of the side-chambers outward was five cubits, and the space which was left was the place of the side-chambers of the house.
And between the rooms was the breadth of twenty cubits round about the house on every side.
And the doors of the side-chambers were toward the space that was left, one door toward the north, and another door toward the south; and the breadth of the space that was left was five cubits round about.
And the building which was before the separate place, at the side toward the west, was seventy cubits broad; and the wall of the building was five cubits thick round about, and the length thereof was ninety cubits.
Then he measured the length of the house, a hundred cubits; and the length of the separate place and the building and the walls thereof, a hundred cubits.
Also the breadth towards the front of the house and of the separate place toward the east was a hundred cubits.
And he measured the length of the building before the separate place, and that which was behind it, and the galleries thereof on this side and on that side, a hundred cubits; and the inner temple, and the porches of the court,
the thresholds, and the windows that were closed, and the galleries round about the three sides. Over against the threshold was a table of wood round about, from the ground to the windows, and the windows were covered with it;
upon the space above every door, and upon the inner house, and without, and upon all the wall round about within and without, according to measure.
And cherubs and palm-trees were made, one palm-tree between two cherubs, and every cherub had two faces;
and the face of a man was toward a palm-tree on one side, and the face of a lion toward a palm-tree on the other side. So was it made upon all the house round about.
From the ground to above the door were cherubs and palm-trees made, and on the wall of the temple.
The posts of the temple were four-square; and the front of the sanctuary had the same appearance.
The altar was of wood, three cubits high, and two cubits long; and the corners thereof and the base thereof and the walls thereof were of wood. And he said to me, This is the table that standeth before Jehovah.
And the temple and the sanctuary had two doors.
And the two doors had two leaves apiece, two turning leaves; two leaves for one door, and two leaves for the other door.
And there were made on them, even on the doors of the temple, cherubs and palm-trees, such as were made upon the walls, and a wooden threshold was before the porch without.
And at the closed windows were palm-trees on this side, and on that side, on the sides of the porch, and on the side-chambers of the house, and on the thresholds.
Then he led me forth to the outer court, in the direction toward the north, and he brought me to the rooms which were before the separate place, and before the building toward the north.
The length was a hundred cubits before the gate toward the north, and the breadth was fifty cubits;
over against the twenty cubits in the inner court, and over against the pavement in the outer court, was gallery before gallery, in three rows.
And before the chambers was a walk of ten cubits breadth inward, a way of one cubit; and their doors were toward the north.
And the upper rooms were narrower (for the galleries took away room from them) than the lower and middle chambers of the building.
For they were in three stories; but had not pillars, as the pillars of the courts; therefore they were narrower than the lowest, and than the middlemost from the ground.
And as to the wall that was without, over against the chambers, toward the outer court, before the chambers, the length thereof was fifty cubits.
For the length of the rooms that were in the outer court was fifty cubits; but before the temple it was a hundred cubits.
And under these rooms was an entry from the east, as one came to them from the outer court.
In the breadth of the wall of the court toward the east, before the separate place and before the building, were rooms.
And there was a way before them similar to that before the rooms toward the north. Both their length and their breadth were the same, and all their goings out and their fashions and their doors were the same.
And so also were the doors of the rooms toward the south; there was a door at the head of the way, before the well-built wall in the way toward the east, as one entered into them.
Then he said to me, The north rooms and the south rooms, which are before the separate place, are holy rooms, where the priests, when they come near to Jehovah, eat the most holy things. There shall they lay the most holy things, both the flour-offering and the sin-offering and the trespass-offering; for the place is holy.
When the priests enter therein, then shall they not go out of the holy place into the outer court, but shall leave there the garments in which they minister; for they are holy; and shall put on other garments, and approach to the place which belongeth to the people.
Now when he had made an end of measuring the inner house, he brought me forth to the gate, whose prospect is toward the east, and measured it round about.
He measured the east side with the measuring-reed, five hundred reeds with the measuring-reed round about.
He measured the north side five hundred reeds with the measuring-reed round about.
He measured the south side five hundred reeds with the measuring-reed.
He turned himself also to the west side, and measured five hundred reeds with the measuring-reed.
On all the four sides measured he the wall round about five hundred reeds in length, and five hundred in breadth, to make a separation between the holy and the unholy place.
Then he brought me to the gate, even to the gate that looketh toward the east.
And behold, the glory of the God of Israel came from the east; and the sound thereof was as the sound of great waters, and the earth shone with his glory.
And the appearance was like the vision which I saw, like the vision which I saw when I came to destroy the city; it was a vision like the vision which I saw at the river Chebar. And I fell upon my face.
And the glory of Jehovah came into the house by way of the gate, whose prospect was toward the east.
Then the spirit took me up and brought me into the inner court; and behold, the glory of Jehovah filled the house.
And I heard one speaking to me out of the house, and a man was standing by me.
And he said to me: Son of man, this is the place of my throne, and the place of the soles of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the sons of Israel forever; and the house of Israel shall no more pollute my holy name, neither they nor their kings, by their fornication, and by the dead bodies of their kings in their sepulchres;
in that they set their threshold by my threshold, and their post near my post, so that there was only a wall between me and them, and defiled my holy name by the abominations which they committed; wherefore I have consumed them in my anger.
Now let them remove far away from me their fornication, and the carcasses of their kings; and I will dwell in the midst of them forever.
And thou, son of man, show this house to the house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities, and that they may measure the pattern.
And if they be ashamed of all which they have done, let them know the form of the house and the fashion thereof, and the passages for going out and coming in, and all the forms thereof, and all the statutes thereof, and all the laws thereof, and write it in their sight, that they may keep the whole form thereof, and all the statutes thereof, and do them.
This is the law of the house. Upon the top of the mountain, all within its limits shall be most holy. Behold, this is the law of the house.
And these are the measures of the altar by cubits; each cubit being a cubit and a hand-breadth. The bottom shall be a cubit high and a cubit broad; and the border thereof, by the edge thereof round about, shall be a span; and this shall be the outer part of the altar.
And from the bottom upon the ground to the lower ledge shall be two cubits, and the breadth one cubit; and from the lesser ledge to the greater ledge shall be four cubits, and the breadth a cubit.
And the altar shall be four cubits; and from the altar upward shall be four horns.
And the altar shall be twelve cubits long by twelve broad; square on the four sides thereof.
And the ledge shall be fourteen cubits long by fourteen broad on the four sides thereof; and the border about it shall be half a cubit; and the bottom thereof shall be a cubit round about; and its steps shall look toward the east.
And he said to me, Son of man, thus saith the Lord Jehovah: These are the statutes of the altar, in the day when it is made, to offer burnt-offerings thereon, and to sprinkle blood thereon.
To the priests, the sons of Levi, of the race of Zadok, that come near to me, saith the Lord Jehovah, to minister to me, thou shalt give a young bullock for a sin-offering.
And thou shalt take of the blood thereof, and put it on its four horns, and on the four corners of the ledge, and on the border round about, and thus cleanse and purge it.
And thou shalt take the bullock of the sin-offering, and it shall be burned in the appointed place of the house, without the sanctuary.
And on the second day thou shalt offer a he-goat without blemish for a sin-offering; and they shall cleanse the altar, as they cleansed it with the bullock.
And when thou hast made an end of cleansing it, thou shalt offer a young bullock without blemish, and a ram out of the flock without blemish.
And thou shalt offer them before Jehovah, and the priests shall cast salt upon them, and offer them up for a burnt-offering to Jehovah.
Seven days shalt thou sacrifice daily a goat for a sin-offering; they shall also sacrifice a young bullock, and a ram out of the flock without blemish.
Seven days shall they purge the altar, and purify it, and consecrate themselves.
And when they have finished these days, it shall be that on the eighth day and forward the priests shall present your burnt-offerings and your thank-offerings upon the altar, and I will accept you, saith the Lord Jehovah.
Then he brought me back to the outer gate of the sanctuary, which looketh toward the east; and it was shut.
Then said Jehovah to me: This gate shall be shut; it shall not be opened, and no man shall enter in by it; because Jehovah, the God of Israel, entered in by it, therefore it shall be shut.
The prince, because he is prince, shall sit in it, to eat food before Jehovah; he shall enter through the porch of that gate, and by the same way shall he go out.
Then he brought me to the north gate before the house; and I looked, and behold, the glory of Jehovah filled the house of Jehovah. And I fell upon my face.
And Jehovah said to me: Son of man, mark well, and behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears all that I say to thee concerning all the ordinances of the house of Jehovah, and all the laws thereof; and mark well all the entrances of the house, and all the outward passages of the sanctuary.
And say to the rebellious house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Let it suffice you of all your abominations, O house of Israel,
in that ye brought strangers, uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my sanctuary, so that ye polluted my house when ye offered my food, the fat and the blood, and broke my covenant by all your abominations.
And ye kept not the charge of my holy place, but appointed for yourselves such keepers of my charge in my sanctuary.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: No stranger, uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into my sanctuary, of all the strangers that are among the sons of Israel.
But even the Levites, who departed from me when Israel went astray, who went astray from me after their idols, shall bear their iniquity.
Yet they shall be ministers in my sanctuary, having charge at the gates of the house, and ministering at the house; they shall slay the burnt-offering and sacrifice for the people, and they shall stand before them to minister to them.
Because they ministered to them before their idols, and caused the house of Israel to fall into iniquity, therefore have I lifted up my hand against them, saith the Lord Jehovah, that they shall bear their iniquity.
And they shall not come near to me to do the office of a priest to me, and to come near to any of my holy things in the most holy place, but they shall bear their shame, and their abominations which they have committed.
But I will make them keepers of the charge of the house, for all the service thereof, and for all which is to be done therein.
But the priests, the Levites, the sons of Zadok, that kept the charge of my sanctuary when the sons of Israel went astray from me, they shall come near to me to minister to me, and they shall stand before me to offer to me the fat and the blood, saith the Lord Jehovah.
They shall come into my sanctuary, and they shall draw near to my table to minister to me, and shall keep my charge.
And when they enter the gates of the inner court, they shall be clothed with linen garments, and no wool shall come upon them while they minister in the gates of the inner court, and within the house.
They shall have linen coverings upon their heads, and linen breeches upon their loins; they shall not gird themselves with anything that causeth sweat.
And when they go forth into the outer court, even into the outer court to the people, they shall put off their garments in which they ministered, and lay them in the holy rooms, and shall clothe themselves with other garments, that they may not sanctify the people with their garments.
They shall neither shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to grow long; they shall shear their heads.
And no priest shall drink wine when they enter into the inner court.
Neither shall they take for their wives a widow, or her that is put away; but they shall take virgins of the race of the house of Israel, or a widow that is the widow of a priest.
And they shall teach my people the difference between the holy and unholy, and cause them to discern between the unclean and the clean.
And in controversy they shall stand to judge; according to my statutes shall they judge. And they shall keep my laws and my statutes in all my festivals, and they shall hallow my sabbaths.
And they shall come to no dead person to defile themselves; but for father, or for mother, or for son, or for daughter, for brother, or for sister that hath had no husband, they may defile themselves.
And after his cleansing they shall reckon to him seven days.
And in the day that he goeth into the sanctuary, into the inner court, to minister in the sanctuary, he shall offer his sin-offering, saith the Lord Jehovah.
And it shall be to them for an inheritance, that I am their inheritance. And ye shall give them no possession in Israel; I am their possession.
They shall eat the flour-offering, and the sin-offering, and the trespass-offering; and every dedicated thing in Israel shall be theirs.
And the first of all the first-fruits, and every oblation of all your oblations, shall belong to the priests. Ye shall also give to the priest the first of your meal, that he may cause a blessing to rest on thine house.
The priests shall not eat of anything that dieth of itself, or that is torn, whether it be fowl or beast.
Moreover, when ye shall divide by lot the land for inheritance, ye shall offer an oblation to Jehovah, a holy portion of the land; the length shall be five and twenty thousand reeds, and the breadth ten thousand. This shall be holy in all its borders round about.
And of this there shall be for the sanctuary five hundred in length and five hundred in breadth square round about; and fifty cubits round about for the suburbs thereof.
And of this measure shalt thou measure in length five and twenty thousand, and in breadth ten thousand; and in it shall be the sanctuary, the most holy place.
This is the holy portion of the land; it shall be for the priests, the ministers of the sanctuary, who come near to minister to Jehovah; and it shall be a place for their houses, and a holy place for the sanctuary.
Five and twenty thousand in length, and ten thousand in breadth, shall the Levites, the ministers of the house, have for themselves for a possession, and twenty rooms.
And ye shall appoint the possession of the city five thousand in breadth, and five and twenty thousand in length, over against the oblation of the holy portion; it shall be for all the house of Israel.
And a portion shall be for the prince on this side and on that side of the oblation of the holy portion and of the possession of the city, before the oblation of the holy portion and before the possession of the city, from the west side westward, and from the east side eastward; and the length shall be over against every one of the portions, from the west border to the east border.
As for the land, it shall be to him a possession in Israel, that my princes may no more oppress my people, but give the rest of the land to the house of Israel according to their tribes.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Let it suffice you, O princes of Israel! Remove violence and spoil, and execute judgment and justice, and cease from your expulsions of my people, saith the Lord Jehovah.
Ye shall have just balances, and a just ephah, and a just bath.
The ephah and the bath shall be of one measure; that the bath may contain the tenth part of a homer, and the ephah the tenth part of a homer; the measure thereof shall be according to the homer.
And the shekel shall be twenty gerahs; twenty shekels, five and twenty shekels, and fifteen shekels shall be to you one maneh.
This is the heave-offering which ye shall offer: the sixth part of an ephah out of a homer of wheat, and the sixth part of an ephah out of a homer of barley.
And as for the statute concerning oil, the bath of oil, ye shall offer the tenth part of a bath out of a cor; a cor being ten baths; for a homer is ten baths.
And ye shall offer one lamb out of the flock, out of two hundred, from the watered pastures of Israel, for the flour-offering and for the burnt-offering, and for the thank-offerings, to make reconciliation for them, saith the Lord Jehovah.
All the people of the land shall give this heave-offering for the prince in Israel.
And it shall be the duty of the prince to give burnt-offerings, and flour-offerings, and drink-offerings, in the feasts, and in the new moons, and in the sabbaths, and in all the solemn assemblies of the house of Israel; he shall present the sin-offering, and the flour-offering, and the burnt-offering, and the peace-offerings, to make reconciliation for the house of Israel.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: In the first month, on the first day of the month, thou shalt take a young bullock without blemish, and shalt cleanse the sanctuary.
And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin-offering, and put it upon the posts of the house, and upon the four corners of the ledge of the altar, and upon the posts of the gate of the inner court.
And so shalt thou do on the seventh day for him that hath transgressed through error or simplicity; so shall ye make reconciliation for the house.
In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, ye shall have the passover, a feast of seven days; every one shall eat unleavened bread.
And upon that day shall the prince sacrifice for himself and for all the people of the land a bullock for a sin-offering.
And the seven days of the feast he shall sacrifice a burnt-offering to Jehovah, seven bullocks and seven rams without blemish daily the seven days; and a he-goat daily for a sin-offering.
And he shall present a flour-offering, an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and a hin of oil for an ephah.
In the seventh month, on the fifteenth day of the month, shall he do the like, in the feast, seven days, according to the sin-offering, and the burnt-offering, and the flour-offering, and the oil.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: The gate of the inner court, that looketh toward the east, shall be shut the six working-days; but on the sabbath it shall be opened, and on the day of the new moon it shall be opened.
And the prince shall enter by the way of the porch of the outer gate, and shall stand by the post of the gate, and the priests shall present his burnt-offerings, and his peace-offerings, and he shall worship at the threshold of the gate; then he shall go forth; but the gate shall not be shut until the evening.
Likewise the people of the land shall worship at the door of this gate before Jehovah on the sabbaths and on the new moons.
And the burnt-offering, which the prince shall offer to Jehovah on the sabbath-day, shall be six lambs without blemish, and a ram without blemish.
And the flour-offering shall be an ephah for a ram; and the flour-offering for the lambs as much as he is disposed to give; and a hin of oil to an ephah.
And in the day of the new moon there shall be a young bullock without blemish, and six lambs and a ram; they shall be without blemish.
And he shall present, as a flour-offering, an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and for the lambs as much as he is able to give; and a hin of oil to an ephah.
And when the prince shall enter, he shall go in by the way of the porch of that gate, and he shall go forth by the way thereof.
But when the people of the land come before Jehovah in the solemn feasts, he that entereth by the way of the north gate to worship shall go out by the way of the south gate; and he that entereth by the way of the south gate shall go forth by the way of the north gate; he shall not return by the way of the gate by which he entered, but shall go forth over against it.
And the prince shall go in in the midst of them when they go in, and when they go forth shall he go forth.
And in the feasts and in the solemn assemblies the flour-offering shall be an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and for the lambs what he is disposed to give; and a hin of oil to an ephah.
And when the prince shall present a free-will burnt-offering or a free-will thank-offering to Jehovah, the gate that looketh toward the east shall be opened for him, and he shall present his burnt-offering, or his thank-offering, as he was wont to do on the sabbath-day; then he shall go forth, and the gate shall be shut after he hath gone forth.
And thou shalt present for a burnt-offering daily to Jehovah a lamb that is a year old without blemish; every morning shalt thou present it.
And thou shalt present with it every morning a flour-offering, the sixth part of an ephah, and the third part of a hin of oil to moisten the fine flour, for a flour-offering to Jehovah, by a perpetual statute continually.
Thus shall they prepare the lamb, and the flour-offering, and the oil, every morning, for a continual burnt-offering.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: If the prince give a gift to any of his sons, the inheritance thereof shall belong to his sons; it shall be their possession by inheritance.
But if he give a gift of his inheritance to one of his servants, it shall be his to the year of liberty, when it shall return to the prince. But his inheritance given to his sons shall be theirs.
And the prince shall not take of the people's inheritance, to thrust them out of their possession; but he shall give an inheritance to his sons out of his own possession; that no one of my people may be driven from his possession.
Then he brought me through the entry, which was at the side of the gate, into the holy rooms for the priests, which looked toward the north; and behold, there was a place behind toward the west.
And he said to me: This is the place where the priests shall boil the trespass-offering, and the sin-offering, and bake the flour-offering; that they may not bear them into the outer court, and so sanctify the people.
Then he brought me forth into the outer court, and caused me to pass by the four corners of the court; and behold, there was a court in every corner of the court.
In the four corners of the court were covered courts forty cubits long, and thirty broad; these four corners were of one measure.
And there was in them a wall round about, even round about the four; and boiling-places were made under the walls round about.
Then said he to me, These are the places of them that boil, where the ministers of the house shall boil the sacrifice of the people.
Afterward he brought me again to the door of the house; and behold, waters issued forth from under the threshold of the house eastward; for the fore-front of the house stood toward the east. And the waters flowed down from the side of the house, south of the altar.
Then he brought me out by the way of the gate northward; and he brought me round by the way without to the outer gate, that looked toward the east; and behold, there ran out waters from the right side.
And when the man that had the line in his hand went forth eastward, he measured a thousand cubits, and he led me through the waters, and the waters were to the soles of the feet.
Again he measured a thousand cubits, and led me through the waters, and the waters were to the knees. Again he measured a thousand cubits, and led me through, and the waters were to the loins.
Again he measured a thousand cubits, and it was a river, which I could not pass through; for the waters were high, waters to swim in, a river which could not be passed through.
And he said to me, Hast thou seen this, son of man? Then he brought me back to the brink of the river.
Now when I had returned, behold, at the brink of the river were very many trees, on the one side and on the other.
Then said he to me, These waters issue forth toward the east region, and run down into the desert, and go into the sea; they go forth into the sea, and the waters shall be healed.
And it shall come to pass, that every living thing that moveth, whithersoever the river shall come, shall live, and there shall be very many fish there; for when these waters shall come thither, [[the waters of the sea]] shall be healed, and everything shall live whither the river cometh.
And it shall come to pass that fishers shall stand upon it; from En-gedi to En-eglaim shall be places to spread nets; and therein shall be fish according to their kinds, like the fish of the great sea, exceeding many.
But the miry places thereof, and the marshes thereof, shall not be healed; they shall be appointed for salt.
And by the river, upon the bank thereof, on this side and on that side, shall grow all trees for food, whose leaf shall not fade, and whose fruit shall not fail; every month shall they bring forth new fruit; because their waters issue forth from the sanctuary. And their fruit shall be for food, and their leaves for medicine.
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: This is the border, according to which ye shall distribute the land among the twelve tribes of Israel. Joseph shall have two portions.
And ye shall inherit it, one like another. For I have lifted up my hand, that I would give it to your fathers; and this land shall fall to you for an inheritance.
And this shall be the border of the land toward the north side: from the great sea toward the way of Hethlon, as men go to Zedad,
Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is between the border of Damascus and the border of Hamath, and Hazar-hatticon, which is by the coast of Hauran.
And the border from the sea shall be Hazar-Enon, the border of Damascus and farther northward, and the border of Hamath.
This is the north side. And the east side ye shall measure between Hauran and Damascus, and between Gilead and the land of Israel by the Jordan, from the border to the east sea. This is the east side.
And the south side southward shall be from Tamar to the waters of strife in Kadesh, as far as the river by the great sea.
This is the south side southward. And the west side shall be the great sea, from the border till a man come over against Hamath. This is the west side.
So shall ye divide this land among you, according to the tribes of Israel.
And ye shall divide it by lot for an inheritance to you, and to the strangers that sojourn among you, who have begotten children among you; and they shall be to you as born in the country among the sons of Israel; they shall have an inheritance with you among the tribes of Israel.
And it shall come to pass, that in what tribe the stranger sojourneth there shall ye appoint him his inheritance, saith the Lord Jehovah.
And these are the names of the tribes. From the north end by the way of Hethlon, as one goeth to Hamath, Hazar-Enan, the border of Damascus northward toward Hamath; and to him belongeth from the east side to the west side: Dan, one tribe.
And by the border of Dan, from the east side to the west side: Asher, one tribe.
And by the border of Asher, from the east side to the west side: Naphtali, one tribe.
And by the border of Naphtali, from the east side to the west side: Manasseh, one tribe.
And by the border of Manasseh, from the east side to the west side: Ephraim, one tribe.
And by the border of Ephraim, from the east side to the west side: Reuben, one tribe.
And by the border of Reuben, from the east side to the west side: Judah, one tribe.
And by the border of Judah, from the east side to the west, shall be the oblation which ye shall offer, five and twenty thousand reeds in breadth, and in length as one of the other portions from the east side to the west side; and the sanctuary shall be in the midst of it.
The oblation which ye shall offer to Jehovah shall be five and twenty thousand reeds in length, and ten thousand in breadth.
And the holy oblation shall be for these: for the priests toward the north five and twenty thousand reeds in length, and toward the west ten thousand in breadth, and toward the east ten thousand in breadth, and toward the south five and twenty thousand in length. And the sanctuary of Jehovah shall be in the midst thereof.
It shall belong to the priests, the sanctified ones, to the sons of Zadok, who kept my charge, who went not astray when the sons of Israel went astray, as the Levites went astray.
And it shall belong to them as an oblation out of the oblation of the land, as most holy, by the border of the Levites.
And over against the border of the priests, the Levites shall have five and twenty thousand reeds in length and ten thousand in breadth; the whole length five and twenty thousand, and the breadth ten thousand.
And they shall not sell of it; neither shall they exchange or transfer the first fruits of the land; for it is holy to Jehovah.
And the five thousand which are left in breadth, over against the five and twenty thousand in length, shall be common land for the city, for habitation and for suburbs. And the city shall be in the midst of it.
And this shall be the measure thereof: the north side four thousand and five hundred, and the south side four thousand and five hundred, and the east side four thousand and five hundred, and the west side four thousand and five hundred.
And the suburbs of the city shall be toward the north two hundred and fifty, and toward the south two hundred and fifty, and toward the east two hundred and fifty, and toward the west two hundred and fifty.
And as to the residue in length, over against the holy portion, ten thousand eastward and ten thousand westward, over against the holy portion, its increase shall be for food to them that serve the city.
And they that serve the city shall serve it out of all the tribes of Israel.
All the oblation shall be five and twenty thousand reeds by five and twenty thousand; ye shall offer the holy oblation, four-square, together with the possession of the city.
And the residue on both sides of the holy oblation and of the possession of the city, over against the five and twenty thousand to the east border, and westward over against the five and twenty thousand to the west border, by the portions of the tribes, shall be for the prince; and the holy oblation and the sanctuary of the house shall be in the midst thereof.
What is left from the possession of the Levites and of the city, which are between what belongs to the prince, between the borders of Judah and Benjamin, shall belong to the prince.
And as for the rest of the tribes, from the east side to the west side: Benjamin, one tribe.
And by the border of Benjamin, from the east side to the west side: Simeon, one tribe.
And by the border of Simeon, from the east side to the west side: Issachar, one tribe.
And by the border of Issachar, from the east side to the west side: Zebulon, one tribe.
And by the border of Zebulon, from the east side to the west side: Gad, one tribe.
And by the border of Gad, at the south side southward, shall the border be from Tamar to the waters of strife in Kadesh, even to the river by the great sea.
This is the land which ye shall divide by lot of the possession among the tribes of Israel, and these are their portions, saith the Lord Jehovah.
And these are the gates of the city. On the north side shall the measure be four thousand five hundred reeds.
And the gates of the city shall be after the names of the tribes of Israel; three gates northward,—one gate of Reuben, one gate of Judah, one gate of Levi.
And on the east side shall be four thousand and five hundred [[reeds]]; and three gates,—one gate of Joseph, one gate of Benjamin, one gate of Dan.
And on the south side its measure shall be four thousand five hundred; and three gates,—one gate of Simeon, one gate of Issachar, one gate of Zebulon.
On the west side, four thousand and five hundred; and three gates,—one gate of Gad, one gate of Asher, one gate of Naphtali.
Its measure round about was eighteen thousand reeds. And the name of the city from that day shall be Jehovah-is-there.
In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim, the king of Judah, came Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, against Jerusalem, and besieged it.
And the Lord gave Jehoiakim, the king of Judah, into his hand, with part of the vessels of the house of God; and he carried them into the land of Shinar, to the house of his god; and he brought the vessels into the treasure-house of his god.
And the king commanded Ashpenaz, the master of his eunuchs, that he should bring certain of the sons of Israel of the king's race, and of the princes,
youths in whom was no blemish, and well favored, and skilful in all wisdom, and having knowledge and intelligence and strength, to stand as servants in the king's palace, and be taught the writing and the language of the Chaldaeans.
And the king appointed them a daily provision of the king's food, and of the wine which he drank; so nourishing them three years, that at the end thereof they might stand as servants before the king.
Now among these were, of the sons of Judah, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah.
And the prince of the eunuchs gave them other names. To Daniel he gave the name of Belteshazzar; and to Hananiah, of Shadrach; and to Mishael, of Meshach; and to Azariah, of Abednego.
But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself with the portion of the king's meat, nor with the wine which he drank; therefore he requested of the prince of the eunuchs that he might not defile himself.
And God gave Daniel favor and kindness from the prince of the eunuchs.
And the prince of the eunuchs said to Daniel, I fear my lord the king, who hath appointed your meat and your drink; for he might see your faces in worse condition than the youths of your age; then shall ye make me endanger my head to the king.
Then said Daniel to the steward whom the prince of the eunuchs had set over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,
Try thy servants ten days, and let them give us pulse to eat, and water to drink.
Then let our countenances be looked upon before thee, and the countenances of the youths that eat of the portion of the king's meat; and as thou seest, deal with thy servants.
And he consented to them in this matter, and tried them ten days.
And at the end of ten days their countenances appeared fairer and fatter in flesh than all the youths who ate the portion of the king's meat.
So the steward took away the portion of their meat, and the wine which they should drink, and gave them pulse.
And God gave these four youths knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom; and Daniel had understanding in all visions and dreams.
And at the end of the days, when the king had commanded him to bring them before him, then the prince of the eunuchs brought them in before Nebuchadnezzar.
And the king conversed with them; and among them all was found none like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah. Therefore they stood as servants before the king.
And in all matters of wisdom and understanding concerning which the king inquired of them, he found them ten times better than all the scribes and magicians that were in all his realm.
And Daniel lived even to the first year of Cyrus the king.
And in the second year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams, on account of which his spirit was troubled, and his sleep went from him.
Then the king commanded to call the scribes, and the magicians, and the sorcerers, and the Chaldaeans, that they might show the king his dreams; and they came and stood before the king.
And the king said to them, I have dreamed a dream, and my spirit is troubled to know the dream.
And the Chaldaeans said to the king in Aramaean, O king, live forever! Tell thy servants the dream, and we will show the interpretation.
The king answered and said to the Chaldaeans: The word has gone from me. If ye will not make known to me the dream and the interpretation thereof, ye shall be cut in pieces, and your houses shall be made a dunghill.
But if ye show the dream and the interpretation thereof, ye shall receive from me gifts, and rewards, and great honor. Therefore show me the dream, and its interpretation!
They answered again and said, Let the king tell his servants the dream, and we will show the interpretation of it.
The king answered and said, I know of a certain, that ye seek to gain time, because ye see that the word hath gone forth from me.
For if ye do not make known to me the dream, this alone is your purpose, and ye have prepared lying and deceitful words to speak before me till the time be changed. Tell me therefore the dream, and I shall know that ye can show me the interpretation thereof.
The Chaldaeans answered before the king, and said: There is not a man upon the earth who can show what the king requireth; on which account no king, however great and powerful, hath asked such things of any scribe, or magician, or Chaldaean.
It is a hard thing which the king requireth, and there is none other that can show it before the king, except the gods, whose dwelling is not with men.
For this cause the king was angry and very furious, and commanded to destroy all the wise men of Babylon.
And the decree went forth that the wise men should be slain; and they sought Daniel and his fellows, to slay them.
Then Daniel answered with understanding and wisdom to Arioch, the captain of the king's guard, who was gone forth to slay the wise men of Babylon.
He answered and said to Arioch, the king's captain, Why is the decree so hasty from the king? Then Arioch made the thing known to Daniel.
Then Daniel went in, and desired of the king that he would give him time, and that he would show the king the interpretation.
Then Daniel went to his house, and made the thing known to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions;
that they would desire mercies of the God of heaven, concerning this secret; that Daniel and his fellows should not perish, with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.
Then was the secret revealed to Daniel in a night vision. Then Daniel blessed the God of heaven.
Daniel spake and said: Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever! for wisdom and might are his.
And he changeth times and seasons; he removeth kings, and setteth up kings; he giveth wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to them that have understanding.
He revealeth deep and secret things; he knoweth what is in darkness, and light dwelleth with him.
I thank thee and praise thee, O thou God of my fathers, who hast given me wisdom and might, and hast made known to me now what we desired of thee; for thou hast now made known to us the king's matter.
Therefore Daniel went in to Arioch, whom the king had appointed to destroy the wise men of Babylon; he went and said thus to him: Destroy not the wise men of Babylon; bring me in before the king, and I will show to the king the interpretation.
Then Arioch brought in Daniel before the king in haste, and said thus to him: I have found a man of the captives of Judah that will make known to the king the interpretation.
The king answered and said to Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, Art thou able to make known to me the dream which I have seen, and the interpretation thereof?
Daniel answered in the presence of the king, and said, The secret which the king hath demanded, the wise men, the scribes, the magicians, the astrologers cannot show to the king;
but there is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets, and maketh known to King Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the days to come. Thy dream and the visions of thy head upon thy bed were these.
Thy thoughts, O king, came into thy mind, what should come to pass hereafter; and he that revealeth secrets maketh known to thee what shall come to pass.
But as for me, this secret is not revealed to me through any wisdom which I have more than all the living, but to the end that the interpretation might be made known to the king, and that thou mightest know the thoughts of thy heart.
Thou, O king, sawest, and behold, a great image. This image, which was high and of surpassing brightness, stood before thee; and its form was terrible.
The head of this image was of fine gold; his breast and his arms of silver; his belly and his thighs of brass;
his legs of iron; his feet, part of iron and part of clay.
Thou sawest till a stone was cut out without hands, which smote the image upon his feet, that were of iron and clay, and broke them to pieces.
Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold broken to pieces together, and became like chaff from the summer threshing-floors, and the wind carried them away, so that no place was found for them; and the stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth.
This is the dream, and now we will tell the interpretation of it before the king.
Thou, O king, art a king of kings; for the God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, power and strength and glory.
And wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts of the field and the birds of heaven hath he given into thy hand, and hath made thee ruler over them all. Thou art the head of gold.
And after thee shall arise another kingdom, inferior to thee; and another third kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule over all the earth.
And a fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron; forasmuch as iron breaketh in pieces and subdueth all things; even as iron, that breaketh all these, shall it break in pieces and bruise.
And whereas thou sawest the feet and toes part of potter's clay and part of iron, it shall be a divided kingdom; but there shall be in it of the strength of the iron, forasmuch as thou sawest the iron mixed with miry clay.
And as the toes of the feet were part of iron and part of clay, so the kingdom shall be partly strong and partly broken.
And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle themselves by marriage, but they shall not cleave to each other, even as iron is not mixed with clay.
But in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed; and the kingdom shall be left to no other people but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand forever;
even as thou sawest that the stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, and that it broke in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold. The great God hath made known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter; and the dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof sure.
Then King Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face and worshipped Daniel, and commanded that they should offer an oblation and sweet odors to him.
The king answered Daniel and said, Of a truth, your God is the God of gods, and the Lord of kings, and the revealer of secrets, since thou couldst reveal this secret.
Then the king made Daniel a great man, and gave him many great gifts, and made him ruler over the whole province of Babylon, and chief of the governors over all the wise men of Babylon.
Then Daniel requested of the king, and he set Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego over the affairs of the province of Babylon; but Daniel was in the gate of the king.
Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, whose height was sixty cubits, and whose breadth was six cubits. He set it up in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon.
Then Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to gather together the satraps, the prefects, and the deputy governors, the chief judges, the treasurers, the judges, the counsellors, and all the rulers of the provinces, to come to the dedication of the image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.
Then the satraps, prefects, and deputy governors, the chief judges, treasurers, judges, counsellors, and all the rulers of the provinces were gathered together to the dedication of the image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up; and they stood before the image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.
Then a herald cried aloud: To you it is commanded, O people, nations, and languages,
that at the time ye hear the sound of the horn, the pipe, the harp, the sambuck, the psaltery, the bagpipe, and all kinds of music, ye fall down and worship the golden image which Nebuchadnezzar the king hath set up.
And whoso doth not fall down and worship shall the same hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.
Therefore at the time when all the people heard the sound of the horn, the pipe, the harp, the sambuck, the psaltery, and all kinds of music, all the people, the nations, and the languages fell down and worshipped the golden image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.
Wherefore at that time certain Chaldaeans came near, and accused the Jews.
They spake and said to King Nebuchadnezzar, O king, live forever!
Thou, O king, hast made a decree, that every man that shall hear the sound of the horn, the pipe, the harp, the sambuck, the psaltery, the bagpipe, and all kinds of music, shall fall down and worship the golden image;
and that whoso doth not fall down and worship shall be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.
Now there are certain Jews whom thou hast set over the affairs of the province of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, these men, O king, have not regarded thee; they serve not thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.
Then Nebuchadnezzar in rage and fury commanded to bring Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. Then they brought these men before the king.
Nebuchadnezzar spake and said to them, Was it by design, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego? Do ye not serve my gods, nor worship the golden image which I have set up?
Now if ye be ready that at the time ye hear the sound of the horn, the pipe, the harp, the sambuck, the psaltery, the bagpipe, and all kinds of music, ye fall down and worship the image which I have set up, well! but if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the same hour into the midst of a burning fiery furnace; and who is the God that shall deliver you out of my hands?
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego answered and said to the king, O Nebuchadnezzar, we have no need to answer thee in this matter.
Behold, our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hand, O king!
But if not, be it known to thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.
Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and the form of his visage was changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. And he spake and commanded that they should heat the furnace seven times more than it was wont to be heated.
And he commanded the mightiest men in his army to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, and to cast them into the burning fiery furnace.
Then these men were bound in their trousers, their under-garments, their mantles, and their other clothing, and were cast into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.
And because the command of the king was urgent, and the furnace exceeding hot, the flame of the fire killed those men that took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.
And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, fell down bound into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.
Then Nebuchadnezzar, the king, was astonished, and rose up in haste, and spake, and said to his counsellors, Did we not cast three men bound into the midst of the fire? They answered and said to the king, True, O king!
He answered and said, Behold, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt, and the appearance of the fourth is like a son of the gods.
Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the mouth of the burning fiery furnace, and spake and said, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, ye servants of the Most High God, come forth! Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego came forth out of the midst of the fire.
And the satraps, prefects, and deputy governors, and the counsellors of the king, being gathered together, saw these men, upon whose bodies the fire had no power, nor was a hair of their head singed, nor were their trousers changed, nor had the smell of fire passed on them.
Then Nebuchadnezzar spake and said, Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who hath sent his angel, and delivered his servants, that trusted in him, and disobeyed the command of the king, and gave up their bodies, that they might not serve nor worship any god except their own God!
Therefore I make a decree, that every people, nation, and language which speaks anything reproachful against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and its houses shall be made a dunghill; because there is no other God that can deliver in this manner.
Then the king promoted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego in the province of Babylon.
Nebuchadnezzar the king to all people, nations, and languages that dwell upon the whole earth. Peace be multiplied to you!
I have thought it good to show the signs and wonders which the Most High God hath wrought toward me.
How great are his signs, and how mighty are his wonders! His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and his dominion endureth from generation to generation.
I, Nebuchadnezzar, was at ease in my house, and flourishing in my palace.
There I saw a dream which made me afraid, and the thoughts upon my bed and the visions of my head troubled me.
Therefore made I a decree to bring in all the wise men of Babylon before me; that they might make known to me the interpretation of the dream.
Then came in the scribes, the magicians, the Chaldaeans, and the astrologers; and I told the dream before them; but they did not make known to me its interpretation.
But at the last Daniel came in before me, whose name is Belteshazzar, according to the name of my god, and in whom is the spirit of the holy gods, and I told him the dream.
O Belteshazzar, chief of the scribes, since I know that the spirit of the holy gods is in thee, and no secret is too hard for thee, tell me the visions of my dream which I have seen, and the interpretation thereof.
The visions of my head were these. I saw, and behold a tree in the midst, whose height was very great.
The tree was large and strong, and its height reached to heaven, and it might be seen to the end of the whole earth.
The leaves thereof were fair, and the fruit abundant, and in it was food for all. The beasts of the field had shadow under it, and the birds of heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, and all flesh was fed of it.
I saw, in the visions of my head upon my bed, and behold, a watcher, even a holy one, came down from heaven;
he cried aloud, and spake thus: Hew down the tree, and cut off its branches; shake off its leaves, and scatter its fruit; let the beasts go away from under it, and the birds from its branches.
Yet leave the stump of its roots in the earth, in bands of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field; and he shall be wet with the dew of heaven, and his portion shall be with the beasts in the grass of the field.
His heart shall be changed, and be no more that of a man, and a beast's heart shall be given him, and seven times shall pass over him.
By a decision of the watchers is the decree, and by a command of the holy ones is the sentence; to the intent that the living may know that the Most High ruleth in the kingdoms of men, and giveth them to whomsoever he will, and setteth up over them the lowest of men.
This dream I, King Nebuchadnezzar, saw, and do thou, O Belteshazzar, declare the interpretation thereof, forasmuch as all the wise men of my kingdom are not able to make known to me the interpretation; but thou art able, for the spirit of the holy gods is in thee.
Then Daniel, who was called Belteshazzar, was amazed for one hour, and his thoughts troubled him. The king spake and said, Belteshazzar, let not the dream or the interpretation thereof trouble thee. Belteshazzar answered and said, My lord, the dream be to them that hate thee, and the signification of it to thine enemies!
The tree which thou sawest, which was large and strong, whose height reached to heaven, and which might be seen by all the earth,
whose leaves were fair, and whose fruit abundant, and in which was food for all, under which all the beasts of the field dwelt, and upon whoso branches the birds of heaven had their lodging,—
it is thou, O king, who art become great and strong; for thy greatness is immense, and reacheth to heaven, and thy dominion to the end of the earth.
And whereas the king saw a watcher, even a holy one, coming down from heaven, and saying, Hew the tree down and destroy it, yet leave the stump of its roots in the earth, in bands of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field, and he shall be wet with the dew of heaven, and his portion shall be with the beasts of the field, till seven times pass over him;
this is the interpretation, O king, and this is the decree of the Most High, which is come upon my lord, the king;
they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field, and they shall let thee eat grass as oxen, and be wet with the dew of heaven, and seven times shall pass over thee, till thou know that the Most High ruleth in the kingdoms of men, and giveth them to whomsoever he will.
And whereas it was commanded to leave the stump of the roots of the tree, thy kingdom shall be sure to thee after thou shalt have acknowledged that Heaven ruleth.
Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable to thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thy iniquities by showing mercy to the poor; if it may be a lengthening out of thy tranquility.
All this came upon King Nebuchadnezzar.
At the end of twelve months, he was walking in the palace of the kingdom of Babylon;
and the king spake and said, Is not this the great Babylon which I have built for the seat of the kingdom by the might of my power and for the honor of my majesty?
While the word was in the king's mouth, there fell a voice from heaven: “To thee it is said, O Nebuchadnezzar! the kingdom is departed from thee.
And they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field; they shall make thee eat grass as oxen, and seven times shall pass over thee, until thou know that the Most High ruleth in the kingdoms of men, and giveth them to whomsoever he will.”
The same hour was the word fulfilled against Nebuchadnezzar, and he was driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown like eagles' feathers, and his nails like birds' claws.
But at the end of the days, I Nebuchadnezzar lifted up my eyes to heaven, and my understanding returned to me, and I blessed the Most High, and I praised and honored Him that liveth forever, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, and whose kingdom endureth from generation to generation.
And all the inhabitants of the earth are counted as nothing; and he doeth according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand, or say to him, What doest thou?
At the same time my reason returned to me, and also the glory of my kingdom, my honor, and my splendor returned to me; and my counsellors and my lords sought me; and I was established in my kingdom, and I received yet greater majesty.
Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honor the King of heaven; all whose works are truth and his ways justice; and those that walk in pride he is able to abase.
Belshazzar, the king gave a great feast to his thousands lords, and drank wine before the thousand.
Belshazzar, while he tasted the wine, commanded to bring the golden and silver vessels which his father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the temple at Jerusalem; that the king and his princes, his wives and his concubines, might drink therein.
Then they brought the golden vessels that were taken out of the temple of the house of God at Jerusalem; and the king and his princes, his wives and his concubines, drank in them.
They drank wine, and praised the gods of gold and of silver, of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.
In the same hour came forth fingers of a man's hand, and wrote over against the chandelier upon the plaster of the wall of the king's palace; and the king saw the hand that wrote.
Then the king's countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were loosened, and his knees smote one against the other.
The king cried aloud to bring in the magicians, the Chaldaeans, and the astrologers. And the king spake and said to the wise men of Babylon, Whoever shall read this writing, and show me the interpretation thereof, shall be clothed with purple, and have a chain of gold about his neck, and shall rule as the third in the kingdom.
Then all the king's wise men came in; but they could not read the writing, nor make known to the king its signification.
Then was King Belshazzar in great consternation, and his countenance was changed, and his lords were amazed.
Then the queen, on account of this affair of the king and his lords, came into the banquet-house; and the queen spake and said, O king, live forever! Let not thy thoughts terrify thee, nor let thy countenance be changed.
There is a man in thy kingdom in whom is the spirit of the holy gods; and in the days of thy father, light and understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods, were found in him; and the king Nebuchadnezzar, thy father, made him chief of the scribes, the magicians, the Chaldeans, and the astrologers, thy father, O king!
forasmuch as an excellent spirit and knowledge and understanding to interpret dreams, and to explain hard sentences, and solve difficult questions were found in him, in Daniel, whom the king named Belteshazzar; now let Daniel be called, and he will show the interpretation.
Then was Daniel brought in before the king. And the king spake and said to Daniel, Art thou that Daniel, of the captives of Judah, whom the king, my father, brought out of Judaea?
I have heard concerning thee, that the spirit of the gods is in thee, and that light and understanding and excellent wisdom are found in thee.
And now the wise men and the magicians have been brought in before me, that they might read this writing, and make known to me its signification; but they could not show the signification of the thing.
But I have heard of thee that thou canst give interpretations, and solve difficult questions. Now if thou canst read the writing and make known to me its signification, thou shalt be clothed with purple, and have a chain of gold about thy neck, and shalt rule as the third in the kingdom.
Then answered Daniel and said before the king, Let thy gifts be to thyself, and give thy rewards to another: yet I will read the writing to the king, and make known to him the signification.
O king, the Most High God gave to Nebuchadnezzar, thy father, a kingdom, and majesty, and glory, and honor.
And by reason of the majesty which he gave him, all people, nations, and languages trembled and feared before him; whom he would he slew, and whom he would he kept alive; whom he would he set up, and whom he would he put down.
But when his heart was lifted up, and his spirit hardened in pride, he was thrust down from his kingly throne, and his glory was taken from him.
And he was driven from the sons of men; and his heart became like the beasts, and his dwelling was with wild asses; he was fed with grass like oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven; till he knew that the Most High God ruled in the kingdoms of men, and set up over them whomsoever he would.
And thou, his son, O Belshazzar, hast not humbled thy heart, though thou knewest all this;
but hast lifted thyself up against the Lord of heaven; and the vessels of his house have been brought before thee, and thou, and thy lords, thy wives, and thy concubines have drunk wine in them; and thou hast praised the gods of silver and gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor know; and the God in whose hand is thy breath, and whose are all thy ways, thou hast not honored.
Then was sent from him the hand, and this writing was written.
And this is the writing which was written: Numbered, Numbered, Weighed, and To be Divided.
And this is the interpretation of it. Numbered: God hath numbered thy kingdom, and made an end of it.
Weighed: Thou art weighed in the balances, and found wanting.
Divided: Thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians.
Then Belshazzar commanded, and they clothed Daniel with purple, and put a chain of gold about his neck, and made a proclamation concerning him that he should be third ruler in the kingdom.
In the same night was Belshazzar, the king of the Chaldaeans, slain;
and Darius the Mede took the kingdom, being about sixty-two years old.
It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom a hundred and twenty satraps, which should be over the whole kingdom,
and over them three presidents, of whom Daniel was one, that the satraps might give accounts to them, and the king might have no damage.
Then this Daniel was eminent above the presidents and satraps, because an excellent spirit was in him; and the king thought to set him over the whole realm.
Then the presidents and satraps sought to find occasion against Daniel in relation to the kingdom; but they could find no occasion nor fault; because he was faithful, and no error nor fault was found in him.
Then said these men, We shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, unless we find it against him concerning the law of his God.
Then these presidents and satraps rushed together to the king, and spake thus to him: King Darius, live forever!
All the presidents of the kingdom, the governors and the satraps, the counsellors and the prefects, have consulted together to establish a royal statute, and to make a firm decree, that whoever shall ask a petition of any god or man for thirty days, save of thee, O king, he shall be cast into the den of lions.
Now, O king, establish the decree and sign the writing that it be not changed, according to the law of the Medes and Persians which altereth not.
Wherefore King Darius signed the writing and the decree.
Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into his house, his windows being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem, and three times a day he kneeled upon his knees, and prayed and gave thanks before his God, as he had done before.
Then these men rushed together, and found Daniel praying and making supplication before his God.
Then they came near and spake before the king concerning the royal decree: Hast thou not signed a decree, that every man who shall ask a petition of any god or man within thirty days, save of thee, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions? The king answered and said, The thing is true, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which altereth not.
Then answered they and said before the king, Daniel, who is of the sons of the captives of Judah, regardeth not thee, O king, nor the decree which thou hast signed, but maketh his petition three times a day.
Then the king, when he heard these words, was much troubled, and set his heart to deliver him; and he labored till the going down of the sun to deliver him.
Then these men assembled before the king, and said to the king, Know, O king, that the law of the Medes and Persians is, that no decree or statute which the king establisheth may be changed.
Then the king commanded that they should bring Daniel and cast him into the den of lions. And the king spake and said to Daniel, May thy God, whom thou servest continually, deliver thee!
And a stone was brought and laid upon the mouth of the den; and the king sealed it with his own signet, and with the signet of his lords, that nothing concerning Daniel might be changed.
Then the king went to his palace, and passed the night fasting, and suffered not the concubines to be brought to him; and his sleep went from him.
Then the king arose very early in the morning, and went in haste to the den of lions.
And when he came to the den, he cried with a troubled voice to Daniel; and the king spake and said to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the living God, has thy God, whom thou servest continually, been able to deliver thee from the lions?
Then said Daniel to the king, O king, live forever!
My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions' mouths, so that they have not hurt me; forasmuch as before him innocency was found in me; and also before thee, O king, have I done no wrong.
Then was the king exceedingly glad, and commanded that they should take Daniel up out of the den. So Daniel was taken up out of the den, and no manner of hurt was found upon him, because he trusted in his God.
And the king commanded, and they brought those men who had accused Daniel, and cast them into the den of lions, them, their children, and their wives; and the lions had the mastery of them, and broke all their bones before they came to the bottom of the den.
Then King Darius wrote to all people, nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth: Peace be multiplied to you!
I make a decree, that in every government of my kingdom men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel; for he is the living God that endureth forever, and whose kingdom shall not be destroyed, and whose dominion shall endure to the end.
It is he that delivereth and rescueth, and worketh signs and wonders in heaven and in earth, who hath delivered Daniel from the power of the lions.
This Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius, and in the reign of Cyrus the Persian.
In the first year of Belshazzar, king of Babylon, Daniel saw a dream, and visions of his head upon his bed. Then he wrote the dream, and related the sum of the matters.
Daniel spake and said:—I saw in my vision by night, and behold, the four winds of heaven burst forth upon the great sea.
And four great beasts came up out of the sea, diverse one from another.
The first was like a lion, and had the wings of an eagle; I beheld till its wings were plucked from it, and it was lifted up from the earth, and made to stand upon its feet like a man, and a man's heart was given to it.
And behold, another beast, the second, like to a bear; and it stood up on one side, and it had three ribs in its mouth between its teeth; and they spake thus to it: Arise, devour much flesh!
After this I beheld, and lo, another, like a leopard, which had upon its back four wings of a bird; the beast also had four heads, and dominion was given to it.
After this I saw in the night visions, and behold, a fourth beast, dreadful, and terrible, and exceedingly strong; and it had great iron teeth; it devoured, and broke in pieces, and stamped the residue with its feet, and it differed from all the beasts that were before it; and it had ten horns.
I gave heed to the horns, and behold, there came up among them another little horn, before which three of the first horns were plucked up by the roots; and behold, in this horn were eyes like the eyes of a man, and a mouth speaking great things.
I beheld, till thrones were placed, and an aged one seated himself, his garment white like snow, and the hair of his head like pure wool; his throne like a fiery flame, and its wheels like burning fire.
A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him; thousands of thousands ministered to him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him; the tribunal sat, and the books were opened.
I beheld; and because of the great words which the horn spake, I beheld till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed and given to the burning flame.
As to the rest of the beasts, they had their dominion taken away, for the duration of their lives had been appointed for a season and a time.
I saw in the night visions, and behold, with the clouds of heaven came one like a son of man, and came to the aged one, and they brought him near before him.
And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages should serve him; his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom shall not be destroyed.
I Daniel was grieved in my spirit within me, and the visions of my head troubled me.
I came near to one of them that stood by, and asked him the truth concerning all this. So he told me, and made known to me the interpretation of the things.
These great beasts, which are four, are four kings, which shall arise out of the earth.
Then shall the saints of the Most High receive the kingdom, and possess the kingdom forever, even for ever and ever.
Then I desired to know the truth concerning the fourth beast, which differed from all the others, exceedingly dreadful, whose teeth were of iron and his nails of brass, which devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with his feet;
and concerning the ten horns which were in his head, and the other which came up, and before which three fell,—even that horn which had eyes, and a mouth that spake very great things, and whose appearance was larger than that of his fellows.
I beheld, and the same horn made war with the saints and prevailed against them,
until the aged one came, and judgment was rendered to the saints of the Most High, and the time came that the saints should possess the kingdom.
He spake thus: The fourth beast is a fourth kingdom upon the earth, which shall differ from all kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces.
And the ten horns are ten kings, which shall arise out of this kingdom; and another shall arise after them; and he shall differ from the former, and shall subdue three kings.
And he will speak great words against the Most High, and will harass the saints of the Most High, and will resolve to change times and laws; and they shall be given into his hand a time, and times, and half a time.
But the tribunal shall sit, and his dominion shall be taken away, and consumed and destroyed forever.
And the sovereignty and dominion and power over all kingdoms under the whole heaven shall be given to the people of the saints of the Most High; his kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him.
Here ended his words. As for me Daniel, my thoughts terrified me much, and my countenance changed; but I kept the matter in my heart.
In the third year of the reign of King Belshazzar, a vision appeared to me, to me, Daniel, after that which appeared to me at the first.
And I saw in a vision, and when I saw, I was in Shushan, in the palace, which is in the province of Elam; and I saw in a vision, and was by the river Ulai.
And I lifted up my eyes and saw, and behold, there stood before the river a ram, which had two horns; and the two horns were high, and one was higher than the other; and the higher came up last.
I saw the ram pushing westward and northward and southward, and no beast could stand before him, and none could deliver out of his hand; but he did according to his will and became great.
And I gave heed, and behold, a he-goat came from the west, over the face of the whole earth, without touching the ground; and the goat had a conspicuous horn between his eyes.
And he came to the ram which had two horns, which I had seen standing before the river, and ran against him in the fury of his power.
And I saw him come close to the ram, and he was enraged against him, and smote the ram, and broke in pieces his two horns; and there was no power in the ram to stand before him; and he cast him down to the ground, and stamped upon him; and none could deliver the ram out of his hand.
And the he-goat became exceedingly great; but when he became strong the great horn was broken, and instead of it grew up four conspicuous ones toward the four winds of heaven.
And out of one of them came forth a little horn, which became exceedingly great toward the south, and toward the east, and toward the beautiful land.
And it exalted itself even to the host of heaven, and some of the host and of the stars it cast down to the ground, and stamped upon them.
Yea, he magnified himself even to the Prince of the host, and the daily sacrifice did he take away from him, and the place of his sanctuary was cast down.
And a host was placed over the daily sacrifice with impiety, and it cast down truth to the ground, and it accomplished its purpose and prospered.
And I heard a holy one speak; and another holy one said to the one that had spoken, To how long a time extendeth the vision concerning the daily sacrifice, and the impiety of the destroyer, to give both the sanctuary and the host to be trodden under foot?
And he said to me, To two thousand and three hundred evenings and mornings; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.
And it came to pass, that when I Daniel saw the vision, I sought for the meaning; and behold, there stood one before me having the appearance of a man.
And I heard a man's voice between the banks of Ulai, which called and said, Gabriel, make this man to understand the vision.
And he came near where I stood; and when he came, I was afraid, and fell upon my face, and he said to me, Understand, O son of man! for this vision relateth to the time of the end.
But when he spake to me, I sank senseless upon my face to the ground; but he touched me, and lifted me up where I had stood.
And he said, Behold, I make known to thee what shall be in the latter time of the indignation; for [[the vision relateth]] to the time of the end.
The ram which thou sawest, having two horns, denoteth the kings of Media and Persia.
And the rough goat is the king of Greece; and the great horn between his eyes is the first king.
And as that was broken, and four arose in its place, four kingdoms shall arise out of the nation, but not with his power.
And toward the end of their reign, when the transgressors have filled up the measure of their iniquities, a king shall arise of a fierce countenance, and cunning in artifices.
And his power shall become mighty, but not by his own strength; and wonderfully will he destroy, and prosper, and accomplish his purposes, and he will destroy many, even the people of the holy ones.
And through his cunning will he cause fraud to prosper in his hand, and he will magnify himself in his heart, and he will destroy many in the midst of security, and against the Prince of princes will he stand up; but he shall be broken without hand.
And the vision of the evening and the morning, which was told thee, is true; but do thou seal up the vision, for it relates to many days.
And I Daniel fainted, and was sick some days; then I rose up and did the king's business; and I was astonished at the vision, but no one explained it.
In the first year of Darius, the son of Ahasuerus, of the race of the Medes, who became king over the realm of the Chaldaeans,
in the first year of his reign, I Daniel attentively considered in the Books the number of the years, concerning which the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah the prophet, that Jerusalem should remain in ruins till they were accomplished, namely, seventy years.
And I set my face toward God, the Lord, and made prayers and supplications, with fasting and sackcloth and ashes.
And I prayed to Jehovah, my God, and made my confession, and said, O Lord, the great and terrible God, who keepeth the covenant and mercy to them that love him and keep his commandments!
We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts and thy statutes.
Neither have we hearkened to thy servants, the prophets, who spake in thy name to our kings, our princes, and our fathers, and to all the people of the land.
To thee, O Lord, belongeth righteousness, but to us confusion of face, as at this day; to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to all Israel, to those that are near and to those that are far off through all the countries whither thou hast driven them because of their trespass which they have trespassed against thee.
O Lord, to us belongeth confusion of face, to our kings, to our princes, and to our fathers, because we have sinned against thee.
Yet with the Lord our God is mercy and forgiveness. For we have rebelled against him,
and have not obeyed the voice of Jehovah our God, to walk in his laws, which he set before us by his servants, the prophets.
Yea, all Israel have transgressed thy law, and turned away, so as not to obey thy voice; therefore the curse is poured out upon us, and the oath that is written in the law of Moses, the servant of God, because we have sinned against him.
And he hath fulfilled his word which he spake against us, and against our judges who judged us, by bringing great calamity upon us; for under the whole heaven hath it not been done as hath been done to Jerusalem.
As it is written in the law of Moses, all this evil came upon us. For we made not our prayer to Jehovah our God, that we might turn from our iniquities, and give heed to thy truth.
Therefore hath Jehovah our God kept his mind upon the evil, and brought it upon us; for Jehovah our God is righteous in all his works which he doeth; for we obeyed not his voice.
And now, O Lord our God, that broughtest thy people forth from the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and madest thee a name such as it is at this day, we have sinned, we have done wickedly.
O Lord, according to all thy goodness, let thine anger and thy fury, I beseech thee, be turned away from thy city Jerusalem, thy holy mountain! for because of our iniquities, and the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people are become a reproach to all that are about us.
Now, therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant, and his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord's sake!
O my God, incline thine ear, and hear! open thine eyes, and behold our desolations, and the city which is called by thy name! for we do not present our supplications before thee on account of our righteousness, but on account of thy great mercy.
O Lord, hear! O Lord, forgive! O Lord, hearken and do! Defer not, for thine own sake, O my God! For thy city and thy people are called by thy name.
And while I was speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin, and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before Jehovah my God, for the holy mountain of my God,
yea, while I was speaking in prayer, the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the former vision, came, weary with running, and reached me about the time of the evening oblation.
And he instructed me, and talked with me, and said: Daniel, I am now come forth to give thee understanding.
At the beginning of thy supplication a word went forth, and I am come to show it thee; for thou art greatly beloved; therefore give heed to the word, and consider the vision.
Seventy weeks are appointed for thy people, and for thy holy city, to complete the iniquity, and to fill up the measure of the sins, and to expiate the guilt, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal vision and prophet, and to anoint a holy of holies.
Know, therefore, and understand! From the going forth of the word that Jerusalem should be restored and built till an anointed one, a prince, are seven weeks; and during sixty-two weeks it shall be restored and built with streets and moats, yet in troublous times.
And after the sixty-two weeks shall an anointed one be cut off, and there shall not be to him [[a successor]]; and the city and the sanctuary shall be destroyed by the people of a prince that shall come, whose end will be as in a flood; and to the end shall be war, decreed desolations.
And he will establish a covenant with many for one week, and during half a week he will cause sacrifice and oblation to cease, and upon the wing of abominations shall come the destroyer, until decreed destruction be poured out on the destroyer.
In the third year of Cyrus, king of Persia, was a revelation made to Daniel, who was also called Belteshazzar; and the revelation is true, and relateth to long warfare. And he gave heed to the revelation, and had understanding of the vision.
In those days, I Daniel was mourning three full weeks.
I ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine into my mouth, till three whole weeks were ended.
And in the four and twentieth day of the first month, as I was by the side of the great river Hiddekel,
I lifted up my eyes and looked, and behold, a certain man, clothed in linen garments, and his loins girded with gold of Uphaz.
His body was like chrysolite, and his face had the appearance of lightning, and his eyes were as torches of fire, and his arms and his feet like the appearance of polished brass, and the sound of his words was as the shout of a multitude.
And I Daniel alone saw the vision and the men who were with me saw not the vision; but a great terror fell upon them, and they fled to hide themselves.
Therefore I was left alone, and saw this great vision; and there remained no strength in me, and my color was changed upon me into a deadly paleness, and I retained no strength.
And I heard the sound of his words; and as I heard the sound of his words, I fell senseless upon my face, and my face toward the ground.
And behold, a hand touched me, and lifted me upon my knees and the palms of my hands.
And he said to me, Daniel, much-beloved man, give heed to the words which I speak to thee, and stand upright! for to thee am I now sent. And when he said this to me, I stood up trembling.
Then said he to me, Fear not, Daniel! for from the first day that thou didst set thy mind to understand, and to chasten thyself before thy God, thy words were heard, and I am come on account of thy words.
But the prince of the kingdom of Persia stood up against me one and twenty days; but lo, Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help me; and I was left there victorious with the kings of Persia.
Now I am come to teach thee what shall befall thy people in the latter days; for the vision yet relates to distant days.
And when he had spoken these words to me, I set my face toward the ground, and was dumb.
And behold, one having the appearance of the sons of men touched my lips; then I opened my mouth and spake, and said to him that stood before me, O my lord, by the vision my pain came upon me, and I have no strength left.
And how can the servant of this my lord talk with this my lord? And now there remaineth no strength in me, neither is breath left in me.
Then one having the appearance of a man again touched me and strengthened me,
and said, Fear not, much-beloved man! peace be to thee! be strong, yea, be strong! And while he was speaking with me, I was strengthened, and said, Let my lord speak; for thou hast strengthened me.
Then he said, Knowest thou wherefore I have come to thee? And now will I return to fight with the prince of Persia, and I will go forth, and behold, the prince of Greece will come.
But I will show thee what is written in the book of truth. No one putteth forth his strength with me against them but Michael, your prince.
And I also, in the first year of Darius the Mede, stood up to confirm and strengthen him.
And now I will tell thee what is true. Behold, there shall arise yet three kings in Persia, and the fourth shall be far richer than they all; and, relying upon his riches, he shall stir up all against the realm of Greece.
But a mighty king shall arise, and rule with great dominion, and do according to his will.
But when he shall have arisen, his kingdom shall be broken in pieces, and shall be divided toward the four winds of heaven; and not to his posterity, nor with the dominion with which he ruled; for his kingdom shall be plucked up, and divided amongst others besides those.
And the king of the South shall become strong; but one of his princes shall become stronger than he, and have dominion; his dominion shall be a great dominion.
And after some years they shall ally themselves with each other; and the daughter of the king of the South shall come to the king of the North, to make peace; but she shall not retain the power of giving aid; neither shall he stand, nor his aid; but she shall be given up, and they that caused her to go, and he that begat her, and he that received her in those times.
But from a shoot of her roots shall one arise in his place, who shall come to an army, and shall come against the fortresses of the king of the North, and shall deal with them according to his pleasure, and prevail against them.
And their gods, with their molten images, and their precious vessels of silver and of gold, shall he carry into captivity into Egypt; then shall he stand away for many years from the king of the North;
and he shall come against the kingdom of the king of the South, but he shall return into his own land.
But his sons shall be stirred up, and shall assemble a multitude of large forces; and one of them shall move onward, and overflow, and pass through, and shall again stir himself up to carry on the war even to his stronghold.
Then shall the king of the South be enraged, and shall come forth and fight with him, even with the king of the North; and shall lead forth a great multitude, and the multitude shall be given into his hand.
And the multitude shall be elated, and his heart shall be lifted up, and he shall cast down tens of thousands; but he shall not be strong.
For the king of the North shall return and raise up against him a multitude greater than the former, and shall steadily come after certain years with a great army and with great riches.
And in those times many will stand up against the king of the South; and violent men of thy people shall exalt themselves, so as to establish the vision, and shall fall.
And the king of the North shall come, and cast up a mound, and take a fortified city; and the arms of the South shall not withstand, neither his chosen men, neither shall there be any strength to withstand.
And he that cometh against him shall do according to his will, and none shall stand before him; and he shall stand in the beautiful land, and destruction shall be in his hand.
And he shall set his face to come with the strength of his whole kingdom, and shall make pacification with him; and he shall give him his daughter in marriage, to ruin his dominion. But it shall not succeed, neither shall it be for him.
After this he shall turn his face to the isles, and shall take many; but a commander shall put an end to his scorn; nay, shall cause his scorn to return upon himself.
Then shall he turn his face to the strongholds of his own land; and he shall stumble, and fall, and shall not be found.
Then shall arise in his place one who shall send an exacter of tribute through the glory of his kingdom; but within few days shall he be destroyed, neither by anger nor by battle.
And in his place shall arise a despised person, to whom they shall not give the honor of the kingdom; but in the midst of peace he shall come in and obtain the kingdom by flatteries.
And the forces of a flood shall be overwhelmed before him, and shall be broken in pieces; and even the prince that is allied with him.
For after making a league with him, he will practise deceit; for he will come up, and prevail with a small people.
In the midst of security shall he come into the fattest provinces of the land, and he shall do what his fathers never did, nor his fathers' fathers; he shall scatter among them prey, and spoil, and riches; and he shall form his devices against the strongholds, even to a set time.
And he shall stir up his power and his courage against the king of the South, with a great army; and the king of the South shall be stirred up to battle with a very great and mighty army; but he shall not stand, for they shall form devices against him.
Even they that eat of his own food shall destroy him; and his army shall overflow, and many shall fall down slain.
And the hearts of both these kings shall be to do mischief; and at one table shall they speak lies; but it shall not prosper; for yet the end is for the appointed time.
Then shall he return into his land with great riches; and he will set his heart against the holy covenant, and he will execute his purposes, and return to his own land.
At the appointed time he shall again go against the South; but the second time it shall not be as at the first.
For the Chittaean ships shall come against him, and he shall be discouraged, and return, and be enraged against the holy covenant, and execute his purposes; and he shall again have an understanding with them that forsake the holy covenant.
And forces shall be raised by him, which shall pollute the sanctuary, the stronghold, and take away the daily sacrifice, and set up the abomination of the destroyer.
And such as do wickedly against the covenant will he lead to apostasy by flatteries; but the people that know their God shall be strong, and do exploits.
And they that have understanding among the people shall instruct many; but they shall fall by the sword, and by flame, by captivity, and by spoil, many days.
And whilst they fall they shall receive a little help, and many shall join themselves to them with flatteries.
And some of them of understanding shall fall, to try them, and to purify, and cleanse, even to the time of the end, for it is yet at the time appointed.
And the king shall do according to his will; and he will exalt himself and magnify himself against every god, and he will speak horrible things against the God of gods, and he will prosper until the indignation be accomplished; for that which is determined shall be done.
Neither will he regard the god of his fathers, nor the desire of women; nor will he regard any god, but he will magnify himself against all.
But in their place will he honor the god of strongholds, even the god whom his fathers knew not shall he honor with gold, and with silver, and with precious stones, and with jewels.
And he shall do his will against fenced strongholds with a strange god; whoever acknowledge him, to them he will give great honor, and give them dominion over many, and divide the land amongst them for a reward.
But at the time of the end shall the king of the South push at him, and the king of the North shall rush against him like a whirlwind with chariots, and with horsemen, and with many ships; and he shall enter into the countries, and overflow them, and pass over them.
He shall also enter into the beautiful land, and multitudes shall be overthrown; but these shall escape out of his hand, Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the sons of Ammon.
He shall stretch forth his hand also upon the countries, and the land of Egypt shall not escape.
And he shall have power over the treasures of gold and of silver, and over all the precious things of Egypt; and the Lybians and Ethiopians shall be in his train.
But tidings out of the East and out of the North shall trouble him, and he shall go forth with great fury to destroy and utterly to take away many.
And he shall pitch his palace-tents between the sea and the beautiful holy mountain; but he shall come to his end, and none shall help him.
And at that time shall Michael arise, the great prince that standeth up for the sons of thy people; and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation even to that time; and at that time shall thy people be delivered, every one that is found written in the book.
And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame, to everlasting contempt.
And they that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn the many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.
But thou, Daniel, shut up these words, and seal this book even to the time of the end. Many shall run eagerly through it, and much knowledge shall be gained.
And I Daniel looked, and behold, two others stood there, one on this side of the bank of the river, and the other on that side of the bank of the river.
And one of them said to the man clothed in linen, who was upon the waters of the river, How long shall it be to the end of these wonders?
And I heard the man clothed in linen, who was upon the waters of the river, and he lifted up his right hand and his left hand to heaven, and swore by Him that liveth forever, that in a time, times, and a half, even when the dispersion of a portion of the holy people should be at an end, all these things should be fulfilled.
And I heard but understood not; and I said, My lord, what is the latter end of these things?
And he said, Go thy way, Daniel, for the words are closed up and sealed till the time of the end.
Many shall be cleansed, and made white, and purified, and the wicked will do wickedly; and none of the wicked will understand, but the wise will understand.
And from the time when the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination of the destroyer set up, there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days.
Happy is he that waiteth and cometh to a thousand three hundred and thirty-five days!
But go thou thy way even to the end; for thou shalt rest, and rise up to thy lot at the end of the days.
The word of Jehovah, which came to Hoses, the son of Beeri, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam, the son of Joash, king of Israel.
The beginning of the word of Jehovah by Hosea. Jehovah said to Hosea: Go, and take thee a wife of lewdness, and children of lewdness; for the land hath committed great lewdness; it is false to Jehovah.
So he went, and took Gomer, the daughter of Diblaim; and she conceived and bore him a son.
And Jehovah said to him, Call his name Jezreel; for yet a little while, and I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, and will bring the kingdom of the house of Israel to an end.
Yea, in that day will I break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel.
And she conceived again, and bore a daughter. And God said to him, Call her name Unpitied; for I will no more have pity upon the house of Israel, but will surely take them away.
But upon the house of Judah will I have pity, and will save them by Jehovah their God; I will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle, nor by horses, nor by horsemen.
Then she weaned her daughter Unpitied, and conceived, and bore a son.
And God said, Call his name Not-my-people. For ye are not my people, and I will not be your God.
Yet the number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured, or numbered; and in the place where it was said to them, Ye are not my people, there shall it be said to them, Ye are the sons of the living God.
Then shall the sons of Judah and the sons of Israel be gathered together, and shall appoint to themselves one head, and shall come up out of the land. For great shall be the day of Jezreel.
Call ye your brethren My-people; and your sisters Pitied.
Contend ye with your mother, contend! For she is not my wife, Nor am I her husband; That she put away lewdness from her face, And adultery from her breasts, Lest I strip her naked, And expose her, as when she was born;
Lest I make her as the desert, and like a parched land, And kill her with thirst.
Upon her sons also I will not have pity, For they are the sons of lewdness.
For their mother hath been guilty of lewdness; She that bore them hath brought upon herself shame; For she said, I will go after my lovers, Who give me my food and my water, My wool and my flax, my oil and my strong drink.
Therefore, behold, I will hedge up her way with thorns, And I will enclose her with a wall, So that she shall not find her paths.
When she followeth after her lovers, she shall not overtake them; When she seeketh them, she shall not find them. Then shall she say, I will go back to my former husband, For then it was better with me than now.
For she did not consider that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, And multiplied silver unto her, And gold, of which they made images of Baal.
Therefore will I take back my corn in its time, And my new wine in its season, And I will take away my wool and my flax, Which covered her nakedness.
And now will I reveal her shame before the eyes of her lovers, And none shall deliver her out of my hand.
And I will cause all her joy to cease; Her feasts, and new moons, and sabbaths, And all her festal days.
I will destroy her vines, and her fig-trees, Of which she said, These are my hire, Which my lovers have given me; And I will make them a forest, And the wild beasts shall eat them.
I will punish her for the days of the Baals, When she burned incense to them, And decked herself with her rings and her jewels, And went after her lovers, And forgot me, saith Jehovah.
Therefore, behold, I will allure her, And will lead her to the desert, And will speak kindly to her;
And thence will I give her her vineyards, And the valley of Achor for a door of hope; And there shall she sing, as in the days of her youth! As in the day when she came up from the land of Egypt.
At that time, saith Jehovah, Thou shalt call me, MY HUSBAND; Thou shalt no more call me, MY BAAL;
For I will take away the name of the Baals out of her mouth, And their name shall no more be uttered.
At that time will I make for them a covenant With the beasts of the forest, and with the birds of heaven, And with the creeping things of the ground. The bow and the sword and the battle will I break from the land, And I will cause them to lie down in safety.
I will betroth thee to me forever; Yea, I will betroth thee to me in righteousness, and in justice, And in kindness, and in tender love.
Yea, I will betroth thee to me in faithfulness, And thou shalt know Jehovah.
At that time will I hear, saith Jehovah; I will hear the heavens; And they shall hear the earth,
And the earth shall hear the corn, and the new wine, and the oil, And they shall hear Jezreel.
And I will plant her for myself in the land; And I will have pity upon her that was called Unpitied; And I will say to them called Not-my-people, Thou art my people; And they shall say, Thou art my God.
And Jehovah said to me, Go again, love a woman that is loved by another, and is an adulteress; even as Jehovah loveth the sons of Israel, who turn themselves to other gods, and love raisin-cakes.
So I bought her for me for fifteen shekels of silver, and a homer and a half of barley.
And I said to her, Thou shalt wait for me many days; thou shalt not play the harlot, and thou shalt not be with any man; so will I also wait for thee.
For the sons of Israel shall abide many days without a king, and without a prince, and without a sacrifice, and without an image, and without an ephod, and without teraphim.
Afterward shall the sons of Israel return, and seek Jehovah their God, and David their king, and turn with fear to Jehovah and his goodness in future times.
Hear the word of Jehovah, ye sons of Israel! For Jehovah hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the land; For there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land.
Perjury, and falsehood, and murder, And theft, and adultery have broken forth, And blood reacheth to blood.
Therefore shall the land mourn, And every one that dwelleth therein shall languish, Together with the beasts of the forest, and the birds of heaven; Yea, even the fishes of the sea shall perish.
Yet let no man rebuke, and let no man reprove; For thy people are like those that contend with the priest,
Therefore shalt thou Fall by day, And the prophet shall fall with thee by night, And I will destroy thy mother.
My people is destroyed for lack of knowledge; Since thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, so that thou shalt no more be my priest; Since thou hast forgotten the law of thy God, I also will forget thy children.
As they have become great, so have they sinned against me; I will change their glory into shame.
They feed upon the sins of my people, And incline their hearts to their iniquity.
And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest; I will punish them for their ways, And requite them for their doings.
They shall eat and shall not be satisfied; They shall commit fornication, and shall not increase, For they have left off giving heed to Jehovah.
Fornication and wine and new wine take away the understanding;
My people ask counsel of their stocks, And their staff revealeth to them. For the spirit of fornication causeth them to err; Yea, they commit fornication, forsaking their God.
On the tops of the mountains they sacrifice, And on the hills they burn incense, Under the oak, and the poplar, and the terebinth, Because their shade is pleasant. Therefore your daughters commit fornication, And your daughters-in-law commit adultery;
I will not punish your daughters, when they commit fornication, Nor your daughters-in-law, when they commit adultery; For ye yourselves go aside with harlots, And sacrifice with prostitutes; Therefore the people that hath not understanding shall fall.
Though thou play the harlot, O Israel, Yet let not Judah offend! Come ye not to Gilgal, Neither go ye up to Bethaven. And swear ye not, saying, As Jehovah liveth!
For like a refractory heifer is Israel become refractory, Therefore will Jehovah feed them, like a lamb in a wide place.
Ephraim is joined to idols; Let him alone!
When their carousal is over, They give themselves up to lasciviousness; Their rulers love shame.
The wind hath bound them up with its wings, And they shall be brought to shame on account of their sacrifices.
Hear ye this, O ye priests, And hearken, O house of Israel, And give ear, O house of the king! For judgment is coming upon you, Because ye have been a snare at Mizpah, And an outspread net upon Tabor.
By their sacrifices they commit deep transgression, And I will bring chastisement upon them all.
I know Ephraim, And Israel is not hidden from me; For thou committest fornication, O Ephraim, And Israel is defiled.
They will not frame their doings To return to their God; For a spirit of fornication is within them, And they have no regard to Jehovah.
The pride of Israel testifieth to his face; Therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquity; Judah also shall fall with them.
With their flocks and with their herds shall they go to seek Jehovah, And shall not find him; He hath withdrawn himself from them.
They have been false to Jehovah, For they have begotten strange children; Now shall the new moon consume them with their possessions.
Blow ye the trumpet in Gibeah, And the cornet in Ramah; Cry aloud at Bethaven! Look behind thee, O Benjamin!
Ephraim shall be desolate in the day of rebuke; Among the tribes of Israel do I make known what is sure.
The princes of Judah are like them that remove the land mark; I will pour out my wrath upon them like water.
Ephraim is oppressed; he is crushed with punishment, Because he willingly walked after the decree.
I am as a moth to Ephraim, And as rottenness to the house of Judah.
When Ephraim saw his sickness, And Judah his wound, Then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, And Judah sent to the hostile king; But he will not be able to heal you, Nor will he cure you of your wound.
For I will be as a lion to Ephraim, And as a young lion to the house of Judah. I, even I, will tear, and will depart; I will take away, and none shall rescue.
I will go back to my place, Till they have suffered for their sin, and seek my face! In their affliction they will seek me early.
“Come, and let us return to Jehovah! For he hath torn, and he will heal us; He hath smitten, and he will bind us up.
After two days will he revive us, On the third day he will raise us up, And we shall live in his presence,
Let us, therefore, know him; Let us ever strive to know Jehovah, His coming forth is sure as the morning; He will come to us like the rain, Like the latter rain which watereth the earth.”
O Ephraim, what shall I do to thee? O Judah, what shall I do to thee? For your goodness is like the morning cloud, And like the early dew, which vanisheth away.
Therefore I have hewn them by the prophets, I have slain them by the words of my mouth, And my judgments have gone forth like the light.
For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice, And the knowledge of God rather than burnt-offerings.
But they, after the manner of men, have transgressed the covenant; Even therein have they dealt unfaithfully with me.
Gilead is a city of them that do iniquity; She is full of footsteps of blood.
As troops of robbers lying in wait for a man, so is the company of priests; They murder in the way to Shechem; Yea, they commit heinous wickedness.
I have seen a horrible thing in the house of Israel; There Ephraim committeth fornication, Israel is polluted.
For thee also, O Judah, a harvest is appointed.
When I was about to deliver my people from captivity, When I would have healed Israel, Then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, And the wickedness of Samaria; For they practise fraud, And the thief entereth in, And the band of robbers spoileth without.
And they think not in their hearts, That I remember all their wickedness. Now shall their doings encompass them; They are before my face.
With their wickedness they gladden the king, And with their falsehoods the princes; All of them are adulterers;
They are as an oven heated by the baker; He ceaseth to stir the fire, Until the dough which he hath kneaded be leavened.
On the feast-day of our king, the princes are sick with the heat of wine, And he stretcheth out his hand with revilers.
For they make ready their heart like an oven, while they lie in wait; All night the baker sleepeth; In the morning it gloweth like a flaming fire.
They all glow as an oven; They have devoured their judges; All their kings have fallen; And none among them calleth upon me.
Ephraim hath mixed himself with the nations; Ephraim is a cake not turned.
Strangers have devoured his strength, And he knoweth it not; Yea, gray hairs are sprinkled upon him, Yet he knoweth it not.
The pride of Israel testifieth to his face; Yet do not they return to Jehovah their God, Nor seek him, for all this.
Ephraim is like a silly dove, without understanding; They call upon Egypt; they go to Assyria.
When they go, I will spread my net over them; As birds of heaven will I bring them down. I will chastise them, as hath been proclaimed in their congregation.
Woe to them, for they have wandered from me! Destruction upon them, for they have rebelled against me! Though I myself would redeem them, they speak falsely to me.
They cry not to me from their heart, But howl upon their beds; For corn and wine they assemble themselves; They rebel against me.
I have chastened them; I have also strengthened their arms; Yet do they devise evil against me.
They return, but not to the Most High; They are like a deceitful bow; Their princes shall fall by the sword for the haughtiness of their tongues; This shall be their reproach in the land of Egypt.
Put the trumpet to thy mouth! Like an eagle cometh an enemy against the house of Jehovah, Because they have transgressed my covenant, And have rebelled against my law.
They shall say to me, My God, we know thee, we, thine Israel!
Israel hath cast away what is good; The enemy shall pursue him.
They have set up kings, but not by me; They have made princes, and I knew it not. Of their silver and their gold have they made themselves idols, That they may be brought to destruction.
An abomination is thy calf, O Samaria! Mine anger is kindled against them; How long will it be ere they can attain to purity!
For from Israel it came; The workman made it, and it is no God; Yea, into fragments shall the calf of Samaria be broken.
They have sown the wind, And they shall reap the whirlwind. They shall have no standing harvest; The ear shall yield no meal; If perchance it yield, strangers shall devour it.
Israel is swallowed up; Soon shall they become among the nations As a vessel which no one desireth.
For they have gone up to Assyria, Like a solitary wild-ass; Ephraim hireth lovers;
But though they hire among the nations, Soon will I gather the nations against them; Then shall they rest a little while from the burden of their king, and their princes!
Ephraim hath built many altars for sin, Therefore shall he have altars for sin.
Though I write for him many laws, They are accounted as a strange thing;
As to the sacrifices which they should offer me, they slay flesh and eat it; Jehovah hath no pleasure in them. Now will he remember their iniquity, And punish their sins; To Egypt shall they return.
For Israel hath forgotten his Maker, and builded palaces, And Judah hath multiplied fenced cities; But I will send a fire upon his cities, And it shall devour his palaces.
Rejoice not, O Israel, Exult not, like the nations! For thou committest fornication, forsaking thy God! Thou lovest hire on every corn-floor.
The floor and the vat shall not feed them, And the new wine shall deceive them.
They shall not dwell in the land of Jehovah; To Egypt shall Ephraim go back, And eat unclean things in Assyria.
They shall pour out no offerings of wine to Jehovah, Nor shall their sacrifices please him; They shall be to them as the bread of mourners; All that eat thereof shall be polluted. Their bread shall be for their own hunger; It shall not come into the house of Jehovah.
What will ye do in the festal day, In the day of the feast of Jehovah?
For, behold, they go forth from a wasted land; Egypt shall gather them; Memphis shall bury them; The precious places of their silver, Nettles shall possess them; Thorns shall spring up in their habitations.
The days of visitation are come; The days of retribution are come— Israel shall know that the prophet was foolish, That the man of the spirit was mad— For the greatness of` thy iniquity, and thy great hatred.
If Ephraim seek an answer from my God, The prophet is as the snare of the fowler in all his ways, A net in the house of his God.
They have deeply corrupted themselves, as in the days of Gibeah; He will remember their iniquity; He will requite their sins.
I found Israel as grapes in the wilderness; As the early fruit on the fig-tree, at its first time of bearing, I saw your fathers. But they went to Baal Peor, And separated themselves to shame, And had abominable idols according to their love.
The glory of Ephraim shall fly away as a bird; They shall not bring forth, nor bear in the womb, nor conceive;
Yea, if they bring up children, I will utterly bereave them; Yea, woe to them when I depart from them!
I have seen Ephraim planted, like Tyre, in a rich pasture, Yet shall Ephraim bring out his children to the murderer.
Give them, O Jehovah! What wilt thou give them? Give them a miscarrying womb, And dry breasts!
All their wickedness is in Gilgal; Yea, there have I hated them for the wickedness of their doings; I will drive them from my house; I will love them no more; All their princes are revolters.
Ephraim is smitten; Their root is dried up; they shall bear no fruit; Yea, though they should beget children, I will destroy the beloved fruit of the womb.
My God shall cast them away, Because they have not hearkened to him, And they shall be wanderers among the nations.
Israel is a luxuriant vine, That bringeth forth fruit; But according to the abundance of his fruit hath he abounded in altars; According to the goodness of his land hath he made goodly images.
Their heart is divided; now shall they suffer for it; He will break down their altars, And destroy their images.
For soon shall they say, We have no king, Because we fear not Jehovah; What can a king do for us?
They utter empty words, Swearing falsely, making covenants, And now judgment springeth up, as hemlock in the furrows of the field.
For the calf of Bethaven shall the inhabitants of Samaria be in fear; Yea, its people shall grieve for it, And its priests shall tremble for it, Because its glory has departed from it.
It shall be carried to Assyria, As a present to the hostile king. Ephraim shall be covered with confusion, And Israel shall be ashamed of his doings,
Samaria shall be brought to destruction; Her king shall be as a twig upon the waters.
The high places of Aven, the sin of Israel, shall be destroyed; The thorn and the thistle shall come up on their altars. And they shall say to the mountains, Cover us! And to the hills, Fall on us!
More than in the days of Gibeah hast thou sinned, O Israel! There they stood; The battle in Gibeah against the sons of iniquity did not overtake them.
Now will I chastise them according to my pleasure, And the nations shall be gathered together against them, When I shall bind them for their two iniquities.
Ephraim is a trained heifer, that loveth to tread out the corn; But I will lay the yoke upon her fair neck; I will cause Ephraim to draw, Judah shall plough, Jacob shall harrow.
Sow for yourselves to righteousness, and ye shall reap according to your piety; Break up your fallow ground; For it is a time to seek Jehovah, Till he come and rain righteousness upon you.
Ye plough wickedness, ye shall reap injustice; Ye shall eat the fruit of falsehood. Because thou trustest in thy way, in the multitude of thy mighty men,
There shall arise a tumult among thy people, And all thy fortresses shall be destroyed, As Shalman destroyed Betharbel in the day of battle, When the mother was dashed in pieces with her children.
Such things shall Bethel bring upon you Because of your great wickedness. In the morning shall the king of Israel be destroyed.
When Israel was a child, I loved him, And called my son out of Egypt,
But they turned away from those that called them. They sacrificed to images of Baal; They burned incense to idols.
I helped Ephraim to go, Yea, I took them up in my arms; Yet they marked not that I healed them.
I drew them with human cords, with bands of love; I was to them as those who lift up the yoke from their jaws; I dealt gently with them, and gave them food.
They shall no more go down to Egypt; For the Assyrian shall be their king, Because they refuse to return to me.
The sword shall fall upon their cities, It shall consume their bars, and devour Because of their devices.
For my people persevere in turning away from me; Though they are called to the Most High, None will exalt him.
How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I abandon thee, Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? My heart is changed within me; Yea, my compassion is kindled.
I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger; I will not again destroy Ephraim; For I am God, and not man, The Holy One in the midst of thee, And I will not come in anger.
They shall walk after Jehovah, when he shall roar like a lion, When he shall roar, then shall their sons hasten from the west;
They shall hasten as a bird from Egypt, And as a dove from the land of Assyria, And I will place them in their houses, saith Jehovah.
Ephraim compasseth me about with falsehood, And the house of Israel with deceit; Judah also is inconstant toward God, Toward the holy and faithful one.
Ephraim feedeth on wind, and followeth after the east wind; Every day he multiplieth falsehood and violence; They make a league with Assyria, And oil is carried into Egypt.
Therefore Jehovah hath a controversy with Judah. And he will punish Jacob for his ways, And requite him according to his doings.
In the womb he took his brother by the heel, And in his strength he contended with God;
Yea, he contended with the angel, and prevailed; He wept, and made supplication to him. At Bethel he found him, And there he spake with us.
And Jehovah, the God of hosts, Jehovah is his name.
Therefore turn thou to thy God; Observe mercy and justice, And hope in thy God always!
He is a Canaanite; in his hands are the balances of deceit; He loveth to oppress.
Yet Ephraim saith, Lo, I have become rich; I have found myself substance; In all my earnings can be found no transgression in which there is guilt.
Yet I, Jehovah, have been thy God from the land of Egypt; I will again cause thee to dwell in tents, as in the days of the solemn feast.
I have also spoken to the prophets, And I have given many visions, And by the prophets I have used similitudes.
Behold, Gilead is full of iniquity; Surely they have become corrupt; In Gilgal they sacrifice oxen, And their altars are like the heaps in the furrows of the field.
Jacob fled into the country of Syria, And Israel served for a wife, And for a wife he kept sheep.
By a prophet Jehovah brought up Israel out of Egypt, And by a prophet was he preserved.
Ephraim hath provoked his Lord most bitterly; Therefore will he leave his blood upon him, And recompense to him his reproach.
Once when Ephraim spake, there was trembling; he was exalted in Israel; But he offended through Baal, and died.
And now they sin more and more, And have made to themselves molten images; Of their silver by their skill have they made idols; All of it is the work of artificers. They say concerning them, Whoever will sacrifice, let him kiss the calves!
Therefore shall they be as the morning cloud, And as the early dew, which passeth away; As chaff driven with a whirlwind from the thrashing-floor, And as smoke from the chimney.
Yet I, Jehovah, have been thy God from the land of Egypt, And thou hast known no God but me; Yea, there was no saviour besides me.
I cared for thee in the desert, In the land of great drought.
As they were fed, so they were filled; They were filled, and their heart was lifted up; Therefore they forgot me.
Therefore have I become to them as a lion; As a leopard I watch for them in the way;
I will meet them as a bear bereaved of her whelps, And I will rend the caul of their heart, And there will I devour them as a lioness; The wild beast shall tear them.
It hath been thy destruction, O Israel, That against me, against thy help, thou hast rebelled!
Where is now thy king? Let him save thee in all thy cities! And where thy judges, In regard to whom thou saidst, Give me a king and princes!
I gave thee a king in mine anger, And I have taken him away in my wrath;
the iniquity of Ephraim is treasured up; His guilt is laid up in store.
The pangs of a travailing woman shall come upon him; He is an unwise son, For else would he not tarry long in the place of the breaking forth of children.
I will ransom them from the power of the grave; I will redeem them from death; O death, where is thy plague? O grave, where is thy destruction? Repentance is hidden from mine eyes.
Though he be fruitful among his brethren, An east wind shall come, A wind of Jehovah shall come up from the desert, And his spring shall become dry, And his fountain shall be dried up, And the treasure of all his pleasant vessels shall be spoiled.
Samaria shall suffer for her guilt, For she hath rebelled against her God. They shall fall by the sword; Their infants shall be dashed in pieces, And their women with child shall be ripped up.
Return, O Israel, to Jehovah thy God; For thou hast fallen by thine iniquity.
Take with you words, And return to Jehovah, saying, “Forgive all our iniquity, and receive us graciously, And we will render to thee the sacrifices of our lips!
Assyria shall not help us; We will not ride on horses; And no more will we say to the work of our hands, Ye are our Gods! For from thee the fatherless obtaineth mercy.”
“I will heal their rebellion; I will love them freely; For my anger is turned away from them.
I will be as the dew to Israel; He shall blossom as the lily, And strike his roots like Lebanon.
His sprouts shall spread forth, And his beauty shall be as the olive-tree, And his fragrance as Lebanon.
They that dwell under his shadow Shall revive as the corn; They shall shoot forth as the vine; Their name shall be like the wine of Lebanon.
Ephraim shall say, What have I more to do with idols? I will hear him; I will care for him; I will be like a green cypress-tree; From me shall thy fruit be found.”
Who is wise, that he may understand these things, Prudent, that he may know them? For the ways of Jehovah are right, And the righteous walk in them; But in them transgressors stumble.
The word of Jehovah, which came to Joel, the son of Pethuel.
Hear this, ye old men; Give ear, all ye inhabitants of the land! Hath such a thing happened in your days, Or even in the days of your fathers?
Tell ye your children of it, And let your children tell their children, And their children another generation!
That which the gnawing-locust left hath the swarming-locust eaten, And that which the swarming-locust left hath the licking-locust eaten, And that which the licking-locust left hath the consuming-locust eaten.
Awake, ye drunkards, and weep! Howl, all ye drinkers of wine, For the new wine, which is snatched from your mouths!
For a nation hath come up on my land, Strong, and not to be numbered; Their teeth are the teeth of the lion; They have the jaw-teeth of the lioness.
They have made my vine a desolation, And my fig-tree a broken branch; They have made it quite bare and cast it away; The branches thereof are made white.
Lament ye, like a bride, Clothed in sackcloth for the husband of her youth!
The flour-offering and the drink-offering are cut off from the house of Jehovah; The priests, the servants of Jehovah mourn.
The field is laid waste; The ground mourneth, For the corn is laid waste; The new wine is dried up; The oil languisheth.
Lament, O ye husbandmen, Howl, O ye vine-dressers, For the wheat and the barley, For the harvest of the field hath perished!
The vine is dried up, And the fig-tree languisheth; The pomegranate, the palm-tree, and the apple-tree,—All the trees of the field, are withered; Yea, joy is withered away from the sons of men.
Gird yourselves with sackcloth and mourn, ye priests! Howl, ye ministers of the altar! Come, lie all night in sackcloth, ye ministers of my God, For the flour-offering and the drink-offering are withholden from the house of your God!
Appoint ye a fast, proclaim a solemn assembly! Gather the elders and all the inhabitants of the land Into the house of Jehovah, your God, And cry unto Jehovah!
Alas, alas the day! For the day of Jehovah is near; Even as destruction from the Almighty doth it come.
Is not our food cut off from before our eyes, Yea, joy and gladness from the house of our God?
The seeds are rotten under their clods, The storehouses are laid desolate, the garners are destroyed; For the corn is withered.
How do the beasts groan, How do the herds of oxen wander perplexed, Having no pasture! The flocks of sheep also are destroyed.
To thee, O Jehovah, do I call, For a fire hath devoured the pastures of the desert, And a flame hath burned all the trees of the field!
The beasts of the field, also, cry unto thee, For the streams of water are dried up, And a fire hath devoured the pastures of the desert!
Blow ye the trumpet in Zion; Sound an alarm in my holy mountain! Let all the inhabitants of the land tremble! For the day of Jehovah cometh, for it is near!
A day of darkness, and gloominess, A day of clouds, and thick darkness. As the morning light spreadeth itself upon the mountains, There cometh a numerous people and a strong; Like them there have been none of old time, And after them there shall not be, Even to the years of many generations.
A fire devoureth before them, And behind them a flame burneth; The land is as the garden of Eden before them. And behind them a desolate wilderness! Yea, nothing escapeth them.
Their appearance is like the appearance of horses, And like horsemen do they run;
Like rattling chariots they leap on the tops of the mountains; Like the crackling flame of fire, which devoureth stubble; Like a mighty host set in battle array.
Before them the people tremble, And all faces gather blackness.
They run like mighty men; They climb the wall like warriors; They march every one on his way; They change not their paths.
One doth not thrust another; They march every one in his path, And though they rush among weapons, they are not wounded.
They run through the city; They run upon the wall; They go up into the houses; They enter in at the windows, like a thief.
The earth quaketh before them, And the heavens tremble; The sun and the moon are darkened, And the stars withdraw their shining.
Jehovah uttereth his voice before his army; For very great is his host; Yea, it is mighty, executing his word; The day of Jehovah is great, and very terrible; Who shall be able to bear it?
Yet even now, saith Jehovah, Turn ye to me with all your heart, With fasting, with weeping, and with mourning!
And rend your hearts, and not your garments, And turn to Jehovah your God, For he is gracious and merciful, Slow to anger, and of great kindness, And repenteth of a threatened evil.
Who knoweth but he will turn and repent, And leave a blessing behind him, Even a flour-offering and a drink-offering for Jehovah your God.
Blow ye the trumpet in Zion; Appoint yea fast; proclaim a solemn assembly!
Gather the people; appoint a congregation; Assemble the elders; Gather the children and the sucklings! Let the bridegroom come forth from his chamber, And the bride from her nuptial bed!
Let the priests, the servants of Jehovah, Weep between the porch and the altar, And say, Spare thy people, O Jehovah, And give not thine inheritance to reproach, And to be a by-word to the nations! Why should they say among the nations, Where is their God?
Then will Jehovah be zealous for his land, And have compassion on his people,
Yea, Jehovah will answer, and say to his people, Behold, I will send you corn, And new wine, and oil, and ye shall be satisfied therewith; And I will no more make you a reproach among the nations.
I will remove far from you the northern host, And I will drive it into a dry and desolate land; Its van toward the Eastern sea, And its rear toward the Western sea. And its scent shall come up, And its ill savor shall come up, Because it hath done great things.
Fear not, O land, exult and rejoice, For Jehovah hath done great things!
Fear not, O ye beasts of the field, For the pastures of the desert spring up, For the tree beareth its fruit; The fig-tree and the vine yield their strength!
And, O ye sons of Zion, exult, And rejoice in Jehovah your God! For he giveth you the former rain in just measure, And causeth showers to come down upon you, Even the former rain, and the latter rain, as aforetime.
And the threshing-floors shall be full of wheat, And the vats shall overflow with new wine and oil.
And I will restore to you the years Which the swarming-locust hath eaten, The licking-locust, the consuming-locust, and the gnawing-locusts, My great army, which I sent among you.
Ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, And praise the name of Jehovah your God, Who hath dealt wondrously with you; And my people shall never be put to shame.
Ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, And that I am Jehovah, your God, and none else; And my people shall never be put to shame.
And it shall come to pass afterward, That I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; And your sons and your daughters shall prophesy; Your old men shall dream dreams, Your young men shall see visions.
Upon the men-servants also, and upon the handmaids, Will I pour out my spirit in those days.
And I will show wonders in the heavens and in the earth; Blood and fire, and pillars of smoke.
The sun shall be turned into darkness, And the moon into blood, Before the day of Jehovah cometh, The great and the terrible day. Then whoever calleth on the name of Jehovah shall be delivered;
For upon mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, shall be deliverance, As Jehovah hath spoken; And among the remnant, whom Jehovah shall call.
For behold, in those days and at that time, When I shall bring back the captives of Judah and Jerusalem,
I will assemble all the nations, And will bring them down it to the valley of Jehoshaphat, And there will I contend with them for my people and inheritance, Israel; Because they scattered them among the nations, And divided my land among themselves.
Yea, they cast lots for my people, And gave a boy for a harlot, And sold a damsel for wine to drink.
What have ye to do with me, O Tyre and Sidon, And all the borders of Philistia? Will ye retaliate on me? Or will ye do anything against me? Swiftly and speedily will I bring back your doings upon your own head.
Ye have taken my silver and my gold, And have carried into your palaces my precious, goodly things;
The sons also of Judah, and the sons of Jerusalem, Ye have sold to the Grecians, That ye might remove them far from their border.
Behold, I will raise them out of the place whither ye have sold them, And I will return your injury upon your own head;
I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hand of the sons of Judah, And they shall sell them to the Sabeans, to a nation afar off; For Jehovah hath spoken it.
Proclaim ye this among the nations: “Prepare war! Stir up the mighty ones! Let all the warriors draw near; let them come up!”
Beat your ploughshares into swords, And your pruning-hooks into spears; Let the weak say, I am strong!
Assemble yourselves and come, all ye nations round about; Gather yourselves together! Thither, O Jehovah, bring down thy mighty ones!
Let the nations rise and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat! For there will I sit to judge all the nations around.
Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe; Come and tread, for the wine-press is full; The vats overflow; For their wickedness is great!
The multitudes, the multitudes in the valley of judgment! For the day of Jehovah is near in the valley of judgment.
The sun and the moon are darkened, And the stars withdraw their shining.
Jehovah also will roar from Zion, And utter his voice from Jerusalem; The heavens and the earth shall shake. But Jehovah will be a refuge to his people! A strong-hold to the sons of Israel.
Then shall ye know that I am Jehovah your God, Dwelling in Zion, my holy mountain; And Jerusalem shall be holy; Strangers shall pass through her no more.
In that day shall the mountains drop down new wine, And the hills shall flow with milk. And all the streams of Judah shall flow with water. A fountain shall come forth from the house of Jehovah, That shall water the valley of Shittim.
Egypt shall be a waste, And Edom a desolate wilderness, For their violence against the sons of Judah; For they shed innocent blood in their land.
But Judah shall be inhabited for ever, And Jerusalem from generation to generation.
And I will avenge their blood, which I have not avenged, And Jehovah will dwell upon Zion.
The words of Amos, one of the shepherds of Tekoa, which he prophesied concerning Israel in the days of Uzziah king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam, the son of Joash, king of Israel, two years before the earth quake. He said:—
Jehovah will roar from Zion, And utter his voice from Jerusalem; The habitations of the shepherds shall mourn, And the top of Carmel shall wither.
Thus saith Jehovah; For three transgressions of Damascus, And for four, will I not turn away its punishment; For they thrashed Gilead with thrashing-wains of iron.
I will send a fire upon the house of Hazael, Which shall devour the palaces of Benhadad.
I will also break the bar of Damascus, And I will destroy the inhabitant from the valley of Aven, And him that holdeth the sceptre from Beth-Eden, And the people of Syria shall be led captive to Kir: Jehovah hath said it.
Thus saith Jehovah: For three transgressions of Gaza, And for four, I will not turn away its punishment; For they led captive all that fell into their hands, And delivered them up to Edom.
But I will send a fire upon the wall of Gaza, Which shall devour her palaces.
And I will destroy the inhabitant from Ashdod, And him that holdeth the sceptre from Ashkelon; And I will turn my hand against Ekron, And the residue of the Philistines shall perish. The Lord, Jehovah, hath said it.
Thus saith Jehovah: For three transgressions of Tyre, And for four, will I not turn away its punishment; Because they delivered up all their captives to Edom, And remembered not the brotherly covenant.
But I will send a fire on the wall of Tyre, Which shall devour her palaces.
Thus saith Jehovah: For three transgressions of Edom, And for four, will I not turn away his punishment; For he pursued his brother with the sword, And cast off all pity, And his anger tore perpetually; Yea, he kept his wrath forever.
But I will send a fire upon Teman. Which shall devour the palaces of Bozrah.
Thus saith Jehovah: For three transgressions of the children of Ammon, And for four, will I not turn away their punishment; For they ripped up the women with child of Gilead, That they might enlarge their border.
But I will kindle a fire on the wall of Rabbah, Which shall devour her palaces, Amid the war-shout in the day of battle, In a whirlwind in the day of the storm.
Their king shall go into captivity, He and his princes together, saith Jehovah.
Thus saith Jehovah: For three transgressions of Moab, And for four, will I not turn away his punishment; For he burned the bones of the king of Edom into lime!
But I will send a fire on Moab, Which shall devour the palaces of Kirioth; And Moab shall die amid tumults, Amid the war-shout, and the sound of the trumpet.
I will destroy the judge from the midst of him, And slay all the princes with him, saith Jehovah.
Thus saith Jehovah: For three transgressions of Judah, And for four, will I not turn away their punishment; For they have despised the law of Jehovah, And have not kept his statutes, And their idols have caused them to err, After which their fathers walked.
But I will send a fire upon Judah, Which shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem.
Thus saith Jehovah: For three transgressions of Israel, And for four, will I not turn away their punishment. For they sell the righteous for silver, And the needy for a pair of shoes;
They pant for the dust of the earth on the head of the poor, And pervert the cause of the afflicted. The son and the father go in to the same damsel, To dishonor my holy name.
They lay themselves down upon pledged garments Near every altar; And drink wine, procured by fines, In the house of their gods.
Yet I destroyed the Amorites before them, Who were tall as the cedars, And strong as the oaks. I destroyed their fruit above, And their roots beneath.
I brought you up from the land of Egypt, And led you in the desert forty years, That ye might possess the land of the Amorite.
Of your sons also I raised up prophets, And of your young men Nazarites; Is it not even so, O ye sons of Israel? saith Jehovah.
But ye gave the Nazarites wine to drink, And commanded the prophets, Saying, Prophesy not!
Behold, I will press you down, As a wagon presseth down that is full of sheaves.
And flight shall fail the swift, And the strong shall not exert his strength, And the mighty shall not save his life,
And he that handleth the bow shall not stand, And the swift of foot shall not save himself, And the horseman shall not escape with his life.
He that is strong in heart among the mighty Shall, in that day, flee away naked, saith Jehovah.
Hear these words, which Jehovah speaketh against you, ye sons of Israel; Against the whole family which I brought up out of the land of Egypt!
You only have I known of all the families of the earth; Therefore will I punish you for all your iniquities.
Can two walk together, Unless they agree together?
Will the lion roar in the forest, When he seeth no prey? Will the young lion cry aloud from his den, If he have seized nothing?
Can a bird fall into a snare upon the earth, Where none is set for him? Will a snare spring up from the ground, When it hath caught nothing?
Shall a trumpet be blown in the city, And the people not be afraid? Shall there be evil upon a city, And Jehovah not have done it?
Surely the Lord Jehovah doeth nothing, But he revealeth his secret To his servants the prophets.
When the lion roareth, who will not fear? When the Lord Jehovah speaketh, who will not prophesy?
Proclaim ye, in the palaces in Ashdod, And in the palaces in the land of Egypt, And say, Assemble yourselves upon the mountains of Samaria; Behold the great tumults in the midst of her, And the oppressions within her!
For they have no care to do right, saith Jehovah; They treasure up rapine and robbery in their palaces.
Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: An enemy shall encompass the land. And shall bring down thy strength from thee, And thy palaces shall be plundered.
Thus saith Jehovah: As the shepherd taketh out of the lion's mouth Two legs, or a portion of an ear, So shall the children of Israel be taken out, Who in Samaria sit in the corners of their sofas, And upon their damask couches.
Hear ye, and testify to the house of Jacob, Saith the Lord, Jehovah, God of hosts!
In the day when I punish the transgressions of Israel, Then will I punish the altars of Bethel; The horns of the altar shall be cut off, And fall to the ground.
and I will smite the winter-house together with the summer-house, And the houses of ivory shall be destroyed, And the great houses shall be brought to the ground, saith Jehovah.
Hear these words, O ye kine of Bashan, That are on the mountain of Samaria; That oppress the poor; that crush the needy; That say to your master, Bring, and let us drink!
The Lord Jehovah hath sworn by his holiness; Behold, the days shall come upon you When ye shall be taken away with hooks, And your residue with fishing-hooks.
And ye shall go out at the breaches, every one right forward, And ye shall be thrown into a castle, saith Jehovah.
Go, now, to Bethel, and transgress; At Gilgal multiply transgression! Bring your sacrifices every morning, And your tithes every three years!
Burn a thank-offering from your extortions, And proclaim the free-will offerings; publish them abroad! For this is your delight, ye sons of Israel, Saith the Lord, Jehovah.
I also have caused cleanness of teeth in all your cities, And want of bread in all your places; And yet ye have not returned to me, saith Jehovah.
I also have withholden from you the rain three months before the harvest; I have caused it to rain upon one city, And upon another city have I not caused it to rain; One piece of ground hath been rained upon, And another, upon which I have not caused it to rain, hath withered.
Two or three cities have gone to one city, To drink water, and have not been satisfied; And yet ye have not returned to me, saith Jehovah.
I have smitten you with blasting and mildew; The locust hath devoured your many gardens, Your vineyards, your fig-trees, and your olive-trees; Yet have ye not returned to me, saith Jehovah.
I have sent among you the pestilence after the manner of Egypt; I have slain your young men with the sword, And your horses have I led into captivity; I have made the smell of your camps to come up into your nostrils; And yet ye have not returned to me, saith Jehovah.
I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah; And ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning; And yet ye have not returned to me, saith Jehovah.
Therefore thus will I deal with thee, O Israel! Yet since I will thus deal with thee, Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel!
For behold, he formed the mountains, and created the wind; He declareth to man what is his thought; He maketh the morning darkness, And walketh upon the high places of the earth; Jehovah, God of hosts, is his name.
Hear these words, which I utter concerning you; This lamentation, O house of Israel!
She is fallen, she shall rise no more, The virgin of Israel! She is prostrate on her own ground, there is none to raise her up!
For thus saith the Lord Jehovah; The city which sent out a thousand shall have a hundred left, And that which sent out a hundred shall have ten left, To the house of Israel.
For thus saith Jehovah to the house of Israel: Seek ye me, and ye shall live!
Seek not Bethel, And go not to Gilgal, And pass not over to Beersheba! For Gilgal shall surely go into captivity! And Bethel shall come to naught.
Seek Jehovah, and ye shall live! Lest he rush like a fire on the house of Joseph, And it devour, and there be none to quench it in the house of Israel.
Ye who turn justice into wormwood, And cast righteousness down to the ground.
Seek him, that made the Pleiades and Orion; That changeth death-like darkness into morning, And darkeneth day into night; That calleth up the waters of the sea, And poureth them out upon the face of the earth; Jehovah is his name!
Who sendeth sudden destruction upon the strong, And bringeth desolation upon the fortress.
They hate him that pleadeth in the gate, And abhor him that speaketh uprightly.
Since, then, ye trample upon the poor, And take from him presents of wheat, Though ye build houses of hewn stone, ye shall not dwell in them; Though ye plant pleasant vineyards, ye shall not drink their wine.
For I know that your sins are many, And your transgressions manifold, Ye who afflict the righteous, and take a bribe, And oppress the poor in the gate!
Therefore the wise man shall be silent at that time, For it shall be an evil time.
Seek ye good, and not evil, that ye may live; Then shall Jehovah, the God of hosts, be with you, as ye boast.
Hate ye evil, and love good, And establish justice in the gate; It may be that Jehovah, the God of hosts, will have pity upon the remnant of Joseph.
Thus saith Jehovah, the God of hosts, the Lord: In all the streets shall there be wailing, And in all the highways shall they cry, Alas! alas! They shall call the husbandmen to mourning, And those who are skilful in lamentation to wailing,
And in all vineyards shall be sounds of woe, For I will pass through the midst of thee, saith Jehovah.
Woe unto them that ask for the day of Jehovah! What is the day of Jehovah to you? It shall be darkness, and not light.
As if a man fled from a lion, And a bear met him; Or went into a house and leaned his hand on a wall, And a serpent bit him;
So shall the day of Jehovah be darkness, and not light, Even thick darkness, and no brightness in it.
I hate, I despise your feasts; I have no delight in your solemn assemblies.
When ye offer me burnt-offerings and flour-offerings, I will not accept them; And upon the thank-offerings of your fatlings I will not look.
Take ye away from me the noise of your songs, And the music of your harps let me not hear!
Let justice flow forth as waters, And righteousness as a mighty stream!
Did ye offer me sacrifices and offerings In the wilderness, for forty years, O house of Israel?
But ye bore the tabernacle of your king, And the shrine of your images, The star of your god, which ye made for yourselves.
Therefore will I cause you to go into captivity beyond Damascus, Saith Jehovah, whose name is the God of hosts!
Woe to them that dwell at ease in Zion; That feel secure upon the mountain of Samaria; The honorable men of the chief of the nations, To whom the house of Israel resort!
Pass over to Calneh, and see; And thence go to great Hamath; Then go down to Gath of the Philistines: Are they better than these kingdoms, Or is their border greater than your border?
Woe to them, that put far away the day of evil, And bring near the seat of oppression;
That lie upon beds of ivory, And stretch themselves upon their couches; That eat lambs from the flock, And calves from the stall;
That chant to the sound of the harp, And invent for themselves instruments of music, like David;
That drink wine in bowls, And anoint themselves with the most precious perfumes, But grieve not for the destruction of Joseph!
Therefore now shall they go captive at the head of the captives; Yea, the shouting of them that stretch themselves upon their couches shall cease.
The Lord Jehovah hath sworn by himself, Thus saith Jehovah, the God of hosts: I abhor the pride of Jacob, And I hate his palaces; I will give up the city, and all that is therein.
And if ten men remain in one house, These also shall die.
A man's relative, or a burner of the dead, shall take him up, To carry his bones out of the house, And he shall say to him that is in the innermost part of the house, Is there yet any one with thee? And he shall answer, No one! Then shall he say, Keep silence! For we may not make mention of the name of Jehovah.
For behold Jehovah hath commanded, And he will smite the great house with breaches, And the small house with clefts.
Shall horses run upon rocks, Or will one plough rocks with oxen, That ye change justice into hemlock, And the fruit of equity into wormwood,
Ye that rejoice in a thing of naught, And say, Have we not acquired dominion by our own strength?
Behold, O house of Israel, saith Jehovah, the God of hosts, I will raise against you a nation, That shall oppress you from Hamath Even to the brook of the desert.
The Lord Jehovah showed me this vision: Behold, he formed locusts In the beginning of the shooting up of the latter growth; Behold, it was the latter growth after the king's mowing.
And when they had devoured the grass of the land, Then said I, O Lord Jehovah, forgive, I beseech thee! How shall Jacob stand? For he is small!
Jehovah repented of this; It shall not be, said Jehovah.
The Lord Jehovah also showed me this vision: Behold, the Lord Jehovah commanded the fire to execute judgment; And it devoured the great deep, And it devoured the fields.
Then said I, O Lord Jehovah, desist, I beseech thee! How shall Jacob stand? For he is small!
Jehovah repented of this; This also shall not be, said the Lord Jehovah.
He also showed me this vision: Behold, the Lord stood upon a wall, built with a plumb-line, And in his hand was a plumb-line;
And Jehovah said to me, What seest thou, Amos? And I said, A plumb-line. And the Lord said, Behold I will set a plumb-line in the midst of my people Israel; I will not spare them any more.
The high places of Isaac shall be desolate, And the sanctuaries of Israel shall be laid waste, And I will rise against the house of Jeroboam with the sword.
Then sent Amaziah, the priest of Bethel, To Jeroboam, the king of Israel, and said: Amos conspireth against thee in the midst of the house of Israel; The land is not able to bear all his words.
For thus hath Amos said: Jeroboam shall die by the sword, And Israel shall surely be led captive from their own land.
And Amaziah said to Amos, Go, thou seer! flee into the land of Judah! There eat thy bread, and there prophesy!
But prophesy no more at Bethel, For it is the king's sanctuary, And it is the king's abode.
Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah: I was no prophet, nor the son of a prophet; I was a shepherd, and a gatherer of sycamore fruit.
And Jehovah took me from the flock; And Jehovah said to me, Go, prophesy to my people Israel!
Now, therefore, hear the word of Jehovah: Thou sayest, Prophesy not against Israel, And speak no word against the house of Isaac!
Therefore thus saith Jehovah: “Thy wife shall be put to shame in the city, And thy sons and daughters shall fall by the sword; Thy land shall be divided by the line, And thou shalt die in a polluted land, And Israel shall surely be led captive from his own land.”
The Lord Jehovah showed me this vision: Behold a basket of ripe fruits!
And he said, Amos, what seest thou? And I said, A basket of ripe fruits. Then said Jehovah to me, The destruction of my people Israel is ripe; I will not spare them any more.
The songs of the palace shall be shrieks in that day, Saith the Lord Jehovah. There shall be many dead bodies in every place, And they shall be cast forth in silence.
Hear this, ye that pant to oppress the needy, And to destroy the poor of the land.
That say, When will the new moon be gone, that we may sell corn, And the Sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, Making the ephah small, and the shekel heavy, And falsifying the balances for deceit,
That we may buy the poor for silver, And the needy for a pair of shoes, And sell the refuse of the wheat?
Jehovah hath sworn by the glory of Jacob: Surely I will never forget any of their deeds.
Shall not the land tremble for this, And shall not all that dwell therein mourn? Shall not all of it rise in waves like a river, And be swept from its place, and overflowed, as by the river of Egypt!
It shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord Jehovah, That I will cause the sun to go down at noon, And will darken the land in the clear day.
I will turn your feasts into mourning, And all your songs into lamentation; I will bring sackcloth upon all loins, And baldness upon all heads. I will fill the land with mourning, as for an only son, And its end shall be as a day of bitter woe.
Behold, the time cometh, saith the Lord Jehovah, That I will send a famine upon the land; Not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, But of hearing the word of Jehovah.
And men shall wander from sea to sea, And from the north even to the east shall they run to and fro, To seek an answer from Jehovah, and shall not find it.
In that day shall the fair virgins, and the young men, faint for thirst,
Who swear by the sin of Samaria, And say, By the life of thy God, O Dan! And, By the worship of Beersheba! They shall fall, and shall rise no more!
I saw the Lord standing by the altar; and he said: Smite the capital, so that the thresholds shall tremble! Break them in pieces upon the heads of all of them! And their residue will I slay with the sword. He that fleeth of them shall not flee from danger, And he that escapeth of them shall not escape into safety.
Though they dig down to the under-world, Thence shall my hand take them; Though they climb up to heaven, Thence will I bring them down.
Though they hide themselves on the top of Carmel, There will I search for them, and take them away; Though they hide themselves from mine eyes in the bottom of the sea, There will I command the serpent, and he shall bite them.
Though they go into captivity before their enemies, There will I command the sword, and it shall slay them; I will set mine eyes upon them for evil, and not for good.
For the Lord Jehovah of hosts Is he, that toucheth the earth, and it shall melt, And all that dwell therein shall mourn; All of it shall rise in waves like a river, And shall be overflowed, as by the river of Egypt;
He that buildeth his upper rooms in the heavens, And foundeth his arch upon the earth,—That calleth the waters of the sea, And poureth them out upon the face of the earth,—Jehovah is his name.
Are ye not as the Ethiopians to me, O children of Israel? saith Jehovah. Did I not bring Israel from the land of Egypt, And the Philistines from Caphtor, and the Syrians from Kir?
Behold, the eyes of the Lord Jehovah are upon the sinful kingdom, And I will destroy it from the face of the earth; Yet will I not utterly destroy the house of Jacob, saith Jehovah.
For, behold, I will command, And I will sift the house of Israel among all the nations, As one sifteth corn with a sieve, And not a grain shall fall upon the ground.
But all the sinners of my people shall die by the sword, Who say, Evil shall not approach, nor fall upon us.
In that day I will raise up the fallen tabernacle of David, And I will close up the breaches thereof, And raise up its ruins, And I will build it, as in the days of old.
That they may possess the remnant of Edom, And all the nations, which shall be called by my name. Thus saith Jehovah, who doeth this.
Behold the days come, saith Jehovah, That the plougher shall draw near to the reaper, And the treader of grapes to the sower of the seed; And the mountains shall drop new wine, And all the hills shall melt.
I will bring back the captives of my people Israel, And they shall build the desolate cities, and shall inhabit them; And they shall plant vineyards, and drink their wine; They shall also make gardens, and eat their fruit.
I will plant them in their land, And they shall no more be rooted up from the land which I have given them, Saith Jehovah, thy God.
The prophecy of Obadiah. Thus saith the Lord Jehovah concerning Edom. We have heard a message from Jehovah, And an ambassador hath been sent among the nations “Arise ye, and let us rise up against her to war.”
Behold, I will make thee small among the nations; Thou shalt be greatly despised.
The pride of thine heart hath deceived thee, Thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock, Whose habitation is high, Who sayest in thine heart, “Who shall bring me down to the ground?”
Though thou lift thyself up as the eagle, And though thou set thy nest among the stars, Thence will I bring thee down, saith Jehovah.
If thieves had come upon thee, Or robbers by night, Would they not have ceased stealing when they had enough? How art thou utterly destroyed! If grape-gatherers had come upon thee, Would they not have left gleanings of the grapes?
How is Esau searched through! How are his hidden places explored!
All thine allies have brought thee to the border; They that were at peace with thee have deceived thee, and prevailed against thee; They that ate thy bread have spread a snare under thee; There is no understanding in thee.
In that day, saith Jehovah, I will destroy the wise men from Edom, And understanding from the mount of Esau.
Thy mighty men, O Teman, shall be dismayed; Every one shall be cut off from the mount of Esau.
For slaughter and for oppression of thy brother Jacob shall shame cover thee, And thou shalt be destroyed forever.
In the day when thou stoodest over against him, In the day when strangers carried away captive his forces, And when foreigners entered his gates, And when they cast lots upon Jerusalem, Thou also wast as one of them.
But thou shouldst not have looked with delight on the day of thy brother in the day of his calamity; Nor shouldst thou have rejoiced over the children of Judah in the day of their destruction, Nor have spoken haughtily in the day of his distress.
Thou shouldst not have entered into the gate of my people in the day of their calamity, Nor have looked with delight on their affliction in the day of their calamity, Nor have laid hand on their substance in the day of their calamity,
Nor have stood in the cross-way to cut off their fugitives, Nor have delivered up those that remained in the day of distress!
For the day of Jehovah is near upon all the nations: As thou hast done, so shall it be done to thee; Thy dealing shall return upon thine own head.
For as ye have drunk upon my holy mountain, So shall all the nations drink perpetually, Yea, they shall drink and swallow it down, And they shall be as though they had not been.
But upon mount Zion shall be deliverance, and it shall be holy; And the house of Jacob shall regain their possessions.
And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, And the house of Joseph a flame, And the house of Esau stubble, And they shall kindle them and devour them. And there shall be none remaining of the house of Esau; For Jehovah hath spoken it.
And they of the south shall possess the mountain of Esau, And they of the plain, the Philistines; And they shall possess the fields of Ephraim, And the fields of Samaria; And Benjamin shall possess Gilead.
And the captives of this host of the sons of Israel shall possess the land of the Canaanites unto Sarepta, And the captives of Jerusalem which are at Sepharad shall possess the cities of the south.
And saviors shall go up to mount Zion, To rule the mount of Esau. And the kingdom shall be Jehovah's.
Now the word of Jehovah came to Jonah, the son of Amittai, saying,
Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and cry against it; for their wickedness is come up before me.
But Jonah rose up to flee to Tarshish from the presence of Jehovah; and he went down to Joppa, and found a ship going to Tarshish, and paid the fare thereof, and went down into it, to go with them to Tarshish from the presence of Jehovah.
But Jehovah sent forth a great wind upon the sea, and there was a mighty tempest in the sea, so that the ship was like to be broken in pieces.
Then the mariners were afraid, and cried every man to his god. And they cast forth the things that were in the ship into the sea, to lighten it of them. But Jonah had gone down to the lower part of the ship, and he lay and was fast asleep.
And the shipmaster came to him, and said to him, What meanest thou, O sleeper? Arise, call upon thy God! Perhaps God will think upon us, that we perish not.
And they said one to another, come, and let us cast lots, that we may know on whose account this evil is upon us! And they cast lots, and the lot fell upon Jonah.
Then said they to him, Tell us, we pray thee, on whose account this evil is upon us. What is thy business? And whence comest thou? What is thy country? And of what people art thou?
And he said to them, I am a Hebrew; and I fear Jehovah, the God of heaven, who made the sea and the dry land.
Then were the men exceedingly afraid, and said to him, Wherefore hast thou done this? For the men knew that he fled from the presence of Jehovah, because he had told them.
Then said they to him, What shall we do to thee, that the sea may be calm to us? For the sea grew more and more tempestuous.
And he said to them, Take me up, and cast me forth into the sea; and the sea shall be calm to you. For I know that because of me this great tempest is upon you.
Nevertheless the men rowed hard to bring the ship to the land; but they could not; for the sea grew more and more tempestuous against them.
And they cried to Jehovah, and said, We beseech thee, O Jehovah, we beseech thee, let us not perish for the life of this man, and lay not upon us innocent blood! For thou, O Jehovah, hast done as it pleased thee.
And they took up Jonah, and cast him forth into the sea; and the sea ceased from its raging.
Then the men feared Jehovah exceedingly, and offered sacrifice to Jehovah, and made vows.
Now Jehovah had appointed a great fish to swallow up Jonah. And Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights.
Then Jonah prayed to Jehovah from the belly of the fish,
and said:— I cried by reason of my distress to Jehovah, And he heard me: Out of the depth of the under-world I cried, And thou didst hear my voice.
Thou didst cast me into the deep, into the heart of the sea, And the flood compassed me about; All thy billows and thy waves passed over me.
And I said, “I am cast out from before thine eyes; Yet I will look again to thy holy temple!”
The waters compassed me about, even to the life, The deep enclosed me round about; Sea-weeds were bound around my head;
I sank down to the foundations of the mountains; The bars of the earth were about me forever; Yet hast thou brought up my life from the pit, O Jehovah, my God!
When my soul fainted within me, I remembered Jehovah, And my prayer came to thee, To thy holy temple.
They that honor lying vanities forsake their mercy;
But I will sacrifice to thee with the voice of thanksgiving; I will pay that which I have vowed; Salvation is from Jehovah.
And Jehovah commanded the fish, and it cast out Jonah upon the dry land.
And the word of Jehovah came to Jonah the second time, saying,
Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and proclaim to her the words which I shall speak to thee.
And Jonah arose and went to Nineveh, according to the word of Jehovah. Now Nineveh was through God a great city, three days' journey in extent.
And Jonah began to enter into the city a day's journey, and he cried out and said, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown.
And the men of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to the least of them.
For when the matter came to the king of Nineveh, he arose from his throne, and put off his mantle and covered himself with sackcloth, and sat in ashes.
And he caused it to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh by the decree of the king and his nobles, saying, Let neither man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste anything; let them not feed, nor drink water.
But let man and beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily to God. Yea, let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the violence that is in their hands.
Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not?
And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way: and God repented of the evil which he had said that he would do to them, and he did it not.
But this displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was very angry.
And he prayed to Jehovah and said, Ah! Jehovah, was not this what I said, when I was yet in my own country? Therefore I made haste to flee to Tarshish. For I knew that thou art a gracious and merciful God, slow to anger and abundant in mercy, and that thou repentest of a threatened evil.
And now, O Jehovah, take, I pray thee, my life from me! for it is better for me to die than to live.
And Jehovah said, Is it right that thou shouldst be angry?
Now Jonah had gone out of the city, and had sat on the east side of the city, and had made himself a booth there, and had sat under it in the shade, till he should see what would become of the city.
And God, Jehovah, appointed a gourd; and it grew up over Jonah to be a shadow over his head, to deliver him from his distress. And Jonah was exceedingly glad of the gourd.
But God appointed a worm when the morning rose the next day, and it smote the gourd so that it withered.
And when the sun arose, God appointed a sultry east wind; and the sun beat upon the head of Jonah, and he was faint, and he asked for himself death, and said, It is better for me to die than to live.
And God said to Jonah, Is it right that thou shouldst be angry for the gourd? And he said, It is right that I should be angry even to death.
And Jehovah said, Thou hast had pity on the gourd for which thou hast not labored, and which thou madest not to grow, which grew up in a night and perished in a night;
and should not I spare Nineveh, the great city, wherein are more than a hundred and twenty thousand persons that cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand, and also many cattle?
The word of Jehovah, which came to Micah, the Morasthite, in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah; which was revealed to him concerning Judah and Jerusalem.
Hear, all ye nations, Give ear, O earth, and all that is therein! The Lord, Jehovah, appeareth as a witness against you, The Lord from his holy palace.
Behold, Jehovah cometh forth from his dwelling-place; He cometh down, and advanceth upon the high places of the earth.
The mountains melt under him, And the valleys cleave asunder, Like wax before the fire, Like waters poured down a steep place.
For the transgression of Jacob is all this, And for the sin of the house of Israel. Where is the transgression of Jacob? Is it not at Samaria? And where are the high places of Judah? Are they not at Jerusalem?
Therefore will I make Samaria a heap of stones in the field, A place for the planting of a vineyard; I will pour down her stones into the valley, And lay bare her foundations.
All her graven images shall be beaten to pieces, And all the hire of her harlotry shall be burned with fire, And all her idols will I destroy. For from the hire of a harlot did she gather her ornaments, And to the hire of a harlot shall they return.
Therefore I will wail and howl; I will go stripped and naked; I will wail like the jackal, And mourn like the ostrich.
For her wound is mortal; It extendeth to Judah; It reacheth to the gate of my people, even to Jerusalem.
Tell it not in Gath! weep not in Acco! In Beth-Aprah roll yourselves in the dust!
Pass on, thou inhabitant of Saphir, naked and in shame! The inhabitant of Zaanan no more goeth out; The grief of Beth-Azel denieth you an abode.
The inhabitant of Maroth mourneth for his goods, For evil came down from Jehovah to the gates of Jerusalem.
Bind the chariot to the courser, O inhabitant of Lachish! Thou wast the beginning of sin to the daughter of Zion; In thee were found the transgressions of Israel.
Therefore shalt thou resign the possession of Moresheth of Gath; The houses of Achzib shall disappoint the kings of Israel.
A possessor will I bring to thee, O inhabitant of Mareshah; The glory of Israel shall flee to Adullam.
Make thyself bald, cut off thy locks, for the children of thy love; Enlarge thy baldness like the eagle; For they have gone from thee into captivity.
Woe to them that devise iniquity, And contrive evil upon their beds; When the morning is light, they practise it, Because it is in the power of their hand.
They covet fields, and take them by violence; Houses, and take them from their owners. They defraud a man of his house; Yea, a man of his inheritance.
Therefore, thus saith Jehovah: Behold, against this race do I meditate evil. From which ye shall not remove your necks, nor lift up your heads; For it shall be a time of evil.
In that day shall this song be uttered concerning thee. And this sad lamentation be made: “We are utterly laid waste; He hath changed the portion of my people; How hath he torn it from me! He hath taken away and distributed our fields.”
Behold, thou shalt have no one henceforth Who shall draw out a line for a portion, In the congregation of Jehovah.
“Prophesy not,” [[say they,]] “O ye that prophesy!” If they prophesy not concerning these things, The shame will not depart.
O ye that are called the house of Jacob, Is the spirit of Jehovah impatient? Are these his doings? Are not my words kind to him that walketh uprightly?
But long since hath my people risen against me, as an enemy; Ye strip the mantle from the garment of those that pass by securely, as men returning from war.
The women of my people ye cast out from their pleasant abodes; Ye deprive their children forever of the glory which I gave them.
Arise and depart; This land is not your rest! On account of its pollution shall it be wasted, And given to utter destruction.
If a man follow wind, and invent falsehood, and say, “I will prophesy to thee of wine and strong drink!” He will be the prophet for this people.
Yet will I fully gather thee, O Jacob, I will surely assemble the residue of Israel! I will put them together like sheep in a fold; Like a flock in their fold shall they be in a tumult on account of the multitude of men.
He that forceth a way goeth before them; They force their way, and pass through the gate, And go forth by it; And their king goeth before them, Even Jehovah at the head of them.
I also said: Hear, O ye heads of Jacob, And ye leaders of the house of Israel! Is it not for you to administer justice?
But ye hate what is good, and love what is evil; Ye tear from men their skin, Yea, their flesh from their bones;
Ye devour the flesh of my people, And strip them of their skin, And break their bones, And cut them in pieces, as for the pot, And as flesh for the caldron?
Then shall they cry to Jehovah, But he will not hear them; Yea, at that time will he hide his face from them, Because they have done iniquity.
Thus saith Jehovah concerning the prophets, who deceive my people, Who, while they bite with their teeth, proclaim peace, But who, if one fill not their mouths, prepare war against him:
Therefore shall night come upon you, so that ye shall have no vision, And darkness, so that ye shall not divine; The sun shall go down upon the prophets, And the day shall be dark to them.
Then shall the seers be ashamed, and the diviners confounded, So that all of them shall hide their faces, Because there is no answer from God.
But I am full of power, even of the spirit of Jehovah; Full of uprightness and courage, To declare to Jacob his transgression, And to Israel his sin.
O hear this, ye heads of the house of Jacob, And ye leaders of the house of Israel, Who abhor justice, And pervert all equity,
Who build up Zion with blood, And Jerusalem with iniquity!
Her heads judge for reward, And her priests teach for hire, And her prophets divine for money, And yet they lean upon Jehovah, saying, “Is not Jehovah in the midst of us? No evil can come upon us.”
Therefore because of you shall Zion be ploughed as a field, And Jerusalem become heaps of stones, And the mountain of the temple like the heights of a forest.
But it shall come to pass in the last days That the mountain of the house of Jehovah shall be established at the head of the mountains, And exalted above the hills; And the nations shall flow to it.
And many nations shall go, saying, “Come, let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, To the house of the God of Jacob, That he may teach us his ways, And that we may walk in his paths!” For from Zion shall go forth a law, And the word of Jehovah from Jerusalem.
He shall be a judge of many nations, And an umpire of many kingdoms afar off. They shall beat their swords into ploughshares, And their spears into pruning-hooks; Nation shall not lift up the sword against nation, Neither shall they learn war any more.
But they shall sit every one under his vine, And under his fig-tree, And none shall make them afraid; The mouth of Jehovah of hosts hath spoken it.
Though all the nations walk every one in the name of its God, Yet will we walk in the name of Jehovah our God for ever and ever.
In that day, saith Jehovah, I will gather the halting, And the far scattered I will assemble, And those whom I have afflicted.
I will make the halting a remnant, And the far scattered a strong nation; And Jehovah shall reign over them in mount Zion, Henceforth, even forever.
And thou, O tower of the flock, O hill of the daughter of Zion, to thee it shall come, To thee shall come the former dominion, Even the kingdom of the daughter of Jerusalem.
And now why dost thou cry aloud? Is there no king within thee? Have thy counsellors perished, That pangs have taken hold of thee, as of a woman in travail?
Yea, writhe, and be in anguish, O daughter of Zion, like a woman in travail! For now shalt thou go forth from the city, and dwell in the field; Thou shalt go even to Babylon; Yet there shalt thou be delivered. Jehovah will redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies.
Now many nations gather themselves against thee, Who say, Let her be polluted, And let our eyes gaze upon Zion!
But they know not the thoughts of Jehovah, And understand not his purposes; For he gathereth them as sheaves into the thrashing-floor.
Arise and thrash, O daughter of Zion! For I will make thy horns iron, And thy hoofs brass; Thou shalt beat in pieces many nations, And thou shalt devote their spoils to Jehovah, Their substance to the Lord of the whole earth.
Yet now gather yourselves in troops, O people of troops! They lay siege against us; With a rod they smite the cheek of the judge of Israel.
But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, Who art small to be among the thousands of Judah, Out of thee shall he come forth for me to be ruler in Israel, Whose origin is from the ancient age, from the days of old!
But He [[Jehovah]] shall deliver them up, Until she that bringeth forth hath brought forth; Then shall the residue of his brethren return to the children of Israel.
He shall stand and rule in the strength of Jehovah, In the majesty of Jehovah, his God; And they shall dwell in security, For he shall be great even to the ends of the earth.
And he shall be peace. When the Assyrian shall come into our land, To trample upon our palaces, Then shall we raise against him seven shepherds, And eight leaders of the people,
And they shall devour the land of Assyria with the sword, The land of Nimrod within her gates. Thus shall he deliver us from the Assyrian, when he cometh into our land, And treadeth in our borders.
The residue of Jacob shall be in the midst of many nations As the dew which cometh from Jehovah, As drops of rain upon the grass, Which tarrieth not for man, Nor waiteth for the sons of men.
The residue of Jacob shall be among the nations, In the midst of many kingdoms, As a lion among the beasts of the forest, As a young lion among flocks of sheep, Who, when he assaulteth, treadeth down and teareth, and none can deliver.
Thy hand shall be lifted up over thine adversaries, And all thine enemies shall be destroyed!
It shall come to pass in that day, saith Jehovah, That I will destroy thy horses from the midst of thee, And I will consume thy chariots;
I will destroy the fortified cities of thy land, And throw down all thy strongholds;
I will destroy sorceries from thy borders, And soothsayers shall not be with thee.
I will destroy thy graven images and thy statues from the midst of thee, And thou shalt no more bow down to the work of thine hands;
I will root out thy Astartes from the midst of thee, And I will destroy thy fortified cities;
And I will execute vengeance in anger and in fury Upon the nations which have not hearkened to me.
Hear ye what Jehovah saith! Arise, contend thou before the mountains, And let the hills hear thy voice!
Hear, O ye mountains, the controversy of Jehovah! Hear, ye strong foundations of the earth! For Jehovah hath a controversy with his people; He contendeth with Israel.
“O my people, what have I done to thee, And wherein have I offended thee? Testify against me!
I brought thee up from the land of Egypt, And from the house of bondage I redeemed thee; I sent Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, to go before thee.
O my people, remember what Balak the king of Moab devised. And what Balaam, the son of Beor, answered him, What happened from Shittim to Gilgal, That ye may know the mercies of Jehovah.”
Wherewith shall I come before Jehovah, And bow myself before the most high God? Shall I come before him with burnt-offerings, With calves of a year old?
Will Jehovah be pleased with thousands of rams, Or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my first-born for the sin of my soul, The fruit of my body for my transgression?
He hath showed thee, O man, what is good; What doth Jehovah require of thee, But to do justly, and to love mercy, And to walk humbly before thy God?
The voice of Jehovah crieth to the city, And the man of wisdom will discern thee; Hear ye the rod, and who hath threatened it!
Are there not yet in the houses of the unrighteous the treasures of iniquity, And the scanty measure, which is abominable?
Shall I count her pure with the wicked balances, And with the bag of deceitful weights?
For her rich men are full of violence, And her inhabitants speak lies, And their tongue is deceitful in their mouth.
Therefore will I sorely smite thee, And make thee desolate on account of thy sins.
Thou shalt eat and not be satisfied, And hunger shall be within thee. Thou shalt remove, but shalt not save, And what thou savest will I give up to the sword.
Thou shalt sow, but shalt not reap; Thou shalt tread the olives, but shalt not anoint thee with oil, And the grapes, but shalt not drink the wine.
For ye keep the statutes of Omri, And all the works of the house of Ahab, And walk in their devices; Therefore will I make thee a desolation, And thine inhabitants a derision; And ye shall bear the reproach of my people.
Woe is me! I live where the summer fruits are gathered, And the vintage is gleaned; There is no cluster to eat; I long for the first-ripe fig.
The good man is perished from the land, And there is none upright among men. They all lie in wait for blood; Every one hunteth his brother with a net.
Their hands are diligent for evil; The prince asketh a bribe, And the judge decideth for money! The great man giveth judgment according to his desire; They conspire to pervert justice.
The best of them is like a brier; The most upright of them is sharper than a thorn-hedge. The day of recompense, announced by thy watchmen, cometh; Then shall come their perplexity.
Trust ye not in a friend! Put no confidence in a guide! From her that lieth in thy bosom Keep the doors of thy mouth!
For the son dishonoreth his father, The daughter riseth up against her mother, And the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law; The inmates of a man's house are his foes.
I will look to Jehovah; I will hope in the God of my salvation; My God will hear me.
Rejoice not over me, O my enemy! Though I have fallen, I shall arise; Though I sit in darkness, Jehovah will be my light.
I will bear the indignation of Jehovah, Because I have sinned against him, Until he maintain my cause, and execute judgment for me, Until he bring me to the light, And I behold his mercy.
She that is my enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her, That said to me, Where is Jehovah thy God? Mine eyes shall gaze upon her; Soon shall she be trodden down, as the mire of the streets.
The day cometh when thy walls are to be built; In that day shall the decree be far removed.
In that day shall they come to thee From Assyria, and the cities of Egypt, And from Egypt to the river, From sea to sea, from mountain to mountain.
But first the land shall be desolate on account of its inhabitants, For the fruit of their doings.
Feed thy people with thy crook, The flock of thine inheritance, That dwell solitarily in the forest in the midst of Carmel! Let them feed in Bashan and Gilead, as in the days of old.
As in the day when thou camest from Egypt, So will I show thee wonders.
The nations shall see, and be ashamed of all their might: They shall lay their hands upon their mouths; Their ears shall be deaf.
They shall lick the dust like the serpent; Like the creeping things of the earth, they shall come trembling from their strongholds; To Jehovah our God shall they come with awe, And shall fear on account of thee.
Who is a God like thee, that pardoneth iniquity and passeth by transgression, In the remnant of his inheritance? He retaineth not his anger forever, For he delighteth in mercy.
He will again have compassion on us, He will blot out our iniquities; Yea, thou wilt cast all our sins into the depths of the sea.
Thou wilt show faithfulness to Jacob, And mercy to Abraham, Which thou swarest to our fathers from the days of old.
The prophecy concerning Nineveh. The book of the prophecy of Nahum, the Elkoshite.
Jehovah is a jealous God, and an avenger; Jehovah is an avenger, and full of wrath! Jehovah taketh vengeance on his adversaries, And keepeth indignation for his enemies!
Jehovah is slow to anger, but great in power; He will by no means clear the guilty; Jehovah cometh in the whirlwind and the storm, And the clouds are the dust of his feet.
He rebuketh the sea, and maketh it dry, And drieth up all the rivers. Bashan languisheth, and Carmel, And the flower of Lebanon languisheth.
The mountains tremble before him, And the hills melt; The earth is moved at his presence, Yea, the world and all that dwell therein.
Who can stand before his indignation, And who can abide before the fierceness of his anger? His fury is poured out like fire, And the rocks are cast down by him!
Jehovah is good, A stronghold in the day of trouble; He careth for them that trust in him;
But with an overwhelming flood will he make a full end of her place, And darkness shall pursue his enemies.
What do ye meditate against Jehovah? He will make a full end; Not the second time shall the calamity come.
For while they are entangled like thorns, And like those that are drunk with wine, They shall be devoured as stubble fully dry.
From thee hath gone forth one that devised evil against Jehovah; That meditated destruction.
Thus saith Jehovah: Though they be flourishing, and likewise many, Yet shall they be cut down, and pass away; I have afflicted thee, but I will afflict thee no more.
For now will I break his yoke from off thee, And will burst thy bonds in sunder.
And concerning thee hath Jehovah given command, That thy name shall no more be sown. From the house of thy god I will cut off the graven image and the molten image; I will make thy grave; for thou hast become vile!
Behold upon the mountains the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, That publisheth peace! Keep, O Judah, thy feasts, perform thy vows! For no more shall the destroyer pass through thee; He is utterly consumed.
The ravager cometh up against thee, [[O Nineveh!]] Guard the fortress; watch the way; Gird up the loins; confirm the strength.
For Jehovah restoreth the glory of Jacob, As the glory of Israel; For the wasters have wasted them, And destroyed their branches.
The shields of his mighty men are red; His warriors are clothed in crimson; His chariots glitter with the fire of steel in the day of his preparation, And the spears are brandished.
The chariots rave in the streets; They run to and fro in the broad ways; Their appearance is like torches; They run like lightnings.
He calleth for his mighty men; They stumble on their way; They hasten to the wall; But the mantelet is prepared,
The gates of rivers are opened, And the palace melteth away.
Huzzab is uncovered; she is carried away captive, Her maidservants sigh with the voice of doves, And smite their breasts.
Nineveh was like a pool full of water of old; Yet shall they flee away; Stand! stand! shall they cry; But none shall look back.
Seize the silver; seize the gold; There is no end to the treasures; There is abundance of all precious furniture.
She hath become void, and empty, and desolate; The heart melteth, and the knees smite together; Pangs are in all their loins, And the faces of all gather blackness.
Where now is the dwelling of the lions, And the feeding-place of the young lions, Where the lion and the lioness walked, And the lion's whelp, and none made them afraid?
The lion tore in pieces for his whelps, And strangled for his lionesses, And filled his dens with prey, And his lairs with ravin.
Behold! I am against thee, saith Jehovah of hosts, And I will burn thy chariots into smoke, And the sword shall devour thy young lions. And I will cut off thy prey from the earth, And the voice of thy messengers shall no more be heard.
Woe to the city of blood! She is all full of deceit and robbery; She ceaseth not from plunder.
[[Hark!]] The noise of the whip! The noise of the rattling of the wheels, And of the prancing horses, And of the bounding chariots!
The horseman lifteth up the flame of the sword, And the lightning of the spear; There is a multitude of the slain; heaps of dead bodies; There is no end to the carcasses; they stumble over the carcasses.
It is because of the many whoredoms of the harlot, The graceful beauty, the mistress of enchantments, That sold nations by her whoredoms, And kingdoms by her enchantments.
Behold, I am against thee, saith Jehovah of host, And I will lift up thy trail over thy face, And I will show the nations thy nakedness, And the kingdoms thy shame.
And I will cast abominable filth upon thee, And I will dishonor thee, and make thee a gazing-stock,
And all that see thee shall flee from thee, And shall say, “Nineveh is laid waste; Who will bemoan her? Whence shall I seek comforters for thee?”
Art thou better than No-Ammon, That dwelt by the rivers, That had the waters round about her, Whose fortress was the sea, And whose wall was from the waters?
Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength, a countless multitude; Phut and Lybia were thy helpers!
Yet was she carried away; she went into captivity; Her children were dashed in pieces at the head of all the streets; For her honorable men they cast lots, And all her great men were bound in chains.
Thou also shalt drink to the full; Thou, too, shalt be hidden; Thou shalt seek a refuge from the enemy!
All thy strong-holds shall be like fig-trees with the first ripe figs; If they be shaken, they fall into the mouth of the eater.
Behold, thy people shall be women in the midst of thee; The gates of thy land shall be set wide open to thine enemies; The fire shall devour thy bars.
Draw thee water for the siege, Fortify thy strongholds. Go into the clay, and tread the mortar; Repair the brick-kiln!
Then shall the fire devour thee; The sword shall cut thee off, It shall devour thee like the locust; Though thou art increased like the locusts, Though thou art increased like the thick locusts.
Thy merchants have been more numerous than the stars of heaven; The locusts spread themselves and fly away.
Thy princes are like locusts, And thy captains like swarms of locusts, Which encamp in the hedges in the time of cold; But when the sun ariseth, they flee away, And the place is not known where they are.
Thy shepherds slumber, O king of Assyria! Thy nobles take their rest, Thy people are scattered on the mountains, and none gathereth them.
Thy bruise is incurable; Thy wound is mortal. All that hear of thee shall clap their hands over thee; For upon whom hath not thy wickedness passed continually?
The prophecy which was revealed to the prophet Habakkuk.
How long, O Jehovah, do I cry, and thou dost not hear! How long do I complain to thee of violence, and thou dost not save!
Why dost thou suffer me to see iniquity, And why dost thou look upon wickedness? For spoiling and violence are before me; There is contention, and strife exalteth itself.
Therefore the law faileth, And judgment is not pronounced according to truth; For the wicked encompasseth the righteous, Therefore wrong judgment is pronounced.
Behold ye among the nations, and look! Yea, wonder, and be astonished! For I do a work in your days Which ye will not believe though it be told you.
For behold, I raise up the Chaldeans, A fierce and swift people, Which go over the breadth of the earth, To take possession of dwelling-places that are not their own.
They are terrible and dreadful; From themselves go forth their law and their dignity.
Their horses are swifter than leopards, And fiercer than evening wolves. Their horsemen leap proudly; Their horsemen come from far; They fly like an eagle, hastening to devour.
All of them come for violence; The multitude of their faces is directed forwards, And they gather captives as sand.
They also scoff at kings, And princes are to them a laughing-stock; They deride every stronghold, For they heap up earth and take it.
Then their spirit is uplifted, and they transgress, and become guilty; This their strength is made their god.
Art thou not from everlasting, O Jehovah, my God, my Holy One? We shall not die! Thou, O Jehovah, hast appointed them for judgment; Thou, O Rock, hast ordained them for chastisement.
Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, And canst not look on wickedness; Why then dost thou look on transgressors, And art silent, when the wicked swalloweth up the man that is more righteous than he?
And why makest thou men as the fishes of the sea, As the reptiles that have no ruler?
They take up all of them with the hook, They catch them in their net, And gather them in their drag; Therefore they rejoice and exult.
Therefore they sacrifice to their net, And burn incense to their drag; Because by them their portion is fat, And their food plenteous.
Shall they therefore empty the net, And slay the nations continually without mercy?
I will stand on my watch-tower, And set myself on the bulwark, And watch to see what he will say to me, And what I shall answer to my expostulation.
And Jehovah answered me, and said, Write the vision, and make it plain upon tablets, That he may run that readeth it.
For the vision is yet for an appointed time, But it hasteneth to the end; it shall not deceive; If it tarry, wait for it; For it shall surely come; it shall not long delay.
Behold, the soul of him that is puffed up shall not be at ease; But the just shall live by his faithfulness.
Behold, the man of wine is outrageous; The proud man remaineth not at rest; He enlargeth his desire as the grave; He is as death, and cannot be satisfied; He gathereth to himself all the nations, And collecteth to himself all the kingdoms.
Shall not all of them utter a song against him, Yea, songs of reproach and derision concerning him? And say, Woe to him that heapeth up that which belongeth not to him! For how long a time? That ladeth himself with goods taken in pledge!
Shall not they suddenly rise up that will oppress thee, And awake, that will harass thee? Yea, thou shalt be their booty.
Because thou hast plundered many kingdoms, All the residue of the nations shall plunder thee: For the blood of men, and for violence against the land, Against the city and all its inhabitants.
Woe to him that procureth unjust gain for his house, That he may set his nest on high, That he may be delivered from the evil hand!
Thou hast devised shame for thine house; By destroying many nations, thou hast brought ruin upon thyself.
For the stone from the wall crieth out, And the beam from the timber answereth it.
Woe to him that buildeth a town by blood, And establisheth a city by iniquity!
Behold, it is determined by Jehovah of hosts, That nations shall labor for the fire, And kingdoms weary themselves for naught.
For the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of Jehovah, As the waters cover the sea.
Woe to him who giveth his neighbor drink; Who poureth out the strong wine, and maketh him drunken, That he may look upon his nakedness!
Thou shalt be filled with shame instead of glory; Drink thou also, and show thy foreskin! To thee shall come the cup in the right hand of Jehovah, And foul shame shall be upon thy glory.
For the violence done to Lebanon shall cover thee, And the destruction of the beasts which made them afraid, On account of the blood of men, and violence against the land, Against the city and all its inhabitants.
What profiteth the graven image, When the maker hath graven it? Or the molten image, and the teacher of lies, That the artificer trusteth in his work, When he maketh dumb idols?
Woe to him who saith to the wood, Awake! To the dumb stone, Arise! Will it teach? Behold, it is overlaid with gold and silver, And there is no breath within it.
But Jehovah is in his Holy temple; Be silent before him, all the earth!
The prayer of Habakkuk the prophet, in the form of an ode.
O Jehovah, I have heard thy words, and tremble. O Jehovah, revive thy work in the midst of the years, In the midst of the years make it known, In wrath remember mercy!
God cometh from Teman, And the Holy One from mount Paran; His glory covereth the heavens, And the earth is full of his praise.
His brightness is as the light; Rays stream forth from his hand, And there is the hiding-place of his power.
Before him goeth the pestilence, And the plague followeth his steps.
He standeth, and measureth the earth; He beholdeth, and maketh the nations tremble; The everlasting mountains are broken asunder; The eternal hills sink down; The eternal paths are trodden by him.
I see the tents of Cushan in affliction, And the canopies of the land of Midian tremble.
Is the anger of Jehovah kindled against the rivers, Is thy wrath against the rivers, Is thy indignation against the floods, That thou ridest on with thy horses, Upon thy chariots of victory?
Thy bow is made bare; Curses are the arrows of thy word; Thou causest rivers to break forth from the earth.
The mountains see thee and tremble; The flood of waters overflows; The deep uttereth his voice, And lifteth up his hands on high.
The sun and the moon remain in their habitation, At the light of thine arrows which fly, At the brightness of the lightning of thy spear.
Thou marchest through the land in indignation; Thou thrashest the nations in anger;
Thou goest forth for the deliverance of thy people, For the deliverance of thine anointed. Thou smitest the head of the house of the wicked; Thou destroyest the foundation even to the neck.
Thou piercest with his own spears the chief of his captains, Who rushed like a whirlwind to scatter us; Who exulted, as if they should devour the distressed in a hiding-place.
Thou ridest through the sea with thy horses, Through the raging of mighty waters.
I have heard, and my heart trembleth; My lips quiver at the voice; Rottenness entereth into my bones, and my knees tremble, That I must wait in silence for the day of trouble, When the invader shall come up against my people!
For the fig-tree shall not blossom, And there shall be no fruit upon the vine; The produce of the olive shall fail, And the fields shall yield no food. The flocks shall he cut off from the folds, And there shall be no herd in the stalls.
Yet will I rejoice in Jehovah, I will exult in God, my helper.
The Lord Jehovah is my strength; He will make my feet like the hind's, And cause me to walk upon my high places. “To the leader of the music on my stringed instruments.”
The word of Jehovah, which came to Zephaniah, the son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hizkiah, in the days of Josiah, the son of Amon, king of Judah.
I will utterly consume all things from the face of the land, saith Jehovah;
I will consume man and beast; I will consume the birds of heaven, and the fishes of the sea, And the stumbling-blocks with the wicked; And I will cut off man from the face of the land, saith Jehovah.
I will stretch out my hand over Judah, And over all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, And I will cut off from this place the residue of Baal, The name of the idol-sacrificers with the priests,
And those who bow themselves on the house-tops to the host of heaven, And those who bow themselves and swear by Jehovah, And also swear by their idol,
And those that turn back from Jehovah, And those that seek not Jehovah, nor inquire for him.
Be silent before the Lord Jehovah! For the day of Jehovah is near; For Jehovah hath prepared a sacrifice; He hath appointed his guests.
And in the day of the sacrifice of Jehovah it shall come to pass That I will punish the princes and the sons of the king, And all that are clothed with foreign apparel.
In that day also will I punish all that leap over the threshold, That fill the houses of their master with violence and deceit.
And it shall come to pass in that day, saith Jehovah, That there shall be the noise of a cry from the fish-gate, And of a howling from the other part of the city, And of great destruction from the hills.
Howl, ye inhabitants of Maktesh! For all the trafficking people are cut down; All they that bear silver are destroyed.
And it shall come to pass at that time, That I will search Jerusalem with lamps, And I will punish the men that are settled on their lees; That say in their hearts, “Jehovah doeth neither good nor evil.”
Their substance shall become a spoil, And their houses a desolation; They shall also build houses, but not inhabit them; And shall plant vineyards, but not drink the wine thereof.
The day of Jehovah is near, the great day; It is near, and hasteth greatly; The day of Jehovah shall resound; Bitterly shall the mighty man cry for help.
That day is a day of wrath, A day of distress and anguish, A day of destruction and desolation, A day of darkness and gloominess, A day of clouds and thick darkness,
A day of the trumpet and the war-shout, Against the fenced cities, And against the high towers.
And I will distress the men, so that they shall walk like the blind, Because they have sinned against Jehovah. And their blood shall be poured out as dust, And their flesh as dung.
Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of Jehovah, But by the fire of his indignation shall the whole land be devoured; For destruction, and that a speedy one, will he bring Upon all that dwell in the land.
Search yourselves; yea, search, O nation without shame!
Before the decree bring forth, Before the day come upon you like chaff; Before the fierce anger of Jehovah come upon you, Before the day of the anger of Jehovah come upon you.
Seek ye Jehovah, all ye lowly of the land, Ye, who obey his commands! Seek righteousness; seek lowliness; It may be that ye shall be hid in the day of the anger of Jehovah.
For Gaza shall be forsaken, And Askelon a desolation; Ashdod shall be driven out at noonday, And Ekron shall be rooted up.
Woe to the inhabitants of the sea-coasts, the nation of the Cherethites! This is the word of Jehovah against you, O Canaan, land of the Philistines: “I will destroy thee, that there shall be no inhabitant.”
And the sea-coast shall be pastures full of habitations for shepherds, and folds for flocks.
The coast shall be for the residue of the house of Judah; Thereon shall they feed; In the houses of Askelon shall they lie down in the evening; For Jehovah their God will look upon them, and bring back their captives.
I have heard the reproach of Moab, And the revilings of the sons of Ammon, With which they have reproached my people, And exalted themselves against their borders.
Therefore, as I live, saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, Moab shall be as Sodom, And the sons of Ammon as Gomorrah, A possession for thorns, and a pit for salt, and a perpetual desolation. The residue of my people shall spoil them, And the remainder of my nation shall possess them.
This shall come upon them for their pride, Because they have uttered reproaches, and exalted themselves against the people of Jehovah of hosts.
Jehovah will be terrible against them; For he will destroy all the gods of the earth; And before him shall worship, every one from his place, All the islands of the nations.
Ye, also, O Ethiopians! Ye shall be slain by my sword!
He will also stretch out his hand against the North, And destroy Assyria, And make Nineveh a desolation, Even dry like a desert.
And flocks shall lie down in the midst of her, Yea, all the tribes of wild beasts; The pelican and the hedgehog shall lodge in the capitals of her pillars; A cry shall resound in the window; Desolation shall be upon the threshold; For her cedar-work shall be laid bare.
This is the rejoicing city that dwelt in security, That said in her heart, “I, and none besides me!” Now is she become a desolation, a resting-place for wild beasts! Every one that passeth by her shall hiss, and wag his hand.
Woe to her that is rebellious and polluted, The oppressing city!
She listeneth to no voice, She receiveth not admonition; She trusteth not in Jehovah, She draweth not near to her God.
Her princes within her are roaring lions; Her judges are evening wolves; They reserve nothing for the morning.
Her prophets are vainglorious, Men of treachery; Her priests pollute the sanctuary, They violate the law.
But Jehovah is just in the midst of her; He doeth no iniquity. Every morning bringeth he his righteousness to light; he faileth not; Yet the wicked knoweth not shame.
I have cut off nations; their towers are destroyed; I have laid waste their streets so that none passeth through; Their cities are made desolate, without a man, without an inhabitant.
Then I said, “Surely thou wilt fear me; thou wilt receive admonition, That thy habitation may not be cut off, As I have commanded concerning thee.” But they were diligent to commit iniquity In all their doings.
Therefore wait for me, saith Jehovah. Until the day when I rise up to the prey. For my purpose is to gather the nations, to assemble the kingdoms, To pour upon them my indignation, Even all the heat of my wrath. For with the fire of mine anger shall all the earth be devoured.
Then will I again bestow upon the nations pure lips, So that they shall all of them call upon the name of Jehovah, And serve him with one consent.
From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia My suppliants, the sons of my dispersed ones, shall bring my offering.
In that day thou shalt not be ashamed For all thy doings, wherein thou hast transgressed against me; For I will take away from the midst of thee thy proud exulters, And thou shalt no more exalt thyself upon my holy mountain.
I will leave in the midst of thee a humble and lowly people, Who trust in the name of Jehovah.
The residue of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak falsehood; Neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth; Therefore shall they feed and lie down, and none shall make them afraid.
Sing, O daughter of Zion! Shout, O Israel! Rejoice and exult with all thy heart, O daughter of Jerusalem!
Jehovah hath taken away thy punishments; He hath removed thine enemies. The king of Israel, Jehovah, is in the midst of thee; Thou shalt see evil no more.
In that day shall it be said to Jerusalem, Fear not! And to Zion, Let not thy hands hang down!
Jehovah thy God will be in the midst of thee; The mighty one will save thee. He will rejoice over thee with gladness; He will pardon thee in his love; He will exult over thee with singing.
I will gather them that mourn, far from the solemn assembly, They were far from thee; the reproach was a burden upon thee.
Behold, at that time I will destroy all that afflict thee; And I will save the halting, and gather the scattered, And I will make them a praise and a name In every land where they have been put to shame.
At that time I will bring you back, And at that time I will gather you; For I will make you a name and a praise among all the nations of the earth, When I bring back your captives before your eyes, saith Jehovah.
In the second year of Darius the king, in the sixth month, on the first day of the month, came the word of Jehovah by Haggai the prophet to Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua, the son of Josedech, the high-priest, saying,
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: This people saith, The time is not yet come, the time that the house of Jehovah should be built.
But the word of Jehovah hath come by Haggai the prophet, saying:—
Is it, then, a time for yourselves To dwell in ceiled houses, While this house lieth waste?
Therefore thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Consider how it goeth with you!
Ye sow much, and bring in little; Ye eat, but are not full; Ye drink, but are not satisfied; Ye clothe yourselves, but are not warmed; And he that earneth wages earneth them for a purse with holes.
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Consider how it goeth with you!
Go up to the mountain, and bring wood, and build the house, That I may have pleasure therein, And be glorified, saith Jehovah.
Ye look for much, and lo, it cometh to little; And when ye bring it home, I blow it away; And why? saith Jehovah of hosts. Because of my house which lieth waste, While ye run every one to his own house.
Therefore the heaven over you withholdeth the dew, And the earth refuseth her fruit.
And I have called for a drought upon the land, and upon the mountains; And upon the corn, and the new wine, and the oil; Upon that which the ground bringeth forth, And upon men, and upon cattle, And upon all the labor of the hands.
Then Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, and Joshua, the son of Josedech, the high-priest, and all the remnant of people, hearkened to the voice of Jehovah their God, and to the words of Haggai the prophet, as Jehovah their God had sent him; and the people feared before Jehovah.
Then spake Haggai, the messenger of Jehovah, by a message from Jehovah to the people, saying, I am with you, saith Jehovah.
And Jehovah stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua, the son of Josedech, the high-priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of people, so that they came and executed work upon the house of Jehovah of hosts, their God,
on the four and twentieth day of the sixth month, in the second year of Darius the king.
In the seventh month, on the one and twentieth day of the month, came the word of Jehovah by the prophet Haggai, saying:
Speak now to Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua, the son of Josedech, the high-priest, and to the remnant of the people, saying:—
Who is there left among you, That saw this house In its former glory? And what do ye see it now? Is it not as nothing in your eyes?
Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel, saith Jehovah; And be strong, O Joshua, son of Josedech, the high-priest; And be strong, O all ye people of the land, saith Jehovah, and work! For I am with you, saith Jehovah of hosts.
This is the covenant which I made with you when ye came out of Egypt, And my spirit remaineth among you: Fear ye not!
For thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Yet once more, in a short time, I will shake the heavens and the earth, The sea and the dry land.
I will shake all the nations, And here shall come the precious things of all the nations; And I will fill this house with glory, Saith Jehovah of hosts.
Mine is the silver and mine the gold, Saith Jehovah of hosts;
Greater shall be the glory of this latter house than of the former, Saith Jehovah of hosts; And in this place will I give peace, Saith Jehovah of hosts.
On the four and twentieth day of the ninth month, in the second year of Darius, came the word of Jehovah by Haggai the prophet, saying,
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Ask now the law from the priests, saying,
If a man carry holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt touch bread, or pottage, or wine, or oil, or any food, shall it be holy? And the priests answered and said, No.
Then said Haggai, If a man unclean by a dead body touch any of these things, shall it be unclean? And the priests answered and said, It shall be unclean.
Then answered Haggai and said:— So is this people, and so is this nation before me, saith Jehovah; And so is all the work of their hands; And that which they offer there is unclean.
And now, I pray you, consider [[how it hath gone with you]] From that day and upward, From the time before one stone was laid upon another in the temple of Jehovah.
Since that time one hath come to a heap of twenty measures, And there were but ten; One hath come to a vat to draw out fifty vessels from the wine-press, And there were but twenty;
I have smitten you with blasting, with mildew, and with hail, Even all the works of your hands; Yet none among you hath turned to me, saith Jehovah.
Consider, I pray you, From that day and upward, From the four and twentieth day of the ninth month, From the day when the foundation of the temple of Jehovah was laid, Consider ye!
Is there yet seed in the barn? Yea, as yet the vine, and the fig-tree, and pomegranate, and the olive-tree have not borne. But from this day will I bless you.
And the word of Jehovah came the second time to Haggai, on the four and twentieth day of the month, saying,
Speak to Zerubbabel, the governor of Judah, and say:— I will shake the heavens and the earth,
And I will overthrow the thrones of kingdoms, And I will destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the nations, And I will overthrow the chariots, and those that ride in them, And the horses and their riders shall come down, One by the sword of the other.
In that day, saith Jehovah of hosts, I will take thee, O Zerubbabel, son of Shealtiel, my servant, saith Jehovah, And keep thee as a signet-ring; For thee have I chosen, saith Jehovah of hosts.
In the eighth month, in the second year of Darius, came the word of Jehovah to Zechariah, the son of Barachiah, the son of Iddo, the prophet, saying:—
Jehovah hath been much displeased with your fathers.
But say thou to them, Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Turn ye to me, saith Jehovah of hosts, And I will turn to you, saith Jehovah of hosts.
Be ye not as your fathers, to whom the former prophets cried, saying, Turn ye now from your evil ways, and from your evil doings! But they did not hear, nor hearken to me, saith Jehovah.
Your fathers, where are they? And the prophets, do they live forever?
But my words and my statutes, Which I commanded my servants, the prophets, Did they not overtake your fathers? And they returned and said, Even as Jehovah of hosts thought To do to us according to our ways, and according to doings, So hath he done to us.
On the four and twentieth day of the eleventh month, which is the month Sebat, in the second year of Darius, came the word of Jehovah to Zechariah, the son of Barachiah, the son of Iddo, the prophet, saying:
I saw in the night, and behold, a man riding upon a red horse; and he stood among the myrtle-trees that were in the deep valley, and behind him were other horses, red, fox-colored, and white.
Then I said, What are these, my lord? And the angel that talked with me said to me, I will show thee what these are.
And the man that stood among the myrtle-trees answered and said, These are they whom Jehovah hath sent to go to and fro through the earth.
And they answered the angel of Jehovah that stood among the myrtle-trees, and said, We have gone to and fro through the earth, and behold, all the earth is still and at rest.
Then the angel of Jehovah answered, and said, O Jehovah of hosts, how long wilt thou not have mercy on Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, against which thou hast had indignation these threescore and ten years?
And Jehovah answered the angel that talked with me good words and comfortable words.
And the angel who talked with me said to me: Proclaim thou and say, Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: I am jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion with great jealousy,
And with great anger am I angry with the nations that are at ease; For I was but a little displeased, And they helped forward the affliction.
Therefore thus saith Jehovah: I return to Jerusalem with mercies; My house shall be built in it, Saith Jehovah of hosts, And a measuring-line shall be stretched forth over Jerusalem.
Proclaim yet and say, Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: My cities shall yet overflow with prosperity, And Jehovah will yet comfort Zion, And will yet choose Jerusalem.
Then I lifted up my eyes and looked, and behold, four horns.
And I said to the angel that talked with me, What mean these? And he answered me, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem.
And Jehovah showed me four smiths.
Then said I, What come these to do? And he spake, saying, These are the horns which scattered Judah, so that no man lifted up his head; and now these are come to terrify them, to cast out the horns of the nations which lifted up their horn against the land of Judah to scatter it.
I lifted up mine eyes again, and looked, and behold, a man with a measuring-line in his hand.
Then said I, Whither goest thou? And he said to me, To measure Jerusalem, to see what is the breadth thereof, and what is the length thereof.
And behold, the angel who talked with me went forth, and another angel went forth to meet him,
and said to him, Run, speak to that young man, saying: Jerusalem shall be inhabited without walls On account of the multitude of men and of cattle within her.
And I will be to her, saith Jehovah, A wall of fire round about, And glory will I be within her.
Ho! ho! flee ye out of the land of the North, saith Jehovah; For toward the four winds of heaven have I scattered you abroad, saith Jehovah.
Ho, Zion, escape, Thou that dwellest with the daughter of Babylon!
For thus saith Jehovah of hosts: For glory hath he sent me to the nations which plundered you; (For he that toucheth you toucheth the apple of his eye.)
For, behold, I will shake my hand over them, And they shall be a spoil to those that served them; And ye shall know that Jehovah of hosts hath sent me.
Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion! For, behold, I will come, And I will dwell in the midst of thee, saith Jehovah;
And many nations shall join themselves to Jehovah in that day, And shall be my people; And I will dwell in the midst of thee; And thou shalt know that Jehovah of hosts hath sent me to thee.
And Jehovah will possess Judah as his portion in the holy land, And will again choose Jerusalem.
Be silent, all flesh, before Jehovah! For he riseth up from his holy habitation.
And he showed me Joshua, the high-priest, standing before the angel of Jehovah, and the adversary standing at his right hand, to accuse him.
And Jehovah said to the adversary:— Jehovah rebuke thee, thou adversary, Even Jehovah, who hath chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee! Is not this man a brand plucked out of the fire?
Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments, and stood before the angel.
And he [[the angel]] spake and said to them [[the angels]] that stood before him, saying, Take off the filthy garments from him. And to him he said, Behold, I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and will clothe thee with goodly apparel.
And I said, Let them set a fair mitre upon his head! And they set a fair mitre upon his head, and clothed him with garments. And the angel of Jehovah stood by.
And the angel of Jehovah declared to Joshua and said:
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: If thou wilt walk in my ways, And if thou wilt keep my charge, Then thou shalt also rule my house, And shalt also keep my courts, And I will give thee guides among these that stand by.
Hear now, O Joshua, high-priest, Thou and thy companions, who sit before thee! For they are men that are signs. For, behold, I will cause to come my servant, the Branch.
For, behold, the stone which I have laid before Joshua, Upon this one stone shall be seven eyes; Behold, I will engrave the graving thereof, saith Jehovah of hosts; And I will remove the iniquity of this land in one day.
In that day, saith Jehovah of hosts, Shall ye invite every one his neighbor Under the vine and under the fig-tree.
And the angel that talked with me came again, and awaked me, as a man that is wakened out of his sleep,
and said to me, What seest thou? And I said, I have looked, and behold, a chandelier all of gold, with a bowl upon the top of it, and its seven lamps upon it, and seven pipes to the seven lamps which are upon the top of it;
and two olive-trees by it, one upon the right side of the bowl, and the other upon the left side of it.
And I spake, and said to the angel that talked with me, What mean these, my lord?
Then the angel who talked with me answered and said to me, Knowest thou not what these mean? And I said, No, my lord.
Then he answered and spake to me, saying, This is the word of Jehovah to Zerubbabel, saying:— Not by might, nor by power, But by my spirit, Saith Jehovah of hosts.
What art thou, O great mountain? Before Zerubbabel thou shalt become a plain! And he shall bring forth the corner-stone amid shoutings, [[The people crying,]] “Grace, grace be to it!”
Moreover, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house, and his hands shall finish it. And thou shalt know that Jehovah of hosts hath sent me to you.
For who hath despised the day of small things? With joy shall the plummet be seen in the hand of Zerubbabel by those seven; they are the eyes of Jehovah, which run to and fro through the whole earth.
Then I spake and said to him, What mean these two olive-trees, upon the right side of the chandelier and upon the left side thereof?
And I spake the second time, and said to him, What mean these two olive-branches, which are by the side of the two golden tubes which empty the golden oil out of themselves?
And he answered me and said, Knowest thou not what these mean? And I said, No, my lord.
And he said, These are the two anointed ones that stand before the Lord of all the earth.
And I lifted up my eyes again and looked, and behold, a flying roll.
And he said to me, What seest thou? And I answered, I see a flying roll; the length thereof is twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof ten cubits.
Then said he to me:— This is the curse that goeth forth Over the Face of the whole land; For every one who stealeth shall be cut off from hence, according to it, And every one who sweareth falsely shall be cut off from hence, according to it.
I will bring it forth, saith Jehovah of hosts, And it shall enter into the house of the thief, And into the house of him that sweareth falsely by my name; And it shall abide in his house, And shall consume it, with the timber thereof and the stones thereof.
Then the angel who talked with me went forth, and said to me, Lift up now thine eyes, and see what this is which goeth forth.
And I said, What is it? And he said, This is an ephah which goeth forth. He said, moreover, This is their image through all the land.
And behold, a talent of lead was lifted up, and a woman was sitting upon the ephah.
And he said, This is the Wickedness. And he cast her into the ephah, and he cast the weight of lead upon the mouth thereof.
Then lifted I up mine eyes and looked, and behold, there came forth two women, and wind was in their wings; for they had wings like the wings of a stork, and they lifted up the ephah between the earth and heaven.
Then said I to the angel who talked with me, Whither do these bear the ephah?
And he said to me, To build it a house in the land of Shinar, that it may be fixed there, and set upon its base.
And I lifted up mine eyes again, and looked, and, behold, there came four chariots out from between two mountains; and the mountains were mountains of brass.
In the first chariot were red horses; and in the second chariot, black horses;
and in the third chariot, white horses; and in the fourth chariot, spotted-red horses.
Then I spake, and said to the angel that talked with me, What are these, my lord?
And the angel answered and said to me, These are the four Winds of heaven, which go forth from standing before the Lord of all the earth.
The black horses, which are thereto, go forth into the north country, and the white go forth after them; and the spotted go forth into the south country.
And the red ones went forth, and sought to go, even to walk to and fro through the earth. And he said, Go, walk ye to and fro through the earth! So they walked to and fro through the earth.
Then he cried to me, and spake to me, saying, Behold, these that go forth toward the land of the North shall execute my wrath against the land of the North.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
Take from those of the captivity, from Heldai, from Tobijah, and from Jedaiah, and come thou the same day, and go into the house of Josiah, the son of Zephaniah, whither they are come from Babylon;
take from them silver and gold, and make a crown, and set it upon the head of Joshua, the son of Josedech, the high-priest,
and speak to him, saying, Thus saith Jehovah of hosts:— Behold a man whose name is the Branch, He shall spring up from his place, And he shall build the temple of Jehovah.
He shall build the temple of Jehovah, And he shall bear the majesty, And sit and rule upon his throne, And be a priest upon his throne, And the counsel of peace shall be between them both.
And the crown shall be to Helem, and to Tobijah, and to Jedaiah, and to Hen, the son of Zephaniah, for a memorial in the temple of Jehovah.
And they that are far off shall come and build in the temple of Jehovah; and ye shall know that Jehovah of hosts hath sent me to you. And this shall come to pass, if ye will diligently obey the voice of Jehovah, your God.
And it came to pass, in the fourth year of King Darius, that the word of Jehovah came to Zechariah, on the fourth day of the ninth month, even in Chisleu;
when they had sent to the house of God Sherezer and Regem-melech, and their men, to pray before Jehovah,
and to speak to the priests that were in the house of Jehovah of hosts, and to the prophets, saying, “Shall I weep in the fifth month, separating myself, as I have done these so many years?”
Then came the word of Jehovah of hosts to me, saying,
Speak to all the people of the land, and to the priests, saying, When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth month and in the seventh month, even those seventy years, did ye at all fast for me, even for me?
And when ye eat and drink, is it not ye that eat, and ye that drink?
Are not these the words which Jehovah proclaimed by the former prophets, when Jerusalem was inhabited and in prosperity, and her cities round about her, and when the South and the Plain were inhabited?
And the word of Jehovah came to Zechariah, saying,
Thus spake Jehovah of hosts, saying, Judge true judgment, and show mercy and compassion every man to his brother.
And the widow, and the orphan, and the stranger, and the poor, oppress not, and meditate not evil against one another in your heart.
But they refused to hearken, and showed a refractory shoulder, and made their ears dull, that they might not hear;
yea, they made their hearts as an adamant stone, that they might not hear the law, and the words which Jehovah of hosts sent through his spirit by the former prophets. Therefore came great anger from Jehovah of hosts.
And as he called and they would not hear, so they called and I would not hear, saith Jehovah of hosts.
And I scattered them as with a whirlwind among all the nations, which they knew not. And the land was desolate after them, so that no man passed through, nor returned; and thus the beautiful land was made a desolation.
And the word of Jehovah of hosts came to me, saying,
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: I have been jealous for Zion with great jealousy, And with great wrath have I been jealous for her.
Thus saith Jehovah: I have returned to Zion, And I will dwell in Jerusalem; And Jerusalem shall be called a city of truth, And the mountain of Jehovah of hosts the holy mountain.
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: There shall yet old men and old women dwell In the streets of Jerusalem, Every one with his staff in his hand for great age.
And the streets of the city shall be full Of boys and girls playing in her streets.
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: If it be difficult in the eyes Of the residue of this people in these days, Is it therefore difficult in my eyes, Saith Jehovah of hosts?
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Behold, I will save my people From the land of the rising, and from the land of the setting sun.
And I will bring them, and they shall dwell in Jerusalem; And they shall be my people, And I will be their God, In truth and in righteousness.
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Let your hands be strong, Ye that hear in these days These words by the mouth of the prophets, Who were in the day when the foundation of the house of Jehovah of hosts was laid, The temple, that it might be built.
For before these days There was no recompense for men, Nor was there any recompense for beasts; Nor to him that went out, nor to him that came in, was there security from the enemy; For I set all men one against another.
But now I will not be as in former days Toward the residue of this people, Saith Jehovah of hosts.
For the seed shall be prosperous; The vine shall yield its fruit, And the earth shall yield her increase, And the heavens shall yield their dew; And I will cause the remnant of this people to possess all these.
And it shall be, that as ye were a curse among the nations, O house of Judah and house of Israel, So will I save you, and ye shall be a blessing. Fear not; let your hands be strong!
For thus saith Jehovah of hosts: As I thought to do you evil, When your fathers provoked me to anger, Saith Jehovah of hosts, And I repented not,
So have I again thought in these days To do good to Jerusalem, And to the house of Judah. Fear ye not!
These are the things which ye shall do: Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbor; Judge according to truth, and for peace in your gates;
And meditate not evil against one another in your hearts, And love not a false oath! For all these are things which I hate, saith Jehovah.
And the word of Jehovah of hosts came to me, saying,
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: The fast of the fourth month, and the fast of the fifth month, And the fast of the seventh month, and the fast of the tenth month, Shall be to the house of Judah for joy and gladness, And cheerful festivals. But love ye truth and peace!
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: It shall yet come to pass, that many nations shall come, And the inhabitants of many cities;
And the inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying, “Let us go speedily to pray before Jehovah, And to seek Jehovah of hosts! I will go also!”
Then shall come many nations and mighty kingdoms, To seek Jehovah of hosts in Jerusalem, And to pray before Jehovah.
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: In those days shall ten men of all languages of the nations take hold, They shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, Saying, “We will go with you, For we have heard that God is with you.”
The prophecy of the word of Jehovah is against the land of Hadrach, And upon Damascus shall it come down, For the eye of Jehovah is over man, And over all the tribes of Israel,
And against Hamath, which bordereth thereon, And Tyre and Sidon, though she be very wise.
Though Tyre hath built her a fortress, And hath heaped up silver as dust, And fine gold as the mire of the streets,
Behold, the Lord will cast her out, And will smite her power into the sea, And she shall be devoured by fire.
Askelon shall see it and fear, Gaza also shall see and tremble, And Ekron, because her expectation shall be put to shame. The king shall perish from Gaza, And Askelon shall not be inhabited.
And strangers shall dwell in Ashdod, And I will cut off the pride of the Philistines.
And I will take away his blood out of his mouth, And his abominations from between his teeth; And even he shall be left for our God, And he shall be as a governor in Judah, And Ekron as a Jebusite.
And I will encamp about my house, as a garrison, Against him that passeth by and him that returneth, And no oppressor shall pass through them any more; For now have I seen with my own eyes.
Rejoice greatly, daughter of Zion, Shout, daughter of Jerusalem! Behold, thy king cometh to thee; He is just and victorious, Mild, and riding upon an ass, Even upon a colt, the foal of an ass.
And I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim, And the horse from Jerusalem; And the battle-bow shall be cut off. And he shall speak peace to the nations; And his dominion shall be from sea to sea, And from the river to the ends of the earth.
As for thee also, on account of thy blood-sealed covenant, I will set thy prisoners free from the pit wherein is no water.
Return ye to the strong-hold, ye prisoners of hope! Even this day do I declare it: I will restore double unto thee.
For I will bend Judah as a bow for myself; As a bow will I extend Ephraim to the utmost; And I will raise up thy sons, O Zion, Against thy sons, O Greece, And make thee as the sword of a mighty man.
And Jehovah shall be seen over them. And his arrow shall go forth as lightning; And the Lord Jehovah shall blow the trumpet, And shall go forth with whirlwinds of the South.
Jehovah of hosts shall defend them; And they shall devour, and trample under feet the sling-stones, And they shall drink, and shout as through wine, And they shall be filled like a bowl, like the corners of the altar.
And Jehovah, their God, shall save them in that day; He will save his people as a flock; For they shall be as the stones of a crown, lifting themselves up in his land.
How great shall be their prosperity, and how great their beauty! Corn shall make the young men thrive, and new wire the maidens.
Ask ye of Jehovah rain in the time of the latter rain! It is Jehovah that maketh the lightning; And he will give you abundant showers, To every one the herb of the field.
For the teraphim speak falsehood, And the diviners see a lie, And the dreams speak falsehood; Vain are their consolations. Therefore they wander as a flock; They are in distress, because there is no shepherd.
My anger is kindled against the shepherds, And the bucks will I punish; For Jehovah of hosts will visit his flock, the house of Judah, And make them as his goodly horse in battle.
From him shall come forth the corner-stone, From him the nail, From him the battle-bow; From him shall every leader come forth.
And they shall be as mighty men, Who tread down their enemies in battle as the mire of the streets, And they shall fight, because Jehovah is with them, So that the riders on horses shall be confounded.
And I will strengthen the house of Judah, And give victory to the house of Joseph, And I will set them in their dwellings, because I have compassion upon them; And they shall be as though I had not cast them off; For I am Jehovah, their God, and I will hear them.
And Ephraim shall be as a mighty man, And their heart shall rejoice, as through wine; And their sons shall see it and rejoice, Their hearts shall rejoice in Jehovah.
I will whistle for them, and will gather them; for I have redeemed them; And they shall increase as they increased before.
Though I scatter them among the nations, Yet in far countries will they remember me; And they shall live with their children, and shall return.
And I will bring them back from the land of Egypt, And from Assyria will I gather them; And I will bring them into the land of Gilead and of Lebanon, And there shall not be room enough for them.
And he shall pass through the sea of distress, And he shall smite the sea of waves, And all the depths of the river shall be dried up; And the pride of Assyria shall be brought down, And the sceptre of Egypt shall depart.
And I will strengthen them through Jehovah, And in his name shall they walk, saith Jehovah.
Open thy doors, O Lebanon, That the fire may devour thy cedars!
Howl, O cypress, for the cedar falleth! For the lofty ones are destroyed! Howl, O ye oaks of Bashan, For the high forest is come down!
Hark! the voice of the howling of the shepherds, Because their glory is destroyed! The voice of the roaring of young lions, Because the pride of Jordan is destroyed!
Thus said Jehovah, my God: Feed thou the flock of slaughter,
Whose possessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty, And which they who sell say, “Blessed be Jehovah, for I am rich!” And whose shepherds spare them not.
For I will no longer spare The inhabitants of the land, saith Jehovah; But, behold, I will deliver the men Every one into the hand of his neighbor, And into the hand of his king; And they shall smite the land, And I will not deliver out of their hand.
So I fed the flock of slaughter, truly a miserable flock. And I took to me two crooks; the one I called Favor, and the other I called Bands; and I fed the flock.
And I cut off three shepherds in one month; for I was weary of them, and they also abhorred me.
Then I said, I will not feed you; that which dieth, let it die; and that which is to be cut off, let it be cut off; and let the rest eat the flesh of one another.
And I took my staff Favor, and cut it asunder, that I might break my covenant which I had made with all the nations.
And it was broken in that day; and so the poor of the flock, who had regard to me, knew that it was the word of Jehovah.
Then I said to them, If it seem good in your eyes, give me my wages; if not, keep them. And they weighed for my wages thirty shekels of silver.
And Jehovah said to me, Cast it into the treasury, the goodly price at which I was valued by them. And I took the thirty shekels of silver, and cast them into the house of Jehovah, into the treasury.
Then I broke my other crook, even Bands, to break the brotherhood between Judah and Israel.
And Jehovah said to me: Take to thee yet the instruments of a foolish shepherd.
For lo, I will raise up a shepherd in the land Who shall not care for those that are perishing, Nor seek that which is gone astray, Nor heal that which is wounded, Nor support that which cannot go; But he shall eat the flesh of the fat, And consume it even to the hoofs.
Woe to the foolish shepherd that leaveth the flock! The sword is upon his arm, and upon his right eye; His arm shall surely be withered, And his right eye shall surely be darkened!
The prophecy of the word of Jehovah concerning Israel. Thus saith Jehovah, who stretched out the heavens, And laid the foundation of the earth, And formed the spirit of man within him:
Behold, I make Jerusalem a cup of giddiness to all the nations round about, And for Judah also shall it be In the siege against Jerusalem.
And in that day will I make Jerusalem A burdensome stone for all nations; All that lift it up shall tear themselves, And all the nations of the earth shall gather themselves together against it.
In that day, saith Jehovah, I will smite every horse with amazement, And his rider with madness; I will open mine eyes upon the house of Judah, And every horse of the nations will I smite with blindness.
Then shall the leaders of Judah say in their heart, “Strong are the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Through Jehovah of hosts, their God.”
In that day will I make the leaders of Judah Like a fire-pan among wood, And like a torch of fire in a sheaf, And they shall devour, on the right hand and on the left, All the nations round about. And Jerusalem shall again dwell in her own place at Jerusalem.
Jehovah will also save the tents of Judah first, That the glory of the house of David, And the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, May not magnify itself against Judah.
In that day shall Jehovah defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem, And he that is feeble among them in that day shall be like David, And the house of David shall be as God, As the angel of Jehovah before them.
And it shall come to pass in that day That I will seek to destroy all the nations Which come against Jerusalem.
Then will I pour upon the house of David, And upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, A spirit of supplication, and of prayer; And they shall look to me whom they pierced, And they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, And shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his first-born.
In that day the mourning shall be great in Jerusalem, As the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo.
And the land shall mourn, every family apart; The family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart; The family of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart;
The family of the house of Levi apart, and their wives apart; The family of the house of Shimei apart, and their wives apart;
All the families that remain, Every family apart, and their wives apart.
In that day there shall be a fountain opened To the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, For sin and for uncleanness.
And it shall come to pass in that day, Saith Jehovah of hosts, That I will cut off the names of the idols out of the land, And they shall no more be remembered; And the prophets also, and the impure spirit, Will I cause to pass out of the land.
And it shall come to pass, when any one shall yet prophesy, That his father and mother shall say to him, Even they that begat him, “Thou shalt not live; For thou hast spoken falsehood in the name of Jehovah.” And his father and mother that begat him shall pierce him through when he prophesieth.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that the prophet shall be ashamed Every one of his vision when he prophesieth; Neither shall they wear a garment of hair, to deceive.
But each shall say, “I am no prophet; I am a man that tilleth the ground; For a man hath purchased me from my youth.”
And when one shall say to him, “What are these wounds in thy hands?” He shall answer, “Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends.”
Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, Even against the man who is my fellow, saith Jehovah of hosts! Smite the shepherd, and let the sheep be scattered! I will also turn my hand against the lambs.
And it shall come to pass in all the land, saith Jehovah, That two parts therein shall be cut off and die; But the third part shall be left therein.
And I will bring the third part through the fire, And will refine them, as silver is refined, And will try them, as gold is tried; They shall call upon me, and I will hear them; I will say, “It is my people.” And they shall say, “Jehovah is our God.”
Behold, the day of Jehovah cometh, When thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee.
For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; And the city shall be taken, And the houses shall be rifled, And the women shall be ravished; And half of the city shall go forth into captivity, And the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city.
Then shall Jehovah go forth, And fight against those nations, As he once fought in the day of battle.
And his feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives, Which is before Jerusalem on the east; And the Mount of Olives shall be cloven in the middle of it, eastward and westward, Into a very great valley; And half of the mountain shall remove toward the north, And half of it toward the south.
And ye shall flee through the valley of my mountains, For the valley of the mountains shall reach to Azal; Yea, ye shall flee, as ye fled before the earthquake In the days of Uzziah, king of Judah. And Jehovah, my God, will come, And all his holy ones with him.
And it shall come to pass in that day That there shall he no light, but cold and ice;
And there shall be one day, (Known to Jehovah is it,) It shall be neither day nor night; But at the time of evening there shall be light.
And it shall come to pass in that day That living waters shall go out from Jerusalem, Half of them toward the eastern sea, And half of them toward the western sea; In summer and in winter shall they be.
And Jehovah shall be king over all the earth; In that day shall Jehovah be one, and his name one.
The whole land shall be turned into a plain, From Geba to Rimmon, south of Jerusalem; And the city shall be exalted and inhabited in her place, From the gate of Benjamin to the place of the former gate, And to the corner gate, And from the tower of Hananeel to the king's wine-presses.
Men shall dwell therein, And there shall be no more destruction; But Jerusalem shall dwell securely.
And this shall be the plague With which Jehovah will smite all the nations Which warred against Jerusalem: Their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, And their eyes shall consume away in their sockets, And their tongue shall consume away in their mouth.
And it shall come to pass in that day, That there shall be a great tumult among them from Jehovah; And they shall lay hold every one on the hand of his neighbor, And his hand shall rise up against the hand of his neighbor.
And Judah also shall fight against Jerusalem; But the wealth of all the nations round about shall be gathered together, Gold and silver and apparel in great abundance.
And so shall be the plague of the horse, Of the mule, of the camel, and of the ass, And of every beast which shall be in those camps, Even as this plague.
And it shall be, that every one that is left Of all the nations which come against Jerusalem, Even they shall go up, from year to year, To worship the King, Jehovah of hosts, And to keep the feast of tabernacles.
And it shall be that whoso will not go up, Of the families of the earth, to Jerusalem, To worship the King, Jehovah of hosts, Upon them shall be no rain.
And if the family of Egypt go not up, and come not, Then not for them shall there be water. The plague shall come upon them With which Jehovah shall smite the nations Which go not up to keep the feast of tabernacles.
This shall be the punishment of Egypt, And the punishment of all the nations That come not up to keep the feast of tabernacles.
In that day, upon the bells of the horses Shall be written, “Holy to Jehovah.” And the pots in the house of Jehovah Shall be as the bowls before the altar.
And every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah Shall be holy to Jehovah of hosts; And all that sacrifice shall come, And shall take of them, and seethe therein. And there shall be no more a trader In the house of Jehovah of hosts, in that day.
The prophecy of the word of Jehovah, concerning Israel, by Malachi.
I have loved you, saith Jehovah. But ye say, “Wherein hast thou loved us?” Was not Esau Jacob's brother, saith Jehovah? Yet I loved Jacob,
And Esau I hated; And I made his mountains a desolation, And his inheritance to be habitations of the desert.
Although Edom say, “We are ruined, Yet will we build again the desolate places.” Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: They may build, but I will throw down; And men shall call them “The impious land, The people against whom Jehovah hath indignation forever.”
And your eyes shall see it, and ye shall say, “Great is Jehovah beyond the borders of Israel!”
A son honoreth his father, And a servant his master; If I, then, be a father, where is mine honor? And if I be a master, where is my fear? Saith Jehovah of hosts to you, ye priests that despise my name. Ye say, “Wherein do we despise thy name?”
Ye bring polluted food to mine altar. And ye say, “Wherein do we pollute thee?” In that ye say, “The table of Jehovah is contemptible.”
(1:7A) For when ye bring the blind for sacrifice, [[ye say,]] “It is not evil.” (1:8) And when ye offer the lame and the sick, [[Ye say,]] “It is not evil.” Offer it, then, to thy governor; Will he be pleased with thee, Or have regard to thee? Saith Jehovah of hosts.
And now, I pray you, beseech God to be gracious unto us! Since such things are done by you, Will he have regard to you, Saith Jehovah of hosts?
O that some one of you would close the doors, That ye might not kindle the fire upon mine altar in vain! I have no pleasure in you, saith Jehovah of hosts, Neither will I accept an offering at your hand.
For from the rising of the sun even to the going down of the same My name shall be great among the nations. And in every place shall incense be offered to my name, And a pure offering; For my name shall be great among the nations, Saith Jehovah of hosts.
But ye profane it, In that ye say, “The table of Jehovah is polluted, And what is offered thereon, even its food, is contemptible.”
Ye say also, “Behold, what weariness!” And ye snuff at it, Saith Jehovah of hosts; And ye bring that which is plundered, and lame, and sick, And present it for an offering; Shall I accept it at your hand? Saith Jehovah.
Cursed be the deceiver, Who hath in his flock a male, And yet voweth and sacrificeth to Jehovah that which is marred; For I am a great king, saith Jehovah of hosts; And my name is terrible among the nations.
And now to you, O ye priests, is this commandment:
If ye will not hearken, If ye will not lay it to heart, To give glory to my name, saith Jehovah of hosts, I will send a curse upon you, And I will curse your blessings; Yea, I have cursed them already, Because ye do not lay it to heart.
Behold, I will rebuke your seed, And I will scatter dung in your faces, The dung of your solemn feasts, And ye shall be carried to it.
And ye shall know that I have sent to you this commandment, That my covenant may remain with Levi, Saith Jehovah of hosts.
My covenant was with him for life and peace, Which I gave to him for the fear wherewith he feared me, And was afraid before my name.
The law of truth was in his mouth, And unrighteousness was not found in his lips; He walked with me in truth and equity, And turned many away from iniquity.
For the lips of the priest should keep knowledge, And men should seek the law from his mouth; For he is the messenger of Jehovah of hosts.
But ye have departed from the way, Ye have caused many to stumble at the law, And ye have made void the covenant with Levi, Saith Jehovah of hosts.
Therefore will I also make you Despicable and base before all the people; According as ye have not kept my ways. But have had respect to persons in the law.
Have we not all one Father? Hath not one God created us? Why should we deal treacherously one against another, And profane the covenant made with our fathers?
Judah hath dealt treacherously, And an abomination is committed in Israel and in Jerusalem. For Judah hath profaned the holy people of Jehovah, which he loveth, And hath married the daughter of a strange god.
Jehovah will cut off the man that doeth this, Him that waketh and him that answereth, from the tents of Jacob, And him that bringeth an offering to Jehovah of hosts.
And this also ye do: Ye cover the altar of Jehovah with tears, With weeping and with groans, So that he no more hath regard to the offering, Nor receiveth it with good-will from your hand.
Yet ye say, “Wherefore?” It is because Jehovah has been a witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, Against whom thou hast dealt unfaithfully, Although she was thy companion and thy covenanted wife.
But did not He make one only? And yet had he a residue of the spirit; And wherefore one? He sought a godly race. Therefore take heed to your spirit, And be not unfaithful to the wife of thy youth!
For I hate him that putteth away, Saith Jehovah, the God of Israel, And him that covereth his garment with violence, Saith Jehovah of hosts. Therefore take heed to your spirit, and be not unfaithful.
Ye have wearied Jehovah with your words; Yet ye say, “Wherein have we wearied him?” In that ye say, “Every one of them that do evil Is good in the sight of Jehovah, And in them he hath delight”; Or, “Where is the God of judgment?”
Behold, I will send my messenger, And he shall prepare the way before me; And the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple; And the messenger of the covenant, whom ye desire, Behold, he shall come, saith Jehovah of hosts.
But who shall abide the day of his coming? And who shall stand when he appeareth? For he shall be like the fire of the refiner, And like the soap of the fuller.
And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, And he shall purify the sons of Levi, And shall refine them as gold and silver, That, being holy to Jehovah, they may bring an offering in righteousness.
Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasing to Jehovah, As in the days of old, And as in former years.
And I will come near to you to judgment; And I will be a swift witness Against sorcerers, and against adulterers, and against false swearers, And against those who defraud the hireling of his hire, And oppress the widow and the fatherless, And turn aside the stranger from his right, And fear not me, saith Jehovah of hosts.
For I am Jehovah; I change not; Therefore, ye sons of Jacob, are ye not consumed.
From the days of your fathers have ye turned aside from my statutes, And have not kept them; Return to me, and I will return to you, Saith Jehovah of hosts. But ye say, “Wherein shall we return?”
Shall a man rob God, That ye have robbed me? But ye say, “Wherein have we robbed thee?” In tithes and offerings.
Ye are cursed with a curse, For ye have robbed me, even this whole nation.
Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, That there be food in my house; And try me now in this, Saith Jehovah of hosts, Whether I will not open to you the windows of heaven, And pour out upon you a blessing, until there is none left.
And I will rebuke for you the devourer, And he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground, Nor shall your vine be barren in the field, Saith Jehovah of hosts.
And all nations shall call you blessed; For ye shall be a delightful land, Saith Jehovah of hosts.
Your words have been bold against me, saith Jehovah; Yet ye say, “What have we spoken against thee?”
Ye have said, “It is a vain thing to serve God”; And, “What profit is it that we have kept his ordinances, And that we have walked mournfully before Jehovah of hosts?
Therefore we call the proud happy; Yea, they that do wickedness are built up; Yea, they tempt God, and are delivered.”
Then they that feared Jehovah spake to one another, And Jehovah gave ear and heard; And a book of remembrance was written before him, For them that feared Jehovah, And that thought upon his name.
And they shall be to me, saith Jehovah of hosts, In the day which I appoint, as my own possession; And I will spare them, As a father spareth his own son that serveth him.
Then shall ye return and see What is the difference between the righteous and the wicked, Between him who serveth God And him who serveth him not.
For, behold, the day cometh, which shall burn as an oven; Then shall all the proud, And all that do wickedness, be stubble; And the day that cometh shall burn them up, Saith Jehovah of hosts; It shall leave them neither root nor branch.
But for you that fear my name Shall the sun of salvation arise With healing under his wings. And ye shall go forth and leap for joy, Like calves of the stall.
And ye shall tread down the wicked; For they shall be as dust under the soles of your feet In the day which I appoint, saith Jehovah of hosts.
Remember ye the law of Moses, my servant, Which I commanded him in Horeb for all Israel, My statutes and precepts!
Behold, I will send you Elijah, the prophet, Before the day of Jehovah come, The great and terrible day.
He shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, And the heart of the children to their fathers, That I may not come And smite the land with a curse.
The genealogy of Jesus Christ, son of David, son of Abraham.
Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac begat Jacob; and Jacob begat Judah and his brothers.
And Judah begat Pharez and Zarah, by Tamar. And Pharez begat Hezron; and Hezron begat Ram;
and Ram begat Amminadab; and Amminadab begat Nahshon; and Nahshon begat Salmon;
and Salmon begat Boaz by Rahab. And Boaz begat Obed by Ruth. And Obed begat Jesse;
and Jesse begat David the king. And David begat Solomon by the wife of Uriah.
And Solomon begat Rehoboam; and Rehoboam begat Abijah; and Abijah begat Asa;
and Asa begat Jehoshaphat; and Jehoshaphat begat Joram; and Joram begat Uzziah;
and Uzziah begat Jotham; and Jotham begat Ahaz; and Ahaz begat Hezekiah;
and Hezekiah begat Manasseh; and Manasseh begat Amon; and Amon begat Josiah;
and Josiah begat Jeconiah and his brothers, at the time of the removal to Babylon.
And after the removal to Babylon, Jeconiah begat Shealtiel; and Shealtiel begat Zerubbabel;
and Zerubbabel begat Abiud; and Abiud begat Eliakim; and Eliakim begat Azor;
and Azor begat Zadok; and Zadok begat Achim; and Achim begat Eliud;
and Eliud begat Eleazar; and Eleazar begat Matthan; and Matthan begat Jacob;
and Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ.
So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations; and from David to the removal to Babylon are fourteen generations; and from the removal to Babylon unto Christ are fourteen generations.
Now the birth of Jesus Christ was in this manner. When his mother Mary had been betrothed to Joseph, before they came together, she was found to be with child by the Holy Spirit.
Then Joseph her husband, being righteous, and not willing to expose her to shame, purposed to put her away privately.
But while he thought on these things, lo! an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, Joseph, son of David, fear not to take to thee Mary thy wife; for that which is conceived in her is by the Holy Spirit.
And she will bear a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus; for he will save his people from their sins.
Now all this took place, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying,
“Behold, the virgin shall be with child, and shall bear a son, and they shall call his name Immanuel;” that is, when interpreted, God-is with-us.
Then Joseph, on waking up from sleep, did as the angel of the Lord had bidden him, and took to him his wife;
and he knew her not till she had brought forth a son: and he called his name Jesus.
Now when Jesus had been born in Bethlehem of Judaea, in the days of Herod the king, lo! there came magians from the East to Jerusalem,
saying, Where is the king of the Jews that hath been born? for we saw his star in the East, and came to do him homage.
But when Herod the king heard of these things, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him;
and assembling all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he inquired of them where the Christ was to be born.
And they said to him, In Bethlehem of Judaea; for thus it is written by the prophet:
“And thou Bethlehem, land of Judah, art by no means least among the princes of Judah; for out of thee shall come a ruler, who shall feed my people Israel.”
Then Herod, having privately called the magians ascertained from them exactly the time when the star appeared.
And he sent them to Bethlehem, and said, Go and search carefully for the child; and when ye have found him, bring me word, that I also may go and do him homage.
When they had heard the king, they departed. And lo! the star, which they had seen in the East, went before them, till it came and stood over where the child was.
When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy;
and when they had come into the house, they saw the child with Mary his mother, and fell down, and did homage to him; and opening their treasures, they presented him gifts, gold and frankincense and myrrh.
And having been warned by God in a dream not to return to Herod, they went back to their own country another way.
And when they had gone, lo! an angel of the Lord appeareth to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and remain there until I speak to thee; for Herod will seek the child, to destroy him.
And he arose, and took the child and his mother by night, and went to Egypt;
and was there until the death of Herod; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying, “I called my son out of Egypt.”
Then Herod, when he saw that he had been deceived by the magians, was greatly enraged; and sent forth, and slew all the male children that were in Bethlehem, and in all its borders, from two years old and under, according to the time which he had ascertained from the magians.
Then was fulfilled that which was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet, saying,
“A voice was heard in Ramah, weeping, and great mourning; Rachel weeping for her children, and refusing to be comforted, because they were no more.”
But when Herod was dead, lo! an angel of the Lord appeareth in a dream to Joseph in Egypt,
saying, Arise, and take the child and his mother, and go to the land of Israel; for they who sought the child's life are dead.
And he arose, and took the child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel.
But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning in Judaea in the place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither; and being warned by God in a dream, he withdrew into the parts of Galilee,
and came and took up his abode in a city called Nazareth; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophets, “He will be called a Nazarene,”
In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judaea,
saying, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
For this is he that was spoken of through Isaiah the prophet, saying, “The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord, make straight his paths!”
And John himself had his raiment of camel's hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins; and his food was locusts and wild honey.
Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judaea, and all the country about the Jordan;
and were baptized by him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.
But seeing many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to be baptized, he said to them, Brood of vipers, who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
Bring forth therefore fruit worthy of repentance,
and think not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham for our father; for I say to you, that God is able out of these stones to raise up children to Abraham.
And already is the axe lying at the root of the trees; every tree therefore that beareth not good fruit is to be cut down, and cast into the fire.
I indeed baptize you in water, for repentance; but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose sandals I am not worthy to bear; he will baptize you in the Holy Spirit and in fire.
His winnowing-shovel is in his hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse his threshing-floor, and gather his wheat into the garner; but the chaff he will burn up with unquenchable fire.
Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to be baptized by him.
But John opposed him, saying, I have need to be baptized by thee, and dost thou come to me?
And Jesus answering said to him, Suffer it now; for thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness. Then he suffered him.
And Jesus, as soon as he was baptized, went up from the water; and, lo! the heavens were opened, and he saw the Spirit of God, descending like a dove, coming upon him.
And lo! a voice from the heavens, saying, “This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased.”
Then was Jesus led up by the Spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted by the Devil.
And when he had tasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward hungry.
And the tempter came and said to him, If thou art the Son of God, command that these stones become loaves of bread.
But he answered and said, It is written, “Man shall not live on bread alone, but on every word that proceedeth from the mouth of God.”
Then the Devil taketh him into the holy city, and setteth him on the pinnacle of the temple;
and saith to him, If thou art the Son of God, cast thyself down; for it is written, “He will give his angels charge concerning thee; and in their hands they will bear thee up, that thou mayst not dash thy foot against a stone.”
Jesus said to him, Again it is written, “Thou shalt not make trial of the Lord thy God.”
Again, the Devil taketh him m an exceeding high mountain, and showeth him all the kingdoms of the world, and their glory;
and said to him, All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me.
Then saith Jesus to him, Be gone, Satan! for it is written, “Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.”
Then the Devil leaveth him; and lo! angels came and ministered to him.
Now when Jesus heard that John had been cast into prison, he withdrew into Galilee.
And leaving Nazara, he came and dwelt in Capernaum, on the shore of the lake, in the borders of Zebulun and Naphtali;
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying,
“The land of Zebulun, and the land of Naphtali, by the way of the lake beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles,
the people that sat in darkness, saw a great light; and upon those who sat in the region and shadow of death, light arose.”
From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent; for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
And while walking by the lake of Galilee, he saw two brothers, Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the lake; for they were fishers.
And he saith to them, Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men.
And they immediately left their nets, and followed him.
And going on from thence, he saw two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in the boat with Zebedee their father, mending their nets; and he called them.
And they immediately left the boat and their father, and followed him.
And he went round the whole of Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the glad tidings of the kingdom, and healing every sickness and every disease among the people.
And his fame went forth into all Syria; and they brought to him all that were sick, afflicted with various diseases and torments, and those who were possessed by demons, and lunatics, and those who were struck with palsy; and he healed them.
And great multitudes followed him from Galilee and Decapolis and Jerusalem and Judaea, and from beyond the Jordan.
And seeing the multitudes, he went up into the mountain; and when he had sat down, his disciples came to him.
And he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying:—
Blessed are the poor in spirit; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
(5:5) Blessed are they who mourn; for they will be comforted.
(5:4) Blessed are the meek; for they will inherit the earth.
Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they will be filled.
Blessed are the merciful; for they will obtain mercy.
Blessed are the pure in heart; for they will see God.
Blessed are the peace-makers; for they will be called sons of God.
Blessed are they who are persecuted for righteousness' sake; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are ye, when men revile you, and persecute you, and say every thing that is bad against you, falsely, for my sake.
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven; for so did they persecute the prophets that were before you.
Ye are the salt of the earth. But if the salt have lost its savor, wherewith shall itself be salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot by men.
Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid;
nor do men light a lamp, and put it under the bushel, but on the lamp-stand; and it giveth light to all that are in the house.
In like manner let your light shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father who is in heaven.
Think not that I came to destroy the Law or the Prophets: I came not to destroy, but to fulfill.
For truly do I say to you, Not till heaven and earth pass away, shall one jot or one tittle pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled.
Whoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, will be called the least in the kingdom of heaven; but whoever shall do and teach them, he will be called great in the kingdom of heaven.
For I say to you, Unless your righteousness shall exceed that of the scribes and Pharisees, ye will not enter the kingdom of heaven.
Ye have heard that it was said to them of old time, “Thou shalt not kill; and whoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the Judges.”
But I say to you, that whoever is angry with his brother shall be in danger of the Judges; and whoever shall say to his brother, Simpleton! shall be in danger of the Council; and whoever shall say, Fool! shall be in danger of hell-fire.
Therefore, if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there remember that thy brother hath aught against thee,
leave there thy gift before the altar, and go away; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.
Agree with thine adversary at law quickly, while thou art on the road with him; lest the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge to the officer, and thou be cast into prison.
Truly do I say to thee, Thou wilt not come out thence, till thou hast paid the last farthing.
Ye have heard that it was said, “Thou shalt not commit adultery.”
But I say to you, that whoever looketh on a woman to lust after her, hath committed adultery with her already in his heart.
And if thy right eye cause thee to offend, pluck it out, and cast it from thee; for it is better for thee that one of thy members should perish, than that thy whole body should be cast into hell.
And if thy right hand cause thee to offend, cut it off, and cast it from thee; for it is better for thee that one of thy members should perish, than that thy whole body should go away into hell.
And it was said, “Whoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorcement.”
But I say to you, that whoever putteth away his wife, unless it be on account of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery; and whoever shall marry her when put away, committeth adultery.
Again ye have heard that it was said to them of old time, “Thou shalt not swear falsely, but shalt perform to the Lord thine oaths.”
But I say to you, Swear not at all; neither by heaven, for it is the throne of God;
nor by the earth, for it is his footstool; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the Great King;
nor shalt thou swear by thy head, for thou canst not make one hair white or black.
But let your language be, Yea, yea; Nay; nay; for whatever is more than these cometh of evil.
Ye have heard that it was said, “An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.”
But I say to you, that ye resist not the evil-doer; but whoever smiteth thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also;
and if any one intends to sue thee at the law, and take thy coat, give up to him thy cloak also;
and whoever shall compel thee to go one mile, go with him two.
Give to him that asketh of thee; and from him that would borrow of thee, turn not away.
Ye have heard that it was said, “Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy.”
But I say to you, Love your enemies, and pray for those who persecute you;
that ye may become sons of your Father who is in heaven; for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.
For if ye love those who love you, what reward have ye? Do not even the publicans the same?
And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye that excelleth? Do not even the heathen the same?
Be ye therefore perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect.
But take heed that ye do not your righteousness before men, to be seen by them; otherwise ye have no reward with your Father who is in heaven.
Therefore when thou doest alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. Truly do I say to you, They have received their reward.
But when thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth;
that thine alms may be in secret; and thy Father, who seeth in secret, will reward thee.
And when ye pray, ye shall not be as the hypocrites are; for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen by men. Truly do I say to you, They have received their reward.
But do thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and, when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is in secret; and thy Father, who seeth in secret, will reward thee.
But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do; for they think that they shall be heard for the multitude of their words.
Be not ye therefore like them; for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him.
After this manner therefore pray ye:—Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name;
thy kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven;
give us this day our daily bread;
and forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors;
and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you;
but if ye do not forgive men, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.
Moreover, when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance; for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear to men to be fasting. Truly do I say to you, They have received their reward.
But do thou, when thou fastest, anoint thy head, and wash thy face;
that thou appear not to men to be fasting, but to thy Father who is in secret; and thy Father, who seeth in secret, will reward thee.
Lay not up for yourselves treasures on earth, where the moth and rust consume, and where thieves break through and steal;
but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust consumeth, and where thieves do not break through nor steal.
For where thy treasure is, there will thy heart be also.
The eye is the lamp of the body. If thine eye he clear, thy whole body will be in light;
but if thine eye be disordered, thy whole body will be in darkness. If then the light that is within thee is darkness, how great that darkness!
No one can serve two masters; for either he will hate one, and love the other; or else he will cleave to one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.
Therefore I say to you, Be not anxious for your life, what ye shall eat; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than food, and the body than raiment?
Behold the birds of the air, that they sow not, nor reap, nor gather into barns; and your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are not ye of much greater value than they?
But who of you by anxious thought can add to his life one cubit?
And why are ye anxious about raiment? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow. They toil not, neither do they spin;
and yet I say to you, that not even Solomon in all his glory was arrayed like one of these.
And if God so clothes the herbage of the field, which today is, and tomorrow is cast into an oven, will he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith?
Therefore be not anxious, saying, What shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or wherewith shall we he clothed?
For after all these things do the gentiles seek; for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.
But seek first his kingdom, and his righteousness; and all these things will also be given you.
Be not then anxious about the morrow; for the morrow will be anxious about itself. Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.
Judge not, that ye be not judged.
For with what judgment ye judge, ye will be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it will be measured to you.
And why dost thou look at the mote that is in thy brother's eye, and not perceive the beam in thine own eye?
Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me take the mote out of thine eye; when, lo! the beam is in thine own eye?
Hypocrite! first cast the beam out of thine own eye; and then wilt thou see clearly to take the mote out of thy brother's eye.
Give not that which is holy to dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine; lest they trample them under their feet, and turn upon you and rend you.
Ask, and it will be given you; seek, and ye will find; knock, and the door will be opened to you.
For every one that asketh, receiveth; and he that seeketh, findeth; and to him that knocketh, the door will be opened.
Or what man is there of you, who, if his son ask for bread, will give him a stone?
or, if he ask for a fish, will give him a serpent?
If ye then, though evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father who is in heaven give good things to them that ask him!
All things, then, whatever ye would that men should do to you, do ye also so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets.
Enter in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction; and many are they who go in thereat.
For strait is the gate, and narrow the way, that leadeth to life; and few are they who find it.
Beware of the false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves.
Ye may know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?
So every good tree beareth good fruit; but a bad tree beareth bad fruit.
A good tree cannot bear bad fruit, nor call a bad tree bear good fruit.
Every tree that beareth not good fruit is cut down, and cast into the fire.
So then ye may know them by their fruits.
Not every one that saith to me, Lord, Lord, will enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father who is in heaven.
Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in thy name, and in thy name cast out demons, and in thy name work many miracles?
And then will I declare to them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity.
Every one then that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, shall be likened to a wise man, who built his house upon a rock;
and the rain descended, and the streams came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not; for it was founded upon a rock.
And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened to a foolish man, who built his house upon the sand;
and the rain descended, and the streams came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell; and great was its fall.
And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, that the multitudes were astonished at his teaching.
For he taught them as having authority, and not as their scribes.
When he had come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him.
And lo! there came a leper and bowed down before him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst cleanse me.
And he put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, I will; be thou cleansed. And immediately his leprosy was cleansed.
And Jesus saith to him, See thou tell no one; but go, show thyself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a testimony to them.
And when he had entered into Capernaum, there came to him a centurion, beseeching him,
and saying, Lord, my servant lieth at home palsied, sorely tormented.
He saith to him, I will come and heal him.
But the centurion answered and said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldst come under my roof; but only command with a word, and my servant will be made well.
For even I am a man under authority, having soldiers under me; and I say to this one, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it.
When Jesus heard this, he marveled, and said to those who followed, Truly do I say to you, Not even in Israel have I found such faith.
And I say to you, that many will come from the east and the west, and recline at table with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven.
But the sons of the kingdom will go out into the outer darkness; there will be wailing and gnashing of teeth.
And Jesus said to the centurion, Go thy way; as thou hast believed, so be it done to thee. And the servant was made well in that hour.
And when Jesus had come into Peter's house, he saw his wife's mother lying sick of a fever.
And he touched her hand, and the fever left her; and she arose, and waited on him.
And when evening came, they brought to him many that were possessed by demons; and he cast out the spirits with a word, and healed all that were sick;
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying, “He himself took our infirmities, and bore our diseases.”
And Jesus, seeing great multitudes about him, gave orders to depart to the other side.
And a certain scribe came and said to him, Teacher, I will follow thee wherever thou goest.
And Jesus saith to him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have lodging-places; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head.
And another of the disciples said to him, Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father.
But he saith to him, Follow me, and let the dead bury their own dead.
And when he had gone on board the boat, his disciples followed him.
And, lo! a great tempest arose on the lake, so that the boat was almost covered by the waves; but he was sleeping.
And they came and awoke him, saying, Lord, save! we are perishing.
And he saith to them, Why are ye fearful, ye of little faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the winds and the waves; and there was a great calm.
And the men marveled, saying, What manner of man is this, that even the winds and the waves obey him?
And when he had come to the other side, into the country of the Gadarenes, there met him two men possessed by demons, coming out of the tombs, exceedingly fierce, so that no one could pass by that way.
And lo! they cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee, Son of God? Didst thou come here to torment us before the time?
Now there was at a distance from them a herd of many swine feeding.
And the demons besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, send us into the herd of swine.
And he said to them, Go. And they came out, and went into the swine. And lo! the whole herd rushed down the steep into the lake, and perished in the waters.
And the herdsmen fled, and went away into the city, and told everything, and what had happened to the men possessed by demons.
And lo! the whole city came out to meet Jesus; and when they saw him, they besought him to depart from their borders.
And going on board a boat, he crossed over, and came to his own city.
And lo! they brought to him a man that was palsied, lying on a bed. And Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the palsied man, Be of good cheer, son; thy sins are forgiven.
And lo! some of the scribes said within themselves, This man is blaspheming.
And Jesus seeing their thoughts, said, Wherefore have ye evil thoughts in your hearts?
For which is easier? to say, Thy sins are forgiven? or to say, Arise, and walk?
But that ye may know that the Son of Man hath authority on earth to forgive sins,—then he saith to the palsied man,—Arise, take up thy bed, and go to thy house.
And he arose, and went away to his house.
And when the multitudes saw it, they were struck with fear, and gave glory to God, who had given such power to men.
And as Jesus passed on from thence, he saw a man, named Matthew, sitting at the custom-house; and he saith to him, Follow me. And he arose and followed him.
And it came to pass, as he was reclining at table in the house, lo! many publicans and sinners came and reclined with Jesus and his disciples.
And when the Pharisees saw it, they said to his disciples, Why doth your teacher eat with the publicans and sinners?
But when he heard that, he said, They who are well do not need a physician, but they who are sick.
But go ye and learn what this meaneth: “I desire mercy, and not sacrifice.” For I came not to call righteous men, but sinners.
Then came to him the disciples of John, saying, Why do we and the Pharisees fast, and thy disciples fast not?
And Jesus said to them, Can the companions of the bridegroom mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them? But the days will come, when the bridegroom will be taken from them, and then will they fast.
No one putteth a patch of undressed cloth on an old garment; for the piece that filleth in teareth away from the garment, and a worse rent is made.
Nor do men put new wine into old skins; else the skins burst, and the wine runneth out, and the skins are spoilt. But they put new wine into new skins, and both are preserved together.
While he was thus speaking to them, lo! a certain ruler came in and bowed down before him, saying, My daughter just now died; but come and lay thy hand upon her, and she will live.
And Jesus arose and followed him, with his disciples.
And, lo! a woman, who had had an issue of blood for twelve years, came up behind, and touched the fringe of his garment.
For she said within herself, If I only touch his garment, I shall be made well.
And he turned round, and seeing her, said, Be of good cheer, daughter; thy faith hath made thee well. And the woman was made well from that hour.
And Jesus coming into the ruler's house, and seeing the minstrels, and the crowd making a noise,
said, Withdraw; for the girl is not dead, but is sleeping. And they laughed him to scorn.
But when the crowd had been put out, he went in, and took hold of her hand; and the girl arose.
And the report of this went abroad into all that country.
And as Jesus passed on from thence, two blind men followed him, crying out and saying, Have pity on us, Son of David!
And when he had come into the house, the blind men came to him; and Jesus saith to them, Do ye believe that I am able to do this? They say to him, Yea, Lord.
Then he touched their eyes, saying, According to your faith be it done to you.
And their eyes were opened. And Jesus sternly charged them, saying, See that no one know it.
But they went out, and spread abroad his fame in all that country.
And as they were going out, lo! they brought to him a dumb man, possessed by a demon.
And when the demon was cash out, the dumb man spoke. And the multitudes marveled, saying, Never was the like seen in Israel.
But the Pharisees said, He casteth out the demons through the prince of the demons.
And Jesus went round all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the glad tidings of the kingdom, and healing every sickness and every disease.
And seeing the multitudes, he was moved with compassion for them, because they were harassed and scattered about, as sheep having no shepherd.
Then he saith to his disciples, The harvest indeed is great, but the laborers are few.
Pray therefore the Lord of the harvest to send forth laborers for his harvest.
And he called to him his twelve disciples, and gave them power over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal every sickness and every disease.
Now the names of the twelve apostles are these: first, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother, and James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother;
Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew the publican; James the son of Alphaeus, and Lebbaeus;
Simon of Cana, and Judas Iscariot, he who betrayed him.
These twelve Jesus sent forth, when he had charged them, saying, Go not away to gentiles, and enter not any city of the Samaritans;
but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
And, as ye go, proclaim, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand.
Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse lepers, cast out demons; freely ye received, freely give.
Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass, in your girdles;
nor bag for the journey, nor two coats, nor sandals, nor a staff. For the laborer is worthy of his living.
And into whatever city or town ye enter, inquire who in it is worthy; and there abide till ye leave the place.
And as ye enter the house, salute it.
And if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it; but if it be not worthy, let your peace return to you.
And whoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye go out of that house or city, shake off the dust from your feet.
Truly do I say to you, It will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city.
Lo! I send you forth as sheep into the midst of wolves. Be therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.
But beware of men. For they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues;
and ye will be brought before governors and kings for my sake, that ye may bear testimony to them and to the gentiles.
But when they deliver you up, be not anxious as to how or What ye shall speak; for it will be given you in that hour what ye shall speak.
For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaketh in you.
And brother will deliver up brother to death, and the father his child; and children will rise up against their parent, and put them to death;
and ye will be hated by all on account of my name. But he that endureth to the end will be saved.
And when they persecute you in one city, flee to another. For truly do I say to you, Ye will not have gone over the cities of Israel till the Son of man hath come.
A disciple is not above his teacher, nor a servant above his lord.
It is enough for the disciple to be as his teacher, and the servant as his lord. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebul, how much more will they so call those of his household!
Fear them not therefore. For there is nothing covered that will not be revealed; and hid, that will not be known.
What I say to you in darkness, speak ye in the light; and what ye hear in the ear, proclaim ye upon the housetops.
And fear not those who kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.
Are not two sparrows sold for a penny? and not one of them shall fall to the ground without your Father.
But even the hairs of your head are all numbered.
Fear not therefore; ye are of more value than many sparrows.
Every one therefore who shall acknowledge me before men, him will I also acknowledge before my Father who is in heaven.
But whoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father who is in heaven.
Think not that I came to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword.
For I came to set a man at variance with his father, and a daughter with her mother, and a bride with her mother-in-law;
and they of a man's own household will be his foes.
He that loveth father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me; and he that loveth son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me;
and he that doth not take his cross, and follow me, is not worthy of me.
He that findeth his life will lose it; and he that loseth his life for my sake will find it.
He that receiveth you, receiveth me; and he that receiveth me, receiveth him that sent me.
He that receiveth a prophet because he is a prophet, will receive a prophet's reward, and he that receiveth a righteous man because he is a righteous man, will receive a righteous man's reward.
And whoever shall give to drink only a cup of cold water to one of these little ones because he is a disciple, truly do I say to you, he will by no means lose his reward.
And it came to pass, when Jesus had made an end of his charge to his twelve disciples, that he departed thence, to teach and to preach in their cities.
And John, having heard in the prison of the works of Christ, sent by his disciples,
and said to him, Art thou he that is to come, or are we to look for another?
And Jesus answered and said to them, Go and tell John what ye hear and see.
The blind receive sight and the lame walk, lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, and the dead are raised, and to the poor good tidings are brought;
and blessed is he, whoever shall find no occasion of stumbling in me.
And, as these were going, Jesus began to say to the multitudes concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness to see? the reeds shaken by the wind?
But why did ye go out? to see a man clothed in soft raiment? Lo! they that wear soft clothing are in kings' houses.
But why did ye go out? to see a prophet? Yea, I say to you, and more than a prophet.
For this is he of whom it is written: “Lo! I send my messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee.”
Truly do I say to you, Among those born of women there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist. But he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.
And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent seize upon it.
For all the Prophets and the Law, until John, prophesied.
And if ye are willing to receive it, he is the Elijah who was to come.
He that hath ears, let him hear.
But to what shall I liken this generation? It is like children sitting in the markets, who call to their fellows,
and say, We piped to you, and ye did not dance; we sung a dirge, and ye did not lament.
For John came neither eating nor drinking; and they say, He hath a demon.
The Son of man came eating and drinking; and they say, Behold, a glutton and a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners! But wisdom is justified by her works.
Then he began to upbraid the cities wherein most of his miracles were done, because they did not repent.
Woe to thee, Chorazin! woe to thee, Bethsaida! for if the miracles that were done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
But I say to you, It will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of judgment, than for you.
And thou, Capernaum! shalt thou be exalted to heaven? Thou shalt be brought down to the underworld; for if the miracles which were done in thee had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day.
But I say to you, that it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee.
At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that, though thou didst hide these things from the wise and discerning, thou didst reveal them to babes.
Yea, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.
All things were delivered to me by my Father; and no one knoweth the Son but the Father; nor doth any one know the Father, but the Son, and he to whom it is the will of the Son to reveal him.
Come to me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest for your souls.
For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.
At that time Jesus went on the sabbath through the grain-fields; and his disciples were hungry, and began to pluck the ears of grain, and to eat.
But the Pharisees, seeing it, said to him, Lo! thy disciples are doing that which it is not lawful to do on the sabbath.
But he said to them, Have ye not read what David did, when he and those who were with him were hungry?
how he went into the house of God, and they ate the show-bread, which it was not lawful for him to eat, nor for those who were with him, but for the priests alone?
Or have ye not read in the Law, that on the sabbaths the priests in the temple profane the sabbath, and are blameless?
But I say to you, that something greater than the temple is here.
But if ye had known what this meaneth, “I desire mercy and not sacrifice,” ye would not have condemned the guiltless.
For the Son of man is lord of the sabbath.
And departing thence, he went into their synagogue.
And, lo! there was a man having a withered hand. And they asked him, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath? that they might accuse him.
And he said to them, Who of you that owneth one sheep, if it fall into a pit on the sabbath, will not lay hold of it, and lift it out?
Of how much more worth now is a man than a sheep! So then it is lawful to do well on the sabbath.
Then saith he to the man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he stretched it forth; and it was restored sound as the other.
Then the Pharisees went out, and consulted together against him, how they might destroy him.
But Jesus, knowing it, withdrew from thence; and many followed him; and he healed them all,
and strictly charged them not to make him known;
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying,
“Behold my servant, whom I chose; my beloved, with whom my soul is well pleased; I will put my Spirit upon him, and he will declare judgment to the nations.
He will not strive, nor cry aloud, nor will any one hear his voice in the streets.
A bruised reed he will not break, and smoking flax he will not quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory.
And in his name will nations hope.”
Then was brought to him one possessed by a demon, blind and dumb; and he healed him, so that the dumb man spoke and saw.
And all the multitudes were amazed, and said, Is this the son of David?
But the Pharisees, hearing it, said, This man doth not cast out the demons, except through Beelzebul, the prince of the demons.
And he, knowing their thoughts, said to them, Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; and no city or house divided against itself will stand.
And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; how then shall his kingdom stand?
And if I cast out the demons through Beelzebul, through whom do your sons cast them out? Therefore shall they be judges of you.
But if I cast out the demons through the Spirit of God, then hath the kingdom of God already come to you.
Or how can one enter into a strong man's house, and seize upon his goods, unless he first bind the strong man, and then plunder his house?
He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad.
Therefore I say to you, All manner of sin and evil-speaking will be forgiven to men; but blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven.
And whoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it will be forgiven him; but whoever speaketh against the Holy Spirit, it will not be forgiven him, either in this world, or in the world to come.
Either say that the tree is good, and its fruit good; or say that the tree is bad, and its fruit bad; for the tree is known by its fruit. Brood of vipers!
How can ye, evil as ye are, speak good things? For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.
The good man, from his good treasure, bringeth out good things; and the evil man, from his evil treasure, bringeth out evil things.
And I say to you, that for every idle word that men shall speak, they will give account in the day of judgment.
For by thy words thou wilt be justified, and by thy words thou wilt be condemned.
Then some of the scribes and Pharisees answered him, saying, Teacher, we wish to see a sign from thee.
But he answered and said to them, A wicked and adulterous generation is seeking for a sign; and no sign will be given to it, but the sign of Jonah the prophet.
For as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the great fish, so will the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
The men of Nineveh will stand up in the judgment with this generation, and will condemn it; for they repented at the preaching of Jonah; and, lo! something more than Jonah is here.
The queen of the south will rise up in the judgment with this generation, and will condemn it; for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and lo! something more than Solomon is here.
But when the unclean spirit is gone out from a man, it goeth through dry places, seeking rest, and findeth it not.
Then it saith, I will return to my house whence I came out. And on coming, it findeth it empty, and swept, and put in order.
Then it goeth and taketh with it seven other spirits more wicked than itself, and they enter in, and dwell there; and the last state of that man becometh worse than the first. So will it be also with this wicked generation.
While he was yet speaking to the multitudes, lo! his mother and his brothers were standing without, seeking to speak with him.
And one said to him, Behold, thy mother and thy brothers are standing without, seeking to speak with thee.
But he answered and said to him that told him, Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?
And stretching forth his hand toward his disciples, be said, Behold, my mother and my brothers!
For whoever doeth the will of my Father who is in heaven, he is my brother, and sister, and mother.
The same day Jesus went out of the house, and sat by the shore of the lake;
and great multitudes were gathered together to him, so that he went into a boat, and sat down; and all the multitude stood on the beach.
And he spoke many things to them in parables, saying, Behold, a sower went forth to sow.
And as he sowed, some seeds fell by the wayside; and the birds came and devoured them.
And others fell upon rocky places, where they had not much earth; and they sprung up immediately, because they had no depth of earth.
But when the sun was up, they were scorched; and because they had no root, they withered away.
And others fell among thorns; and the thorns grew up, and choked them.
And others fell upon good ground; and yielded fruit, some a hundred fold, some Sixty, some thirty fold.
He that hath ears, let him hear.
And the disciples came and said to him, Why dost thou speak to them in parables?
He answered and said, Because to you it hath been given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven; but to them it hath not been given.
For whoever hath, to him will be given, and he will have abundance; but whoever hath not, from him will be taken away even what he hath.
Therefore I speak to them in parables, because seeing they see not, and hearing they hear not, nor understand.
And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah, which saith, “Ye will hear indeed, and not understand; and ye will see indeed, and not perceive.
For this people's heart hath become gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed, lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and turn from their ways, and I should heal them.”
But blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear.
Truly do I say to you, that many prophets and righteous men desired to see the things which ye see, and did not see them; and to hear the things which ye hear, and did not hear them.
Hear ye therefore the parable of the sower.
When any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and understandeth it not, the Evil One cometh, and snatcheth away that which was sown in his heart; this man is what was sown by the wayside.
And what was sown on the rocky places, this is he that heareth the word, and immediately receiveth it with joy,
but, having no root within him, endureth only for a time; and when tribulation or persecution ariseth on account of the word, he immediately falleth away.
And what was sown among the thorns, this is he that heareth the word, but the cares of the world and the deceitfulness of riches choke the word, and he becometh unfruitful.
And what was sown on the good ground, this is he that heareth the word, and understandeth it; who also beareth fruit, and yieldeth, one a hundred fold, another sixty, another thirty fold.
Another parable he put forth to them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is like a man who sowed good seed in his field.
But while men slept, his enemy came, and sowed tares among the wheat; and went away.
But when the blade grew up, and put forth fruit, then appeared the tares also.
So the servants of the householder came and said to him, Sir, didst not thou sow good seed in thy field? Whence then hath it tares?
He said to them, An enemy did this. The servants say to him, Dost thou wish then that we go and gather them up?
But he said, Nay; lest, while ye gather up the tares, ye root up the wheat with them.
Let both grow together until the harvest; and in the time of harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather up first the tares, and bind them in bundles, to burn them; but gather the wheat into my barn.
Another parable he put forth to them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is like a grain of mustard, which a man took and sowed in his field.
Which is the least indeed of all seeds; but when it is grown, it is greater than the herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in its branches.
Another parable he spoke to them: The kingdom of heaven is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.
All these things Jesus spoke to the multitudes in parables, and without a parable he spoke nothing to them;
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet Isaiah, saying, “I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter things hidden from the foundation [[of the world]].”
Then he sent the multitudes away, and went into the house. And his disciples came to him, saying, Explain to us the parable of the tares of the field.
He answered and said, He that soweth the good seed is the Son of man.
The field is the world; the good seed is the sons of the kingdom; but the tares are the sons of the Evil One;
the enemy that sowed them is the Devil; the harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are angels.
As therefore the tares are gathered up and burned with fire, so will it be at the end of the world.
The Son of man will send forth his angels, and they will gather out of his kingdom all the stumbling-blocks, and those who do iniquity,
and will cast them into the furnace of fire; there will be wailing and gnashing of teeth.
Then will the righteous shine forth as the sun, in the kingdom of their Father. He that hath ears, let him hear.
The kingdom of heaven is like a treasure hid in a field, which a man found and hid; and for joy thereof he goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field.
Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant seeking goodly pearls.
And having found one pearl of great price, he went and sold all that he had, and bought it.
Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net, cast into the sea, and bringing together fish of every kind;
which, when it was full, they drew upon the beach, and sat down and gathered the good into vessels, but threw the bad away.
So will it be at the end of the world. The angels will come forth, and separate the wicked from among the righteous,
and will cast them into the furnace of fire; there will be wailing and gnashing of teeth.
Did ye understand all these things? They say to him, Yea.
And he said to them, Thus then every scribe, instructed for the kingdom of heaven, is like a householder, who bringeth out from his storehouse things new and old.
And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these parables, that he departed thence.
And having come into his own country, he taught them in their synagogue, so that they were astonished, and said, Whence hath this man this wisdom, and the miracles?
Is not this the carpenter's son? Is not his mother called Mary, and his brothers, James, and Joseph, and Simon, and Judas?
And his sisters, are they not all with us? Whence then hath this man all these things?
And they took offence at him. But Jesus said to them, A prophet is not without honor, except in his own country, and in his own house.
And he did not work many miracles there, because of their unbelief.
At that time Herod the tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus,
and said to his servants, This is John the Baptist; he hath risen from the dead, and therefore do these powers work in him.
For Herod had seized John, and bound him, and put him in prison, on account of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife.
For John said to him, It is not lawful for thee to have her.
And wishing to put him to death, he feared the multitude, because they regarded him as a prophet.
But when Herod's birthday was kept, the daughter of Herodias danced before them, and pleased Herod;
whereupon he promised with an oath to give her whatever she might ask.
And she, being set on by her mother, saith, Give me here on a platter the head of John the Baptist.
And the king was sorry; but on account of his oaths, and of those at table with him, he ordered it to be given,
and sent and beheaded John in the prison.
And his head was brought on a platter, and given to the damsel; and she brought it to her mother.
And his disciples came and took up the body, and buried it, and went and told Jesus.
When Jesus heard of it, he withdrew thence in a boat into a desert place apart; and the multitudes hearing of it followed him on foot from the cities.
And when he came forth he saw a great multitude; and he was moved with compassion for them, and healed their sick.
And when it was evening, the disciples came to him, saying, This is a desert place, and it is now late; send the multitudes away therefore, that they may go to the villages and buy themselves victuals.
But he said to them, They need not go away; do ye give them food.
And they say to him, We have here only five loaves, and two fishes.
He said, Bring them hither to me.
And bidding the multitudes to lie down on the grass, he took the five loaves and the two fishes, and, looking up to heaven, he blessed; and having broken the loaves he gave them to his disciples, and the disciples to the multitudes.
And they all ate, and were filled. And they took up of the fragments that remained, twelve baskets full.
And they who ate were about five thousand men, besides women and children.
and he constrained the disciples to get into the boat, and to go before him to the other side, while he sent the multitudes away.
And when he had sent the multitudes away, he went up into the mountain apart to pray. And when evening came, he was there alone.
But the boat was now in the midst of the lake, tossed by the waves; for the wind was contrary.
And in the fourth watch of the night, he went to them, walking on the lake.
And seeing him walking on the lake, they were dismayed, saying, It is a spectre; and they cried out for fear.
But he immediately spoke to them, saying, Be of good cheer, it is I; be not afraid.
And Peter answering him said, Lord, if it be thou, bid me come to thee on the water.
And he said, Come. And Peter, coming down from the boat, walked on the water, and came to Jesus.
But seeing the wind, he was afraid; and beginning to sink, he cried out, saying, Lord, save me!
And Jesus immediately stretched out his hand, and took hold of him, and said to him, Thou of little faith, why didst thou doubt?
And when they had got into the boat, the wind ceased.
And they that were in the boat fell down before him, saying, Truly thou art the Son of God.
And crossing over, they came to land, to Gennesaret.
And the men of that place, when they saw who he was, sent out into all that country round, and brought to him all the diseased,
and besought him that they might only touch the fringe of his garment; and as many as touched were made well.
Then come to Jesus Pharisees and scribes from Jerusalem, saying,
Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? for they wash not their hands when they eat bread.
But he answered and said to them, Why do ye too transgress the commandment of God for the sake of your tradition?
For God commanded, saying, “Honor thy father and thy mother;” and, “He that curseth father or mother, let him surely die.”
But ye say, Whoever shall say to his father or his mother, Whatever thou mightst receive in aid from me is a gift [[to God]],
he shall not honor his father or his mother. Thus have ye made void the law of God for the sake of your tradition.
Hypocrites! well did Isaiah prophesy concerning you, saying,
“This people honoreth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
But in vain do they worship me, teaching as doctrines the commandments of men.”
And calling the multitude, he said to them, Hear, and understand.
Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man; but that which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man.
Then come the disciples, and say to him, Dost thou know that the Pharisees were offended, when they heard that saying?
But he answered and said, Every plant which my heavenly Father did not plant will be rooted up.
Let them alone; they are blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both will fall into a ditch.
And Peter answering said to him, Explain to us that dark saying.
And he said, Are ye too still without discernment?
Do ye not understand, that whatever entereth the mouth goeth into the stomach, and is cast out into the drain?
But the things which proceed from the mouth come out of the heart; and these defile a man.
For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false testimony, blasphemies.
These are the things which defile a man; but to eat with unwashed hands defileth not a man.
And Jesus, going from thence, withdrew to the parts of Tyre and Sidon.
And, lo! a woman of Canaan came out from those borders, and cried out, saying, Have compassion on me, Lord, Son of David! My daughter is grievously afflicted with a demon.
But he did not answer her a word. And his disciples came and besought him, saying Send her away, for she is crying out after us.
But he answered and said, I was not sent except to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
Then she came and fell down before him, saying, Lord, help me!
But he answering said, It is not allowable to take the children's bread, and throw it to the little dogs.
And she said, Yea, Lord; for the little dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from the table of their masters.
Then Jesus answering said to her, O woman, great is thy faith; be it done to thee even as thou wilt. And her daughter was cured from that hour.
And departing thence, Jesus came near the lake of Galilee; and going up the mountain, he sat down there.
And great multitudes came to him, having with them those who were lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others; and they laid them down at his feet, and he healed them;
so that the multitude wondered, when they saw the dumb speaking, the maimed sound, and the lame walking, and the blind seeing; and they gave glory to the God of Israel.
And Jesus having called his disciples to him, said, I have compassion on the multitude, because they have remained with me now three days, and have nothing to eat; and I am not willing to send them away fasting, lest they faint on the road.
And the disciples say to him, Whence should we have so many loaves in a wilderness, as to fill so great a multitude?
And Jesus saith to them, How many loaves have ye? And they said, Seven, and a few small fishes.
And bidding the multitude to lie down on the ground,
he took the seven loaves and the fishes, and gave thanks, and broke, and gave them to the disciples, and the disciples to the multitudes.
And they all ate, and were filled; and they took up of the fragments that remained, seven baskets full.
And they who ate were four thousand men, besides children and women.
Then he sent away the multitudes, and went on board the boat, and came into the borders of Magadan.
And the Pharisees and Sadducees came to try him, and asked him to show them a sign from heaven.
And he answering said to them, When it is evening, ye say, Fair weather! for the sky is red.
And in the morning, A storm today! for the sky is red and lowering. Ye know how to judge of the face of the sky, and can ye not discern the signs of the times?
A wicked and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and no sign will be given to it, but the sign of Jonah. And he left them and went away.
And the disciples having come to the other side, had forgotten to take bread.
And Jesus said to them, Take heed, and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
And they reasoned among themselves, saying, It is because we took no bread.
And Jesus knowing it, said, Why are ye reasoning among yourselves, ye of little faith, because ye took no bread?
Do ye not yet understand, nor remember the five loaves of the five thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?
Nor the seven loaves of the four thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?
How is it that ye do not understand, that I spoke not to you of loaves? But [[I said]] Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
Then they understood, that he did not bid them beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees, but of the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
And Jesus, having come into the region of Caesarea Philippi, asked his disciples, saying, Who do men say that the Son of man is?
And they said, Some, John the Baptist; but some, Elijah; and others, Jeremiah, or one of the prophets.
He saith to them, But who do ye say that I am?
And Simon Peter answering said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.
And Jesus answering said to him, Blessed art thou, Simon, son of Jonah; for flesh and blood did not reveal it to thee, but my Father who is in heaven.
And I on my part say to thee, that thou art Peter, a rock, and on this rock will I build my church, and the gates of the underworld shall not prevail against it.
I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatever thou shalt bind on earth will be bound in heaven; and whatever thou shalt loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.
Then he charged the disciples to tell no one that he was the Christ.
From that time Jesus began to show to his disciples, that he must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things from the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be put to death, and rise again on the third day.
Then Peter, taking him aside, began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord! This shall not be to thee.
But he turned and said to Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan! thou art my stumbling-block; for thy thoughts are not on the things of God, but on those of men.
Then Jesus said to his disciples, If any one chooseth to come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
For whoever chooseth to save his life will lose it; and whoever shall lose his life for my sake will find it.
For what will a man be profited, if be gain the whole world, and forfeit his life? or what shall a man give as an exchange for his life?
For the Son of man is to come in the glory of his Father, with his angels; and then will he render to every one according to his works.
Truly do I say to you, There are some of those standing here who will not taste of death, till they have seen the Son of man coming in his kingdom.
And after six days Jesus taketh with him Peter, and James, and John his brother, and leadeth them up into a high mountain apart.
And he was transfigured before them, and his face shone as the sun; and his garments became white as the light.
And lo! there appeared to them Moses and Elijah, talking with him.
And Peter answering said to Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here; if thou wilt, I will make here three tents; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah.
While he was yet speaking, lo! a bright cloud overshadowed them; and lo! a voice out of the cloud, saying, “This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased; hear him.”
And the disciples hearing it, fell on their face, and were exceedingly afraid.
And Jesus came and touched them, and said, Arise, and be not afraid.
And lifting up their eyes, they saw no one but Jesus only.
And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, saying, Tell what hath been seen to no one, until the Son of man hath risen from the dead.
And the disciples asked him, saying, Why then say the scribes that Elijah must first come?
And he answering said, Elijah indeed cometh, and will restore all things.
But I say to you, that Elijah hath already come, and they knew him not, but did with him whatever they would. So also is the Son of man to suffer by them.
Then the disciples understood that he spoke to them of John the Baptist.
And when they had come to the multitude, there came to him a man, kneeling down to him, and saying,
Lord, have compassion on my son; for he is a lunatic, and is sorely afflicted; for he often falleth into the fire, and often into the water.
And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not cure him.
Then Jesus answering said, Unbelieving and perverse generation! How long shall I be with you? How long shall I bear with you? Bring him hither to me.
And Jesus rebuked him, and the demon went out of him; and the boy was cured from that hour.
Then the disciples came to Jesus apart, and said, Why could not we cast it out?
And he said to them, Because of your want of faith. For truly do I say to you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard, ye shall say to this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place, and it will remove; and nothing will be impossible to you.

And while they were together in Galilee, Jesus said to them, The Son of man is about to be delivered up into the hands of men,
and they will put him to death; and on the third day he will rise again. And they were greatly grieved.
And when they had come to Capernaum, those who received the half-shekel came to Peter, and said, Doth not your teacher pay the half-shekel?
He saith, Yes. And when he had come into the house, Jesus anticipated him, saying, What thinkest thou, Simon? Of whom do the kings of the earth take customs or taxes? Of their own sons, or of strangers?
And when he said, Of strangers, Jesus said to him, Then are the sons free.
But that we may not give them offence, go to the lake, and cast a hook, and take the fish that first cometh up; and on opening his mouth, thou wilt find a shekel; take that, and give it to them for me and thee.
At that time the disciples came to Jesus, saying, Who then is greatest in the kingdom of heaven?
And he called a child to him, and set him in the midst of them,
and said, Truly do I say to you, Unless ye are changed, and become as children, ye will not enter the kingdom of heaven.
Whoever therefore shall humble himself as this child, he is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
And whoever receiveth one such child in my name, receiveth me.
But whoever shall cause one of these little ones that believe in me to fall away, it were better for him to have a great millstone hung round his neck, and be swallowed up in the depth of the sea.
Woe to the world because of stumbling-blocks! For it must needs be that stumbling-blocks come; but woe to the man through whom the stumbling-block cometh!
And if thy hand or thy foot is causing thee to fall, cut it off, and cast it from thee; it is better for thee to enter into life maimed or lame, than having two hands, or two feet, to be cast into the everlasting fire.
And if thine eye is causing thee to fall, pluck it out, and cast it from thee; it is better for thee to enter into life with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast into hell-fire.
Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say to you, that their angels in heaven continually behold the face of my Father who is in heaven.

What think ye? if a man have a hundred sheep, and one of them hath gone astray, doth he not leave the ninety-nine upon the mountains, and go and seek that which hath gone astray?
And if it happen that he find it, truly do I say to you, he rejoiceth over it more than over the ninety-nine that did not go astray.
Thus it is not the will of your Father who is in heaven that one of these little ones should perish.
Moreover, if thy brother sin, go and reprove him between thee and him alone. If he listen to thee, thou hast gained thy brother;
but if he do not listen, take with thee one or two more; that by the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.
And if he disregard them, tell the matter to the church; but if he disregard the church also, let him be to thee as a heathen and a publican.
Truly do I say to you, Whatever ye shall bind on earth will be bound in heaven; and whatever ye shall loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.
Again, I say to you, that if two of you shall agree on earth concerning any thing that they shall ask, it will be done for them by my Father o who is in heaven.
For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.
Then came Peter, and said to him, Lord, how often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? Until seven times?
Jesus saith to him, I say not to thee, until seven times, but until seventy times seven.
Therefore the kingdom of heaven is likened to a king, who would settle accounts with his servants.
And when he had begun to reckon, there was brought to him one, who owed him ten thousand talents.
But as he was unable to pay, his lord ordered him to be sold, and his wife and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made.
Then that servant fell down and did obeisance to him, saying, Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all.
And the lord of that servant, being moved with compassion, released him, and forgave him the debt.
But that servant went out, and found one of his fellow-servants, who owed him a hundred denaries; and he laid hold of him, and took him by the throat, saying, Pay what thou owest.
His fellow-servant then fell down and besought him, saying, Have patience with me, and I will pay thee.
And he would not; but went away and cast him into prison, till he should pay the debt.
Then his fellow-servants, seeing what was done, were greatly grieved; and went and told their lord all that had been done.
Then his lord, having called him, saith to him, Thou wicked servant! All that debt I forgave thee because thou didst beseech me;
shouldst not thou also have had pity on thy fellow-servant, even as I had pity on thee?
And his lord was enraged, and delivered him to the inflicters of punishment, till he should pay all that was due to him.
So also will my heavenly Father do to you, if ye forgive not every one his brother from your hearts.
And it came to pass, that when Jesus had ended these sayings, he removed from Galilee, and came into the borders of Judaea, beyond the Jordan.
And great multitudes followed him; and he healed them there.
And the Pharisees came to him, trying him, and saying, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?
And he answering said, Have ye not read, that he who made them at the beginning, made them male and female?
And He said: “For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and cleave to his wife; and the two shall become one flesh.”
So they are no longer two, but one flesh. What therefore God joined together, let not man put asunder.
They say to him, Why then did Moses ordain that a man may give his wife a writing of divorcement, and put her away?
He saith to them, Moses, on account of your hardness of heart, allowed you m put away your wives; but in the beginning it was not so.
And I say to you, Whoever putteth away his wife, except for fornication, and marrieth another, committeth adultery.
The disciples say to him, If such be the case of a man with his wife, it is not good to marry.
But he said to them, All cannot receive this saying, but they only to whom it is given.
For there are eunuchs, who were so born from their mother's womb; and there are eunuchs, who were made eunuchs by men; and there are eunuchs, who made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. He that is able to receive it, let him receive it.
Then there were brought to him children, that be might lay his hands on them, and pray; and the disciples rebuked them.
But Jesus said to them, Suffer the children, and forbid them not to come to me; for to such belongeth the kingdom of heaven.
And he laid his hands on them, and departed thence.
And lo! one came to him and said, Teacher, what good thing shall I do, that I may have everlasting life?
And he said to him, Why dost thou ask me concerning what is good? There is but one who is good. But if thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.
Which? saith he. And Jesus said, These: “Thou shalt not kill; Thou shalt not commit adultery; Thou shalt not steal; Thou shalt not bear false witness;
Honor thy father and thy mother;” and, “Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.”
The young man saith to him, All these things have I kept; in what am I still wanting?
Jesus said to him, If thou wilt be perfect, go, sell what thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me.
But the young man, on hearing this went away sorrowful; for he had great possessions.
Then Jesus said to his disciples, Truly do I say to you, it will be hard for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven.
And again I say to you, It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven.
And the disciples, hearing this, were exceedingly amazed, saying, Who then can be saved?
But Jesus, fixing his eyes on them, said, With men this is impossible; but with God all things are possible.
Then Peter answering said to him, Lo! we left all, and followed thee; what then shall we have?
And Jesus said to them, Truly do I say to you, that, in the renovation when the Son of man sitteth on the throne of his glory, ye who have followed me shall also yourselves sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
And every one who hath left brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or children, or lands, or houses, for the sake of my name, will receive many fold more, and will inherit everlasting life.
But many who are first will be last, and the last first.
For the kingdom of heaven is like a householder, who went out early in the morning to hire laborers for his vineyard.
And having agreed with the laborers for a denary a day, he sent them into his vineyard.
And going out about the third hour, he saw others standing idle in the market-place;
and said to them, Go ye also into the vineyard; and whatever is right, I will give you. And they went.
Again going out about the sixth and the ninth hour, he did likewise.
And going out about the eleventh hour, he found others standing, and saith to them, Why stand ye here all the day idle?
They say to him, Because no one hath hired us. He saith to them, Go ye also into the vineyard.
And when evening came, the lord of the vineyard saith to his steward, Call the laborers, and give them their pay, beginning with the last, and going on to the first.
And they who were hired about the eleventh hour came, and received each a denary.
But when the first came, they supposed that they should receive more; and they too received each a denary.
And when they had received it, they murmured against the householder,
saying, These last have worked but one hour, and thou hast made them equal to us, who have borne the burden and heat of the day.
But he answering said to one of them, Friend, I do thee no wrong; didst not thou agree with me for a denary?
Take thy due, and go. But I will give to this last even as to thee.
Am I not free to do what I will with my own? Is thine eye evil, because I am good?
Thus the last will be first, and the first, last. And as
Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve apart, and on the way said to them,
Lo! we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man will be delivered up to the chief priests and scribes; and they will condemn him to death,
and will deliver him up to the gentiles to mock, and scourge, and crucify; and on the third day he will rise again.
Then came to him the mother of the sons of Zebedee with her sons, falling down before him, and asking a certain thing of him.
And he said to her, What is thy wish? She saith to him, Grant that these my two sons may sit, one on thy right hand, and one on thy left, in thy kingdom.
But Jesus answering said, Ye know not what ye ask. Can ye drink the cup which I am to drink? They say to him, We can.
He saith to them, Ye will indeed drink my cup; but to sit on my right hand and on my left is not mine to give, but it will be given to those for whom it hath been prepared by my Father.
And when the ten heard this, they were much displeased with the two brothers.
But Jesus called them to him, and said, Ye know that the rulers of the nations lord it over them, and their great men exercise a strict authority over them.
Not so shall it be among you; but whoever desireth to become great among you, will be your minister;
and whoever desireth to be first among you, will be your servant;
even as the Son of man came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life a ransom for many.
And as they were going out of Jericho, a great multitude followed him.
And lo! two blind men, who were sitting by the way-side, when they heard that Jesus was passing by, cried out, saying, Have pity on us, Son of David!
And the multitude sharply bade them be silent. But they cried out the more, saying, Lord, have pity on us, Son of David!
And Jesus stopped, and called them, and said, What would ye have me do for you?
They say to him, Lord, to open our eyes.
Then Jesus, moved with compassion, touched their eyes; and they immediately received sight, and followed him.
And when they drew near to Jerusalem, and came to Bethphage at the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two disciples,
saying to them, Go m the village over against you, and immediately ye will find an ass tied, and a colt with her; loose and bring them to me.
And if any one say aught to you, ye shall say, The Lord hath need of them; and he will immediately send them.
Now this took place, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet, saying,
“Say to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy king cometh to thee, meek, and riding on an ass, and on a colt the foal of a beast of burden.”
And the disciples o went, and did as Jesus bade them,
and brought the ass and the colt, and put on them their garments, and he sat on them.
And very many of the multitude spread their garments in the road; others cut down branches from the trees, and strewed them in the road.
And the multitudes that went before him, and that followed, were crying out, saying, Hosanna to the Son of David! Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest heavens!
And when he came into Jerusalem, the whole city was in commotion, saying, Who is this?
And the multitudes said, This is the prophet Jesus, from Nazareth of Galilee.
And Jesus went into the temple of God, and cast out all those who sold and bought in the temple, and overturned the tables of the money-changers, and the seats of those who sold the doves;
and said to them, It is written, “My house shall be called a house of prayer; but ye make it a den of robbers.”
And the blind and lame came to him in the temple, and he cured them.
But the chief priests and the scribes, when they saw the wonderful things which he did, and the children that were crying out in the temple, and saying, Hosanna to the Son of David, were much displeased;
and said to him, Dost thou hear what these say? But Jesus saith to them, Yea; did ye never read, “From the mouth of babes and sucklings thou didst prepare praise”?
And he left them, and went out of the city to Bethany, and lodged there.
And in the morning, as he was returning to the city, he was hungry.
And seeing one fig-tree by the road-side, he went up to it, and found nothing on it, but leaves only; and he saith to it, Let there be no fruit from thee hencefoward for ever. And immediately the fig-tree withered.
And the disciples seeing it, marveled, saying, How suddenly did the fig-tree wither!
Jesus answering said to them, Truly do I say to you, If ye have faith, and do not doubt, not only shall ye do what hath been done to the fig-tree, but should ye even say to this mountain, Be thou taken up and cast into the sea, it would be done.
And all things whatever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye will receive.
And when he had come into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came to him as he was teaching, and said, By what authority doest thou these things? And who gave thee this authority?
And Jesus answering said to them, I also will ask you one question; which if ye answer me, I too will tell you by what authority I do these things.
The baptism of John, whence was it? From heaven, or from men? And they reasoned among themselves, saying, If we say, From heaven, he will say to us, Why then did ye not believe him?
But if we say, From men, we fear the multitude; for all regard John as a prophet.
And they answered Jesus and said, We do not know. And he said to them, Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.
But what think ye? A man had two sons: he came to the first, and said, Son, go, work today in the vineyard.
And he answered and said, I will not. Afterward he repented, and went.
And he came to the other and said the same. And he answered and said, I will, sir; and went not.
Which of the two did the will of his father? They say, The first. Jesus saith to them, Truly do I say to you, that the publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before you.
For John came to you as a preacher of righteousness, and ye did not believe him; but the publicans and the harlots believed him; and ye, when ye had seen it, did not afterward repent, that ye might believe him.
Hear another parable. There was a householder, who planted a vineyard, and set a hedge about it, and dug in it a wine-press, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went abroad.
And when the season of the fruits drew near, he sent his servants to the husbandmen, that they might receive his fruits.
And the husbandmen took his servants, and beat one, and killed another, and stoned another.
Again he sent other servants more than the first; and they dealt with them in the same manner.
And afterward he sent to them his son, saying, They will respect my son.
But the husbandmen, when they saw the son, said among themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and get his inheritance.
And they took him, and cast him out of the vineyard, and killed him.
When therefore the lord of the vineyard cometh, what will he do to those husbandmen?
They say to him, He will bring those wicked men to a miserable end, and will let out his vineyard to other husbandmen, who will render him the fruits in their season.
Jesus saith to them, Did ye never read in the Scriptures, “The stone which the builders rejected, the same hath become the corner-stone; from the Lord did this come, and it is marvelous in our eyes?”
Therefore I say to you, that the kingdom of God will be taken away from you, and given to a nation yielding the fruits thereof.

And the chief priests and the Pharisees when they heard his parables, knew that he was speaking of them.
And they sought to seize him, but feared the multitudes, because they regarded him as a prophet.
Jesus answered and spoke to them again in parables, and said,
The kingdom of heaven is like a certain king, who made a marriage-feast for his son,
and sent forth his servants to call to the feast those who had been invited; and they would not come.
Again, he sent other servants, saying, Tell those who have been invited, Behold, I have prepared my dinner; my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready; come to the feast.
But they made light of it, and went away; one to his farm, another to his merchandise.
And the rest seized his servants, and ill-treated and slew them.
And the king was enraged; and sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned their city.
Then saith he to his servants, The feast is ready, but those who were invited were not worthy.
Go therefore into the thoroughfares, and as many as ye find, invite to the feast.
So those servants went out into the highways, and gathered together all, as many as they found, both bad and good; and the bride-chamber was fully furnished with guests.
And the king, coming in to view the guests, saw there a man who had not on a wedding garment;
and he saith to him, Friend, how camest thou in here, not having a wedding garment? And he was struck dumb.
Then the king said to the servants, Bind him hand and foot, and cast him out into the outer darkness; there will be wailing and gnashing of teeth.
For many are called, but few are chosen.
Then the Pharisees went and consulted together how l they might ensnare him in speech.
And they send out to him their disciples with the Herodians, saying, Teacher, we know that thou art true, and teachest the way of God in truth, and thou carest for no one; for thou regardest not the person of men.
Tell us, therefore, What thinkest thou? Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or not?
But Jesus, perceiving their wickedness, said, Why are ye trying me, hypocrites?
Show me the tribute money. And they brought to him a denary.
And Jesus saith to them, Whose is this image and inscription?
They say, Caesar's. Then saith he to them, Render then to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's.
And hearing this, they wondered, and left him, and went away.
The same day there came to him Sadducees, saying that there is no resurrection; and they asked him,
saying, Teacher, Moses said, “If a man die having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and raise up seed to his brother.”
Now there were with us seven brothers; and the first married and died; and, having no offspring, left his wife to his brother.
And so also the second, and the third, even to the seventh.
And last of all the woman died.
In the resurrection, then, of which of the seven will she be the wife? For they all had her.
Jesus answered and said to them, Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God.
For in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven.
But concerning the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken to you by God, saying,
“I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob”? He is not a God of the dead, but of the living.
And when the multitudes heard this, they were astonished at his teaching.
And the Pharisees, hearing that he had put the Sadducees to silence, assembled together;
and one of them, a lawyer, asked, trying him,
Teacher, which commandment is great in the Law?
And he said to him, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.”
This is the great and first commandment.
There is a second like it: “Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.”
On these two commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets.
And while the Pharisees were assembled, Jesus asked them,
saying, What think ye concerning the Christ? whose son is he? They say to him, David's.
He saith to them, How then doth David in the Spirit call him lord? saying,
“The Lord said to my lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I put thine enemies under thy feet.”
If David then calleth him lord, how is he his son?
And no one was able to answer him a word; nor durst any one from that day question him any more.
Then Jesus spoke to the multitudes, and to his disciples,
saying, The scribes and the Pharisees sit in the seat of Moses.
All, therefore, whatever they bid you, do and observe; but do not according to their works; for they say, and do not.
They bind heavy burdens, and lay them on men's shoulders, and will not themselves move them with a finger.
And all their works they do to be observed by men. They make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge their fringes,
and love the first place at feasts, and the chief seats in the synagogues,
and salutations in the markets, and to be called by men, Rabbi.
But be not ye called Rabbi; for one is your teacher; and ye are all brethren.
And call no one your father on the earth; for one is your father, he who is in heaven.
Nor be ye called leaders; for one is your leader, the Christ.
But the greatest among you will be your servant.
And whoever shall exalt himself will be humbled; and whoever shall humble himself will be exalted.
But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites I because ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men; for ye go not in yourselves, nor suffer those who are entering to go in.

Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte; and when he is made, ye make him two-fold mole a son of hell than yourselves.
Woe to you, blind guides, that say, Whoever sweareth by the temple, it is nothing; but whoever sweareth by the gold of the temple, is bound.
Fools and blind I for which is greater, the gold, or the temple that sanctifieth the gold?
And, Whoever sweareth by the altar, it is nothing; but whoever sweareth by the gift that is upon it, is bound.
Blind men! For which is greater, the gift, or the altar flint sanctifieth the gift?
He then who sweareth by the altar, sweareth by it, and by all that is upon it;
and he that sweareth by the temple, sweareth by it, and by him who dwelleth in it;
and he who sweareth by heaven, sweareth by the throne of God, and by him who sitteth thereon.
Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithes of the mint, and the dill, and the cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the Law, justice, and mercy, and faith; these ought ye to have done, and not to leave those undone.
Blind guides! who strain out a gnat, and swallow a camel.
Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye make clean the outside of the cup and the platter, but within they are full of robbery and licentiousness.
Blind Pharisee! cleanse first the inside of the cup, that its outside side also may become clean.
Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like whited sepulchres, which outwardly indeed appear beautiful, but within are full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness.
Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous to men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.
Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye build the sepulchres of the prophets, and adorn the tombs of the righteous,
and say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.
So that ye bear witness against yourselves, that ye are the sons of those who killed the prophets.
Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers!
Serpents, brood of vipers! how can ye escape the punishment of hell?
Therefore, behold, I send to you prophets, and wise men, and scribes; some of them ye will kill and crucify, and some of them ye will scourge in your synagogues, and persecute from city to city;
that on you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah, son of Barachiah, whom ye slew, between the temple and the altar.
Truly do I say to you, All these things will come upon this generation.
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killeth the prophets, and stoneth those who are sent to her! How often would I have gathered thy children together, as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!
Lo! your house is left to you desolate.
For I say to you, Ye will not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.
And Jesus went out, and was going from the temple; and his disciples came to him, to show him the buildings of the temple.
And he answering said to them, See ye not all these? Truly do I say to you, There will not be left here one stone upon another, that will not be thrown down.
And as he was sitting upon the Mount of Olives, the disciples came to him privately, saying, Tell us, when will these things be? and what will be the signs of thy coming, and of the end of the world?
And Jesus answering said to them, See that no one deceive you.
For many will come in my name, saying, I am the Christ, and will deceive many.
And ye are to hear of wars, and rumors of wars; see that ye be not troubled; for these things must come to pass; but not yet is the end.
For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; and there will be famines and earthquakes in divers places.
But all these things are the beginning of travail-pains.
Then will they deliver you up to distress, and will kill you; and ye will be hated by all nations on account of my name.
And then will many fall away; and will deliver up one another, and will hate one another.
And many false prophets will arise, and will deceive many.
And because iniquity shall abound, the love of the many will wax cold.
But he that endureth to the end will be saved.
And these glad tidings of the kingdom will be published throughout the whole world for a testimony to all the nations; and then will come the end.
When, therefore, ye see the abomination of desolation, spoken of through Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy place, (let him that readeth understand,)
then let those who are in Judaea flee to the mountains;
let not him that is on the house-top go down to take away the things belonging to his house;
and let not him that is in the field turn back to take his garment.
And woe to the women with child, and to those with children at the breast, in those days!
And pray that your flight be not in winter, nor on a sabbath.
For there will then be great distress, such as hath not been from the beginning of the world to this time; no, nor shall ever be.
And were not those days to shortened, no flesh would be saved; but, for the sake of the chosen, these days will be shortened.
Then if any one say to you, Lo! here is the Christ; or there, believe him not.
For there will rise up false Christs, and false prophets, and will show great signs and wonders, so that, if possible, even the chosen will be deceived.
Lo! I have told you beforehand.
If therefore they say to you, Lo! he is in the wilderness; go not forth; lo! he is in the private chambers; believe them not.
For as the lightning cometh from the east, and shineth even to the west, so will be the coming of the Son of man.
Wherever the carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered together.
And immediately after the distress of those days will the sun be darkened, and the moon will not give her light, and the stars will fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
And then will appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven; and all the tribes of the earth will mourn, and will see the Son of man coming upon the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.
And he will send forth his angels with a great trumpet, and they will gather his chosen from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.
And from the fig-tree learn its parable. When its branch hath now become tender, and putteth forth its leaves, ye know that summer is near.
So also, when ye see all these things, know ye that he is near, at the doors.
Truly do I say to you, This generation will not pass away, till all these things take place.
Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away.
But that day and hour knoweth no one, not even the angels of heaven, nor the Son, but the Father only.
But as were the days of Noah, so will be the coming of the Son of man.
For as in the days before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day when Noah entered the ark,
and knew not, until the flood came, and took them all away, so also will be the coming of the Son of man.
Then will two men be in the field; one will be taken, and one left.
Two women will be grinding at the mill; one will be taken, and one left.
Watch, therefore, for ye know not on what day your Lord is coming.
But be sure of this, that if the master of the house had known in what watch the thief was coming, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house to be broken through.
Therefore be ye also ready; for at an hour when ye think not, the Son of man cometh.
Who then is the faithful and wise servant, whom his lord placed over his household, to give them their food in due season?
Happy is that servant whom his lord, when he cometh, shall find so doing.
Truly do I say to you, that he will place him in charge of all his substance.
But if the bad servant say in his heart, My lord is tarrying long;
and begin to beat his fellow-servants, and eat and drink with the drunken,
the lord of that servant will come in a day when he looketh not for it, and at an hour when he is not aware;
and will cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites; there will be wailing and gnashing of teeth.
Then the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins, who took their lamps, and went out to meet the bridegroom.
And five of them were foolish, and five wise.
For the foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with them.
But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps.
And as the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept.
But at midnight there was a cry, Lo! the bridegroom! go out to meet him.
Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps.
And the foolish said to the wise, Give us of your oil, for our lamps are going out.
But the wise answered, saying, Perhaps there will not be enough for us and you; go rather to those who sell, and buy for yourselves.
And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they who were ready went in with him to the wedding; and the door was shut.
Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, lord, open to us.
But he answering said, Truly do I say to you, I know you not,
Watch, therefore, for ye know not the day nor the hour.
For it will be as when a man going abroad called his own servants, and intrusted to them his property;
and to one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one, to each according to his ability, and went abroad.
He that had received the five talents went immediately and traded with the same, and gained five talents more.
In like manner, he that had received the two gained two more.
But he that had received the one went and dug in the earth, and hid his lord's money.
And after a long time the lord of those servants cometh, and reckoneth with them.
And he that had received the five talents came and brought five talents more, saying, Lord, thou intrustedst to me five talents; see, I have gained five talents more.
His lord said to him, Well done, good and faithful servant! thou hast been faithful over a little, I will place thee in charge of much; enter into the joy of thy lord.
He also that had received the two talents came and said, Lord, thou intrustedst to me two talents; see, I have gained two talents more.
His lord said to him, Well done, good and faithful servant! thou hast been faithful over a little, I will place thee in charge of much; enter into the joy of thy lord.
Then he also that had received the one talent came and said, Lord, I knew thee to be a hard man, reaping where thou didst not sow, and gathering where thou didst not scatter seed;
and I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent in the earth. See! thou hast thine own.
But his lord answered and said to him, Wicked and slothful servant! Didst thou know that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I did not scatter seed?
Thou oughtest then to have put my money with the money-dealers, and on my coming I should have received mine own with interest.
Take therefore the talent from him, and give it to him who hath the ten talents.
For to every one that hath will be given, and he will have abundance; but from him that hath not, even that which he hath will be taken away.
And cast out the unprofitable servant into the outer darkness; there will be wailing and gnashing of teeth.
And when the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the angels with him, then will he sit on the throne of his glory,
and before him will be gathered all the nations; and he will separate men one from another, as a shepherd separateth the sheep from the goats;
and he will set the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on the left.
Then will the king say to those on his right hand, Come, ye blessed by my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
For I was hungry, and ye gave me food; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in;
naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came to me.
Then will the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee hungry, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink?
and when saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee?
or when did we see thee sick, or in prison, and come to thee?
And the king will answer and say to them, Truly do I say to you, Inasmuch as ye did it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye did it to me.
Then will he say also to those on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into the everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his angels.
For I was hungry, and ye gave me no food; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink;
I was a stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye clothed me not; sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not.
Then will they also answer, saying, Lord, when saw we thee hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister to thee?
Then will he answer them, saying, Truly do I say to you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.
And these will go away into everlasting punishment; but the righteous into everlasting life.
And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these sayings, that he said to his disciples,
Ye know that after two days cometh the passover; and the Son of man is delivered up to be crucified.
Then the chief priests and the elders of the people assembled in the court of the palace of the high-priest, named Caiaphas;
and took counsel together that they might seize Jesus by craft, and put him to death.
But they said, Not at the feast, lest there be an uproar among the people.
Now when Jesus was at Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,
there came to him a woman having an alabaster bottle of very costly ointment, and poured it on his head while he was reclining at table.
But the disciples seeing it, were much displeased, saying, To what purpose is this waste?.
For this might have been sold for much, and given to the poor.
And Jesus, perceiving it, said to them, Why do ye trouble the woman? For she hath done a good deed to me.
For the poor ye have always with you; but me ye have not always.
For she, in pouring this ointment on my body, hath done it to prepare me for burial.
Truly do I say to you, Wherever these glad tidings shall be published in the whole world, this too which she hath done will be told for a memorial of her.
Then one of the twelve, called Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests,
and said, What will ye give me, and I will deliver him up to you? And they paid him thirty pieces of silver.
And from that time he sought an opportunity to deliver him up.
And on the first of the days of unleavened bread the disciples came to Jesus, saying, Where wilt thou that we make ready for thee to eat the passover?
And he said, Go into the city to such a man, and say to him, The Teacher saith, My time is at hand; I keep the passover at thy house with my disciples.
And the disciples did as Jesus directed them, and made ready the passover.
And when evening came, he took his place at table with the twelve disciples.
And as they were eating, he said, Truly do I say to you, that one of you will betray me.
And they were exceedingly sorrowful, and began every one to say to him, Is it I, Lord?
And he answering said, He that hath dipped his hand with me in the dish, he will betray me.
The Son of man indeed goeth away, as it hath been written concerning him; but woe to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! Well were it for that man if he had not been born.
Then Judas, his betrayer, answering said, Is it I, Rabbi? He saith to him, It is.
And, as they were eating, Jesus took a loaf, and having blessed, broke it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body.
And he took a cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it;
for this is my blood of the covenant, which is shed for many for remission of sins.
And I say to you, I shall not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in the kingdom of my Father.
And having sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
Then Jesus saith to them, This night will all of you fall away from me; for it is written, “I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.”
But after I have risen, I will go before you into Galilee.
Peter answering said to him, Though all should fall away from thee, yet will I never fall away.
Jesus said to him, Truly do I say to thee, that this night, before a cock crows, thou wilt thrice deny me.
Peter saith to him, Even if I must die with thee, I will not deny thee. And so said all the disciples.
Then Jesus cometh with them to a place called Gethsemane, and saith to the disciples, Sit here, while I go yonder and pray.
And taking with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, he began to he sorrowful and full of anguish.
Then he saith to them, My soul is exceedingly sorrowful, even to death; remain here, and watch with me.
And he came a little nearer, and fell on his face, praying and saying, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me! nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou wilt.
And he cometh to the disciples, and findeth them sleeping, and saith to Peter, Is it so that ye could not watch with me one hour?
Watch, and pray that ye enter not into temptation; the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.
Again he went away a second time, and prayed, saying, My Father, if this [[cup]] cannot pass away from me, but I must drink it, thy will be done!
And coming again he found them sleeping; for their eyes were heavy.
And leaving them, he went away again, and prayed the third time, saying again the same words.
Then he cometh to the disciples, and saith to them, Sleep on, and take your rest! Lo! the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is delivered up into the hands of sinners.
Rise, let us be going; lo! he is at hand that delivereth me up.
And while he was yet speaking, lo! Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude with swords and clubs, from the chief priests and elders of the people.
And his betrayer had given them a sign, saying, Whomever I shall kiss, he is the man; seize him.
And immediately going up to Jesus, he said, Hail, Rabbi! and kissed him.
And Jesus said to him, Friend, for what hast thou come! Then they came and laid hands on Jesus, and seized him.
And, lo! one of those who were with Jesus stretched out his hand, and drew his sword, and struck the servant of the high-priest, and cut off his ear.
Then Jesus saith to him, Put back thy sword into its place; for all they that take the sword will perish by the sword.
Dost thou think that I cannot pray to my Father, and he will now give me more than twelve legions of angels?
But how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?
In that hour Jesus said to the multitudes, Ye have come out as against a robber, with swords and clubs to take me; I sat daily teaching in the temple, and ye did not lay hands on me.
But all this hath been done, that the Scriptures of the prophets may be fulfilled. Then all the disciples forsook him, and fled.
And they who seized Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the high-priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled.
But Peter followed him at a distance, as far as to the court of the high-priest's palace, and went in, and sat with the officers to see the end.
And the chief priests and the whole council sought false witness against Jesus, to put him to death;
and they found none, though many false witnesses came forward. But at last came two,
and said, This man affirmed, I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to build it within three days.
And the high-priest arose, and said to him, Dost thou make no answer to what these men testify against thee?
But Jesus was silent. And the high-priest answering said to him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou art the Christ, the Son of God.
Jesus saith to him, I am. Moreover I say to you, Henceforth ye will see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of Power, and coming on the clouds of heaven.
Then the high-priest rent his garments, saying, He hath spoken blasphemy; what further need have we of witnesses? See! ye have now heard the blasphemy.
What think ye? They answered and said, He should be punished with death.
Then they spit in his face, and buffeted him; and some smote him with the palms of their hands,
saying, Prophesy to us, O Messiah! who it was that struck thee.
Now Peter was sitting outside in the court. And a maid-servant came to him, saying, Thou also wast with Jesus the Galilaean.
But he denied before them all, saying, I know not what thou sayest.
And when he had gone out into the porch, another woman saw him, and said to those who were there, This man was with Jesus the Nazarene.
And again he denied with an oath; I do not know the man.
And shortly after, they who were standing by came and said to Peter, Surely thou too art one of them; for thy speech betrayeth thee.
Then he began to curse and to swear, saying, I do not know the man. And immediately a cock crew.
And Peter remembered the word of Jesus, who had said, Before a cock crows, thou wilt thrice deny me. And he went out, and wept bitterly.
And when it was morning, all the chief priests and the elders of the people consulted together against Jesus, to put him to death.
And having bound him, they led him away, and delivered him up to Pilate the governor.
Then Judas, who betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented, and brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders,
saying, I sinned in betraying innocent blood. And they said, What is that to us? See thou to it.
And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and withdrew; and went away and hanged himself.
And the chief priests took the pieces of silver, and said, It is not lawful to put them into the treasury, since they are the price of blood.
And they consulted together, and bought with them the potter's field, for a burial-place for strangers.
Wherefore that field hath been called, The Field of Blood, unto this day.
Then was fulfilled that which was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet, saying, “And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was priced, whom they of the sons of Israel priced,
and gave them for the potter's field; as the Lord commanded me.”
And Jesus stood before the governor; and the governor questioned him, saying, Art thou the king of the Jews? And Jesus said, I am.
And when he was accused by the chief priests and elders, he made no answer.
Then saith Pilate to him, Dost thou not hear what things they are testifying against thee?
And he made him no answer, not even to one word; so that the governor greatly wondered.
Now at the feast the governor was wont to release to the multitude one prisoner, whom they would.
And they had then a notorious prisoner, called Barabbas.
When therefore they were assembled, Pilate said to them, Whom will ye that I release to you? Barabbas, or Jesus, who is called Christ?
For he knew that for envy they had delivered him up.
And while he was sitting on the judgment-seat, his wife sent to him, saying, Have nothing to do with that righteous man; for I have suffered much this day in a dream because of him.
But the chief priests and the elders persuaded the multitudes to ask for Barabbas, and to destroy Jesus.
And the governor answering said to them, Which of the two will ye that I release to you? And they said, Barabbas.
Pilate saith to them, What then shall I do with Jesus, who is called Christ? They all say, Let him be crucified.
And he said, Why, what evil hath he done? But they cried out the more, saying, Let him be crucified.
And when Pilate saw that it availed nothing, but that rather a tumult was arising, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of this blood; see ye to it.
And all the people answering said, His blood be on us, and on our children.
Then he released Barabbas to them, and having scourged Jesus, he delivered him up to be crucified.
Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the governor's palace, and gathered to him the whole band.
And they stripped him, and put on him a scarlet robe.
And having platted a crown of thorns, they put it on his head, and a reed in his right hand; and bowing the knee before him, they mocked him, saying, Hail, king of the Jews!
And they spit upon him, and took the reed and struck him on the head.
And after they had made sport of him, they took off the robe from him, and put on him his own garments, and led him away to crucify him.
And as they were going out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name, whom they compelled to carry his cross.
And having come to a place called Golgotha, that is, Place of a Skull,
they gave him wine to drink mingled with gall; and when he had tasted it, he refused to drink.
And when they had crucified him, they divided his garments among them, casting lots.
And sitting down, they watched him there.
And they set up over his head the charge against him in writing: “This is Jesus the king of the Jews.”
Then are crucified with him two robbers, one on the right hand, and one on the left.
And they who passed by reviled him, wagging their heads,
and saying, Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it up in three days, save thyself, if thou art the Son of God, and come down from the cross.
So also the chief priests, mocking, with the scribes and elders, said,
He saved others, cannot he save himself? He is the king of Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe in him.
He trusteth in God; let him now deliver him, if he desireth him; for he said, I am the Son of God.
The robbers also, who were crucified with him, reviled him in the same manner.
And from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land, until the ninth hour.
And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lema sabachthani? that is to say, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?
Some of those standing there, when they heard this, said, This man is calling for Elijah.
And one of them immediately ran and took a sponge, and filled it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave it to him to drink.
But the rest said, Hold! let us see whether Elijah will come to save him.
And Jesus, crying out again with a loud voice, yielded up his spirit.
And, lo! the veil of the temple was rent in two from the top to the bottom; and the earth, quaked, and the rocks were rent,
and the tombs were opened; and many bodies of holy men that slept, arose,
and coming out of the tombs after his resurrection went into the holy city and appeared to many.
And the centurion and they who with him were watching Jesus, when they saw the earthquake, and what was taking place, were exceedingly afraid, saying, Truly this was the Son of God.
And many women were there, looking on from a distance, who had followed Jesus from Galilee, rendering services to him;
among whom was Mary the Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.
And at evening there came a rich man of Arimathaea, named Joseph, who was himself also a disciple of Jesus.
This man went to Pilate, and asked for the body of Jesus. Then Pilate ordered it to be given him.
And Joseph took the body, and wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,
and laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn out in the rock, and having rolled a great stone to the door of the tomb, went away.
And Mary the Magdalene was there, and the other Mary, sitting over against the sepulchre.
And on the next day, that following the day of the preparation, the chief priests and the Pharisees came together to Pilate,
saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, After three days I rise.
Command therefore that the sepulchre be made secure until the third day, lest his disciples come and steal him away, and say to the people, He hath risen from the dead; and the last error will be worse than the first.
Pilate said to them, Ye have a guard; go, make it as secure as ye know how.
And they went, and made the sepulchre secure, sealing the stone, and setting the guard.
And the sabbath being over, as it began to dawn toward the first day of the week, came Mary the Magdalene, and the other Mary, to view the sepulchre.
And, lo! there was a great earthquake; for an angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled away the stone, and sat upon it.
His appearance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow.
And for fear of him the keepers shook, and became as dead men.
And the angel answering said to the women, Fear ye not; for I know that ye are seeking Jesus, who was crucified.
He is not here; for he hath risen, as he said. Come, see the place where he lay.
And go quickly, and tell his disciples that he hath risen from the dead, and, lo! he is going before you into Galilee; there shall ye see him. Lo! I have told you.
And they went away quickly from the tomb with fear and great joy, and ran to tell his disciples.
And lo! Jesus met them, saying, All hail! And they went up, and laid hold of his feet, and knelt down before him.
Then Jesus saith to them, Be not afraid; go, tell my brethren to depart into Galilee, and there they shall see me.
And as they were going, lo! some of the guard came into the city, and told the chief priests all that had taken place.
And having assembled with the elders, and taken counsel together, they gave a large sum of money to the soldiers,
saying, Say, His disciples came by night, and stole him away, while we slept.
And should the governor hear of this, we will persuade him, and make you secure.
So they took the money, and did as they were taught. And this story hath been commonly reported among the Jews to this day.
And the eleven disciples went into Galilee, into the mountain, where Jesus had directed them.
And when they saw him, they knelt down before him; but some doubted.
And Jesus came up and spoke to them, saying, All power was given to me in heaven and on earth.
Go, and make all nations my disciples, baptizing them into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit;
teaching them to observe all things, whatever I have commanded you. And, lo! I am with you always, unto the end of the world.
The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ;
as it is written in Isaiah the prophet: “Lo! I send my messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way;”
“The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord, make straight his paths!”
John the Baptizer appeared in the wilderness, preaching a baptism of repentance for the remission of sins.
And there went out to him all the country of Judaea, and all they of Jerusalem and were baptized by him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.
And John was clothed with camel's hair, and with a leathern girdle about his loins, and he ate locusts and wild honey.
And he preached, saying, There cometh after me one mightier than I, the latchet of whose sandals I am not worthy to stoop down and loose.
I have baptized you with water; but he will baptize you in the Holy Spirit.
And it came to pass that in those days Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized by John in the Jordan.
And immediately on coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens parted, and the Spirit descending as a dove upon him.
And there was a voice from the heavens, “Thou art my beloved Son; with thee I am well pleased.”
And immediately the Spirit driveth him forth into the wilderness.
And he was in the wilderness forty days, tempted by Satan, and was with the wild beasts; and the angels ministered to him.
But after John was put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the glad tidings of God,
[[saying,]] The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand; repent, and believe the glad tidings.
And as he was passing along by the lake of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew the brother of Simon dragging a net in the lake; for they were fishers.
And Jesus said to them, Come after me, and I will cause you to become fishers of men.
And immediately they left their nets, and followed him.
And going on a little farther, he saw James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, who also were in the boat mending the nets;
and immediately he called them. And leaving their father Zebedee in the boat with the hired men, they went after him.
And they enter Capernaum; and immediately on the sabbath he was teaching in the synagogue.
And they were astonished at his teaching; for he taught them as having authority, and not as the scribes.
And immediately there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit, and he cried out,
saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus of Nazareth? Thou hast come to destroy us; we know who thou art, the Holy One of God.
And Jesus rebuked him, [[saying,]] Be silent, and come out of him.
And the unclean spirit convulsing him, and crying out with a loud voice, came out of him.
And they were all amazed, so that they questioned each other, saying, What is this? New teaching with authority; even the unclean spirits doth he command, and they obey him!
And immediately his fame spread abroad everywhere through the whole surrounding country of Galilee.
And having come out of the synagogue, they immediately entered the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John.
And Simon's wife's mother lay sick of a fever; and they immediately speak to him about her.
And he went to her, and took her by the hand, and raised her up; and the fever left her, and she waited on them.
And in the evening, when the sun had set, they brought to him all that were sick, and those who were possessed by demons;
and the whole city was assembled at the door.
And he healed many that were sick with various diseases, and cast out many demons; and he suffered not the demons to speak, because they knew him.
And rising early, long before day, he went out, and withdrew into a desert place, and there prayed.
And Simon and those with him went in search of him,
and found him. And they say to him, All people are in search of thee.
And he saith to them, Let us go elsewhere into the neighboring towns, that I may preach there also; for, for this I came forth.
And he went, preaching in their synagogues throughout all Galilee, and casting out the demons.
And there cometh a leper to him beseeching him, and kneeling down, saying to him, If thou wilt, thou canst cleanse me.
And Jesus, moved with compassion, put forth his hand, and touched him, and saith, I will; be thou cleansed.
And immediately the leprosy left him, and he was cleansed.
And sternly charging him, he immediately sent him away,
saying to him, See that thou say nothing to any one; but go, show thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing what Moses commanded, for a testimony to them.
But he went away, and began to publish it constantly, and to spread the matter abroad, so that Jesus could no more enter a city openly, but was without in desert places; and they came to him from every quarter.
And after some days he again entered Capernaum; and it was reported that he was in the house.
And many were gathered together, so that there was no longer room for them, even at the door; and he was speaking the word to them.
And they come to him, bringing one that was palsied, borne by four men.
And not being able to bring him to him on account of the crowd, they took off the roof where he was; and when they had broken an opening, they let down the bed whereon the palsied man lay.
And Jesus seeing their faith, saith to the palsied man, Son, thy sins are forgiven.
But there were some of the scribes sitting there and reasoning in their hearts,
Why doth this man speak thus? He blasphemeth; who can forgive sins but God only?
And Jesus immediately perceiving in his spirit that they reasoned thus within themselves, saith to them, Why do ye reason thus in your hearts?
Which is easier? to say to the palsied man, Thy sins are forgiven? or to say, Arise, and take up thy bed and go?
But that ye may know that the Son of man hath authority on earth to forgive sins,—he saith to the palsied man,—
I say to thee, Arise, take up thy bed and go to thy house.
And he arose, and immediately took up the bed and went forth before them all; so that they were all amazed, and gave glory to God, saying, We never saw it thus.
And he went forth again to the lake; and all the multitude came to him, and he taught them.
And passing along, he saw Levi, the son of Alphaeus, sitting at the custom-house; and he saith to him, Follow me. And he arose and followed him.
And it happened that he was reclining at table in his house; and many publicans and sinners were reclining with Jesus and his disciples; for there were many, and scribes of the Pharisees were also following him.
And when they saw that he was eating with the publicans and sinners, they said to his disciples, Doth he eat and drink with publicans and sinners?
And Jesus hearing it, saith to them, They who are well do not need a physician, but they who are sick. I came not to call righteous men, but sinners.
And the disciples of John and the Pharisees were fasting; and they come and say to him, Why do the disciples of John and the disciples of the Pharisees fast, and thy disciples fast not?
And Jesus said to them, Can the companions of the bridegroom fast, while the bridegroom is with them? As long as they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot fast.
But the days will come, when the bridegroom will be taken from them, and then will they fast in that day.
No one seweth a patch of undressed cloth on an old garment; for the new piece teareth away from the old garment, and a worse rent is made.
And no one putteth new wine into old skins; for the new wine will burst the skins, and the wine is lost, and the skins.
And it came to pass, that he was going through the grain-fields on the sabbath, and his disciples began, as they went along, to pluck the ears of grain.
And the Pharisees said to him, See, why are they doing on the sabbath that which is not lawful?
And he saith to them, Did ye never read what David did, when he had need, and was hungry, himself and they who were with him?
how he went into the house of God in the days of Abiathar the high-priest, and ate the show-bread, which it is lawful for none but the priests to eat, and gave also to those who were with him?
And he said to them, The sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath.
So that the Son of man is lord even of the sabbath.
And he entered again into a synagogue; and there was a man there having a withered hand;
and they watched him, whether he would heal him on the sabbath, that they might accuse him.
And he saith to the man having the withered hand, Stand up in the midst.
And he saith to them, Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath, or to do evil? to save life, or to kill? But they were silent.
And looking round on them with anger, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts, he saith to the man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he stretched it forth; and his hand was restored.
And the Pharisees went forth, and immediately had a consultation with the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him.
And Jesus withdrew with his disciples to the lake; and a great multitude from Galilee, and from Judaea followed;
and from Jerusalem, and from Idumaea, and from beyond the Jordan, and the people about Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, when they heard what great things he was doing, came to him.
And he gave direction to his disciples, that a boat should be in readiness for him because of the multitude, that they might not throng him.
For he had healed many, so that as many as had plagues pressed upon him to touch him.
And the unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him, and cried out, saying, Thou art the Son of God.
And he strictly charged them that they should not make him known.
And he goeth up into the mountain, and calleth to him whom he would; and they came to him.
And he appointed twelve to be with him, and whom he might send forth to preach,
and to have authority to cast out demons. And he appointed the twelve,
and Simon he surnamed Peter;
and James the son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James; and he surnamed them Boanerges, that is, Sons of thunder;
and Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus, and Simon of Cana,
and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed him. And he cometh into the house.
And again a multitude cometh together, so that they could not so much as eat bread.
And his relations hearing of it went out to lay hold of him; for they said, He is beside himself.
And the scribes who came down from Jerusalem said, He hath Beelzebul; and, He casteth out the demons through the prince of the demons.
And calling them to him, he said to them in parables: How can Satan cast out Satan?
And if a kingdom be divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand;
and if a house be divided against itself, that house will not be able to stand;
and if Satan rise up against himself, he is divided, and cannot stand, but hath an end.
Moreover, no one can enter into a strong man's house, and plunder his goods, unless he first bind the strong man; and then he will plunder his house.
Truly do I say to you, All sins will be forgiven the sons of men, and the blasphemies wherewith they shall blaspheme;
but he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Spirit hath no forgiveness forever, but is exposed to everlasting sin.—
Because they said, He hath an unclean spirit.
And his mother and his brothers came; and, standing without, sent to him, to call him.
And a multitude was sitting about him; and they say to him, Lo! thy mother and thy brothers and thy sisters are without, seeking for thee.
And he answering saith to them, Who is my mother, and my brothers?
And looking round on those who sat about him, he saith, Behold my mother and my brothers.
Whoever shall do the will of God, he is my brother, and sister, and mother.
And again he began to teach by the shore of the lake; and there was gathered to him a very great multitude, so that he went into a boat, and sat down in it upon the lake; and all the multitude was by the lake on the land.
And he taught them many things in parables, and said to them in his teaching,
Hearken: Behold, a sower went forth to sow.
And it came to pass, as he sowed some seeds fell by the way-side; and the birds came and devoured them.
And others fell on rocky ground, where they had not much earth; and they sprung up immediately, because they had no depth of earth.
But when the sun was up, they were scorched; and because they had no root, they withered away.
And others fell among thorns; and the thorns grew up, and choked them, and they yielded no fruit.
And others fell on good ground, and shooting up and growing yielded fruit; and bore as much as thirty, and sixty, and a hundred fold.
And he said, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.
And when he was in private, they who were about him, with the twelve, asked him about the parables.
And he said to them, To you hath been given the mystery of the kingdom of God; but to them, who are without, all things are done in parables; t
hat seeing they may see, and not perceive, and hearing they may hear, and not understand; lest they should turn, and be forgiven.
And he saith to them, Know ye not this parable? and how will ye know all the parables?
The sower soweth the word.
And these are they by the wayside, those where the word is sown, and when they have heard, Satan cometh immediately, and taketh away the word that was sown in them.
And these in like manner are they that are sown on the rocky places, those, who, when they have heard the word, immediately receive it with joy,
and have no root in themselves, but endure only for a time; then, when affliction or persecution ariseth on account of the word, they immediately fall away.
And others are they that are sown among the thorns; these are they who hear the word,
but the cares of the world, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things entering in, choke the word, and it becometh unfruitful.
And these are they who are sown on the good ground; such as hear the word, and receive it; and bear fruit, thirty, sixty, and a hundred fold.
And he said to them, Is a lamp brought to be put under the bushel, or under the bed, and not to be set on the lamp-stand?
For there is nothing secret, unless to be made known; nor was any thing hidden, but that it should come to light.
If any one hath ears to hear, let him hear.
And he said to them, Take heed what ye hear. With what measure ye mete, it will be measured to you, and more will be added to you.
For he that hath, to him will be given; and he that hath not, from him will be taken away even what he hath.
And he said, Thus is the kingdom of God, as when a man has cast seed upon the ground,
and sleeps and rises night and day, and the seed springs and grows up, he knows not how.
For the earth brings forth fruit of itself, first the blade, then the ear, then the full grain in the ear.
But when the fruit puts itself forth, immediately he sends out the sickle, because the harvest is come.
And he said, To what shall we liken the kingdom of God? or under what comparison shall we set it forth?
It is like a grain of mustard, which, when it is sown in the earth, is less than all the seeds that are in the earth;
and when it is sown, it grows up, and becomes greater than all the herbs, and puts forth great branches, so that the birds of the air can lodge under its shade.
And with many such parables he spoke the word to them, as they were able to hear.
But without a parable he did not speak to them; but in private he explained all things to his own disciples.
And on the same day, when the evening was come, he saith to them, Let us pass over to the other side.
And leaving the multitude, they take him with them, as he was, in the boat; and there were also other boats with him.
And there arose a great storm of wind, and the waves heat into the boat, so that it was already filling.
And he was in the stern, asleep on the pillow; and they awake him, and say to him, Teacher, carest thou not that we are perishing?
And he arose, and rebuked the wind, and said to the waves, Peace! be still! And the wind ceased, and there was a great calm.
And he said to them, Why are ye so fearful? How is it that ye have not faith?
And they feared exceedingly, and said one to another, Who then is this, that even the wind and the waves obey him?
And they came to the other side of the lake, into the country of the Gerasenes.
And when he had come out of the boat, immediately there met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit,
who had his dwelling in the tombs; and not even with a chain could any one bind him any longer;
because he had often been bound with fetters and chains, and the chains had been snapped asunder by him, and the fetters broken in pieces; and no one could master him;
and continually, night and day, in the tombs and in the mountains, he was crying out, and cutting himself, with stones.
And seeing Jesus afar off, he ran and bowed down before him,
and cried out with a loud voice, and said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus, Son of the most high God? I adjure thee by God, do not torment me.
For he was saying to him, Unclean spirit, come out from the man.
And he asked him, What is thy name? And he saith to him, Legion is my name; for we are many.
And he besought him much not to send them out of the country.
Now there was there, by the mountain, a great herd of swine feeding.
And they besought him, saying, Send us into the swine, that we may enter into them.
And he gave them leave. And the unclean spirits coming out, entered into the swine; and the herd rushed down the steep into the lake, about two thousand, and were drowned in the lake.
And they that fed them fled, and told the news in the city and in the country. And they came to see what had been done.
And they come to Jesus, and see him who had been possessed by demons, sitting, clothed, and in his right mind,—him who had had the legion; and they were afraid.
And they who saw it told them how it befell him that was possessed by the demons, and concerning the swine.
And they began to beseech him to depart from their borders.
And when he was going on board the boat, he that had been possessed by the demons besought him that be might be with him.
And he did not permit him, but said to him, Go to thy house to thy friends, and tell them how great things the Lord hath done for thee, and that he hath had compassion on thee.
And he departed, and began to publish in Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for him; and all wondered.
And when Jesus had crossed again in the boat to the ether side, a great multitude gathered about him; and he was by the lake.
And there cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name; and seeing him, he fell at his feet,
and besought him much, saying, My little daughter lieth at the point of death; I pray thee, come and lay thy hands on her, that she may be saved and live.
And he went with him; and a great multitude followed him, and pressed upon him.
And a woman, who had had an issue of blood twelve years,
and had undergone much at the hands of many physicians, and spent all that she had, and was not at all benefited, but rather grew worse,
having heard about Jesus, came in the crowd behind, and touched his garment.
For she said, If I touch even his garments, I shall be made well.
And immediately the fountain of her blood was dried up; and she perceived in her body that she was cured of her plague.
And Jesus immediately perceiving in himself that power had gone out from him, turned round in the crowed, and said, Who touched my garments?
And his disciples said to him, Thou seest the multitude pressing on thee, and dost thou say, Who touched me?
And he looked round to see her who had done this.
But the woman, fearing and trembling, knowing what had been done to her, came and fell down before him, and told him all the truth.
And he said to her, Daughter, thy faith hath made thee well; go in peace, and be recovered from thy plague.
While he was yet speaking, there came from the house I of the ruler of the synagogue some who said, Thy daughter is dead; why dost thou trouble the Teacher any further?
And Jesus, overhearing those words, saith to the ruler of the synagogue, Fear not; only believe.
And he suffered no one to follow him except Peter and James, and John the brother of James.
And they come to the house of the ruler of the synagogue; and he seeth a tumult, and people weeping and wailing greatly.
And going in, he saith to them, Why do ye make this confusion and weeping? The child is not dead, but is sleeping.
And they laughed him to scorn. But putting them all out, he taketh the father of the child, and the mother, and those who were with him, and entereth where the child was.
And taking hold of the hand of the child, he saith to her, Talitha, kum; which is, when interpreted, Damsel, I say to thee, arise!
And immediately the damsel arose and walked; for she was twelve years old. And immediately they were greatly astonished.
And he charged them strictly that no one should know it, and bade that something should be given her to eat.
And he went out from thence, and cometh into his own country; and his disciples follow him.
And when the sabbath was come, he began to teach in the synagogue. And most people when they heard him were astonished, saying, Whence hath this man these things? And what is the wisdom which is given him? And how is it that such miracles are wrought by his hands?
Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, and brother of James, and Joses, and Judah, and Simon? And are not his sisters here with us? And they took offence at him.
And Jesus said to them, A prophet is not without honor except in his own country, and among his own kindred, and in his own house.
And he could not do any miracle there, except that he laid his hand upon a few sick persons, and cured them.
And he wondered at their want of faith. And he went about the surrounding villages teaching.
And he calleth to him the twelve, and began to send them forth by two and two; and gave them power over the unclean spirits;
and commanded them that they should take nothing for the way but a staff only; no bread, no bag, no money in their girdle;
but to be shod with sandals; and, Do not put on two coats.
And he said to them, Wherever ye enter a house, there abide fill ye leave that place.
And whatever place shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye go thence, shake off the dust under your feet as a testimony to them.
And they went out and preached that men should repent;
and they cast out many demons, and anointed with oil many sick persons, and healed them.
And king Herod heard of him (for his name was spread abroad), and he said, John the Baptizer hath risen from the dead, and therefore do these powers work in him. But others said, It is Elijah.
And others said, It is a prophet, as one of the prophets.
But Herod hearing of it said, John, whom I beheaded, hath risen again.
For Herod himself had sent forth and seized John, and bound him in prison, on account of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife; for he had married her.
For John had said to Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother's wife.
And Herodias was enraged against him, and wished to put him to death, but could not.
For Herod feared John, knowing that he was a righteous and holy man, and was regardful of him; and on hearing him, was in much anxiety, and listened to him gladly.
And a convenient day having come, when Herod on his birthday made a supper for his nobles and chief captains and the principal men of Galilee,
and the daughter of Herodias came in and danced, she pleased Herod and those at table with him; and the king said to the damsel, Ask of me whatever thou wilt, and I will give it thee.
And he swore to her, Whatever thou shalt ask of me, I will give thee, to the half of my kingdom.
And she went out and said to her mother, What shall I ask? And she said, The head of John the Baptizer.
And she came in immediately with haste to the king, and asked, saying, I desire that thou wilt give me immediately on a platter the head of John the Baptist.
And the king was exceedingly sorry; but on account of his oaths, and of those at table with him, he would not refuse her.
And the king immediately sent one of his guards, and ordered his head to be brought. And he went and beheaded him in the prison,
and brought his head on a platter, and gave it to the damsel; and the damsel gave it to her mother.
And his disciples, when they heard of it, came and took up his body, and laid it in a tomb.
And the apostles gather together to Jesus, and told him all which they had done and taught.
And he saith to them, Come ye by yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest a while. For there were many coming and going; and they had no leisure, even to eat.
And they went away into a desert place in the boat apart.
And many saw them departing, and knew them, and ran together on foot thither from all the cities, and arrived before them.
And when he came forth, he saw a great multitude, and was moved with compassion for them, because they were as sheep not having a shepherd; and he began to teach them many things.
And late in the day his disciples came to him, and said, This is a desert place, and it is now late;
send them away, that they may go into the surrounding fields and villages, and buy themselves something to eat.
But he answering said to them, Give ye them to eat. And they say to him, Shall we go and buy two hundred denaries' worth of bread, and give them to eat?
He saith to them, How many loaves have ye? Go and see. And when they knew, they say, Five, and two fishes.
And he ordered them to make all lie down in companies upon the green grass.
And they lay down in ranks, by hundreds, and by fifties.
And taking the five loaves and the two fishes, he looked up to heaven and blessed, and broke the loaves, and gave them to the disciples to set before them; and the two fishes he divided among them all.
And they all ate, and were filled.
And they took up twelve baskets full of the fragments, and of the fishes.
And they who ate of the loaves were five thousand men.
And he immediately constrained his disciples to get into the boat, and to go before to the other side to Bethsaida, while he sent the multitude away.
And when he had taken leave of them, he went away into the mountain to pray.
And when evening came, the boat was in the midst of the lake; and he was alone on the land.
And when he saw them toiling hard in rowing, for the wind was against them, about the fourth watch of the night he cometh to them, walking upon the lake. And he would have passed by them;
but they, seeing him walking upon the lake, thought it was a spectre, and cried out.
For they all saw him, and were terrified. But he immediately spoke with them, and saith to them, Be of good cheer; it is I, be not afraid.
And he went up to them into the boat, and the wind ceased. And they were exceedingly astonished, beyond measure.
For they did not consider the matter of the loaves; but their heart was hardened.
And crossing over, they came to land, to Gennesaret; and anchored there.
And when they had come out of the boat, the people immediately knowing who he was,
ran through all that region, and began to carry about on beds those that were sick to the place where they heard he was.
And wherever he entered into villages or cities or the open country, they laid the sick in the market-places, and besought him that they might touch if it were but the fringe of his garment; and as many as touched him were made well.
And there come together to him the Pharisees, and some of the scribes, who came from Jerusalem;
and seeing some of his disciples eating bread with defiled, that is, unwashed hands,
(for the Pharisees, and all the Jews, unless they wash their hands often, do not eat, holding fast the tradition of the elders;
and on coming from the marketplace, unless they bathe, they do not eat; and there are many other things which they have received to hold, the dipping of cups, and pitchers, and brazen vessels;)
then the Pharisees and scribes ask him, Why do not thy disciples walk according to the tradition of the elders, but eat bread with defiled hands?
And he said to them, Well did Isaiah prophesy of you hypocrites, as it is written, “This people honoreth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
But in vain do they worship me, teaching as doctrines the commandments of men.”
Laying aside, the commandment of God, ye hold fast the tradition of men.
And he said to them, Full well do ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep your tradition!
For Moses said, “Honor thy father and thy mother;” and, “He that curseth father or mother, let him surely die.”
But ye say, If a man say to his father or mother, Whatever thou mightst receive in aid from me is Corban, that is, a gift to God, [[he is not bound by the command. Thus]]
ye suffer him no longer to do anything for his father or his mother;
making void the word of God by your tradition, which ye have handed down; and many such things ye do.
And again calling the multitude to him, he said to them, Hearken to me all of you, and understand.
Nothing that entereth into a man from without can defile him; but the things that come out of him are what defile a man.

And when he had gone into the house from the crowd, his disciples asked him concerning the parable.
And he saith to them, Are ye too so without discernment? Do ye not understand that whatever thing from without entereth into a man, cannot defile him?
because it entereth not into his heart, but into the stomach; and goeth out into the drain, which cleanseth all kinds of food.
And he said, That which cometh out of a man, that defileth a man.
For from within, out of the heart of men, come forth evil thoughts, fornications,
thefts, murders, adulteries, covetousness, iniquities, deceit, wantonness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness.
All these evil things come from within, and defile a man.
And rising up, he departed thence into the borders of Tyre; and entering into a house, he desired that no one should know it; but he could not escape notice.
But a woman, whose young daughter had an unclean spirit, immediately hearing of him, came in, and fell at his feet.
The woman was a Greek, a Syrophoenician by nation; and she besought him that he would cast out the demon from her daughter.
And he said to her, Let the children be filled first; for it is not well to take the children's bread and throw it to the little dogs.
But she answered, and saith to him, Yea, Lord; even the little dogs under the table eat of the children's crumbs.
And he said to her, For this saying go thy way; the demon hath gone out of thy daughter.
And going away to her house, she found the child laid upon the bed, and the demon gone out.
And again leaving the borders of Tyre, he came through Sidon to the lake of Galilee, through the midst of the borders of Decapolis.
And they bring to him one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech, and beseech him to lay his hand upon him.
And taking him aside from the multitude, he put his fingers into his ears, and having spit, touched his tongue;
and looking up to heaven, he sighed, and saith to him, Ephphatha, that is, Be opened.
And his ears were opened; and the string of his tongue was immediately loosed, and he spoke plain.
And he charged them to tell no one; but the more he charged them, the more did they publish it.
And they were beyond measure astonished, saying, He hath done all things well; he maketh both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak.
In those days, there being again a great multitude, and they having nothing to eat, he called the disciples to him, and saith to them,
I have compassion on the multitude, because they have remained with me now three days, and they have nothing to eat.
And if I send them away fasting to their houses, they will faint on the road; and some of them have come from altar.
And his disciples answered him, Whence can ally one satisfy these men with bread here in a wilderness?
And he asked them, How many loaves have ye? And they said, Seven.
And he ordered the multitude to lie down on the ground; and he took the seven loaves, and gave thanks, and broke, and gave to his disciples to set before them; and they set them before the multitude.
And they had a few small fishes; and having blessed them, he set them before them.
And they ate, and were filled; and they took up of the fragments that remained, seven baskets.
And they were about four thousand; and he sent them away.
And immediately going on board the boat with his disciples, he came into the region of Dalmanutha.
And the Pharisees came out, and began to question with him, seeking of him a sign from heaven, trying him.
And sighing deeply in his spirit, he saith, Why doth this generation seek for a sign? Truly do I say to you, A sign will not he given to this generation.
And leaving them, he again went on board and crossed to the other side.
And they had forgotten to take bread, and had not in the boat with them more than one loaf.
And he charged them, saying, Take heed, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and the leaven of Herod.
And they reasoned among themselves, saying, It is because we have no bread.
And knowing it, he saith to them, Why are ye reasoning, because ye have no bread? Do ye not yet perceive nor understand? Have ye your mind still blinded?
Having eyes, do ye not see? and having ears, do ye not hear? And do ye not remember,
when I broke the five loaves among the five thousand, and how many baskets full of fragments ye took up? They say to him, Twelve.
When also the seven among the four thousand, how many baskets full of fragments did ye take up? And they say, Seven.
And he said to them, Do ye not yet understand?
And they come to Bethsaida. And they bring to him a blind man, and beseech him to touch him.
And taking the blind man by the hand, he led him out of the village; and spitting on his eyes, and putting his hands on him, he asked him if he saw anything.
And he looked up, and said, I can see men, for I see them as trees, walking.
Then he again put his hands on his eyes, and he saw clearly, and was restored, and saw all things distinctly.
And he sent him away to his house, saying, Go not into the village.
And Jesus went out, and his disciples, into the villages of Caesarea Philippi. And on the way he asked his disciples, saying to them, Who do men say that I am?
And they answered him, saying, John the Baptist; and others, Elijah; and others, One of the prophets.
And he asked them, But who do ye say that I am? Peter answering saith to him, Thou art the Christ.
And he strictly charged them to tell no one concerning him.
And he began to teach them that the Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders and the chief priests and the scribes, and be put to death, and after three days rise again;
and he told them this plainly. And Peter, taking him aside, began to rebuke him.
But he turning about and looking at his disciples, rebuked Peter, and saith, Get thee behind me, Satan! for thy thoughts are not on the things of God, but on those of men.
And calling the multitude to him with his disciples also, he said to them, Whoever chooseth to follow me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
For whoever chooseth to save his life, will lose it; but whoever shall lose his life for the sake of me and of the glad tidings, will save it.
For what doth it profit a man to gain the whole world, and forfeit his life?
For what can a man give as an exchange for his life?
For whoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him will also the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.
And he said to them, Truly do I say to you, There are some of those standing here who will not taste of death, till they have seen that the kingdom of God hath come with power.
And after six days Jesus taketh with him Peter and James and John, and leadeth them up into a high mountain apart by themselves; and he was transfigured before them.
And his garments became glistening, very white, so as no fuller on earth can whiten.
And there appeared to them Elijah with Moses; and they were talking with Jesus.
And Peter answering saith to Jesus, Rabbi, it is good for us to be here; and let us make three tents, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah.
For he knew not what to answer; for they were struck with terror.
And there came a cloud overshadowing them; and a voice came out of the cloud, This is my beloved Son; hear him.
And suddenly looking round, they no longer saw any one but Jesus alone with themselves.
And as they came down from the mountain, he charged them to give no account of what they had seen to any one, till the Son of man should have risen from the dead.
And they kept these words in mind, questioning one another what rising from the dead might mean.
And they asked him, saying, How is it that the Pharisees and scribes say that Elijah must come first?
And he said to them, Elijah cometh first, and restoreth all things. And how hath it been written of the Son of man? that he must suffer many things, and be set at nought.
But I say to you that Elijah hath come, and they have done to him whatever they would; as it hath been written concerning him.
And coming to the disciples, they saw a great multitude about them, and scribes debating with them.
And immediately the whole multitude on seeing him was struck with awe, and running to him, saluted him.
And he asked them, About what are ye debating with them?
And one of the multitude answered him, Teacher, I have brought to thee my son, who hath a dumb spirit.
And wherever it seizeth hold of him, it throweth him down; and he foameth and gnasheth his teeth; and he pineth away. And I spoke to thy disciples to cast it out, and they were not able.
He answereth and saith to them, O unbelieving generation! How long shall I be with you? How long shall I bear with you? Bring him to me.
And they brought him to him. And as soon as he saw him, the spirit convulsed him; and he fell on the ground, and wallowed, foaming.
And he asked his father, How long hath it been thus with him? And he said, From a child;
and it hath often cast him both into fire, and into water, to destroy him; but if thou art able to do any thing, have compassion on us, and help us.
Jesus said to him, If thou art able? All things are possible for him that believeth.
The father of the child immediately cried out and said, I believe; help thou my unbelief.
And Jesus seeing that the multitude came running together, rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to it, Dumb and deaf spirit, I command thee, come out of him, and enter no more into him.
And uttering a cry, and convulsing him much, it came out of him. And he became as one dead; so that very many said, He is dead.
But Jesus, taking hold of his hand, raised him, and he stood up.
And when he had come into the house, his disciples asked him privately, Why could not we cast it out?
And he said to them, This kind can go out by nothing, except by prayer.
And departing thence, they passed through Galilee; and he would not that any one should know it.
For he taught his disciples, and said to them, The Son of man is about to be delivered up into the hands of men, and they will put him to death; and when he hath been put to death, after three days he will rise again.
But they understood not what he said, and were afraid to ask him.
And they came to Capernaum; and having come into the house, he asked them, About what were ye disputing on the road?
But they were silent; for on the road they had been disputing with one another, who was greatest.
And sitting down, he called the twelve, and saith to them, If any one desire to be first, he will be last of all, and servant of all.
And he took a child, and placed him in the midst of them, and taking him in his arms, he said to them,
Whoever receiveth one of these children in my name, receiveth me; and whoever receiveth me, receiveth not me, but him that sent me.
John said to him, Teacher, we saw one casting out demons in thy name who followeth not us; and we forbade him, because he did not follow us.
But Jesus said, Forbid him not. For no one, who shall do a miracle in my name, can readily speak evil of me.
For he that is not against us is for us.
For whoever shall give you a cup of water to drink in my name, because ye belong to Christ, truly do I say to you, he will not lose his reward.
And whoever shall cause one of these little ones that believe to fall away, it would be better for him to have a great millstone hung round his neck, and be cast into the sea.
And if thy hand cause thee to fall away, cut it off. It is better for thee to enter into life maimed, than having the two hands to go away into hell, into the fire that is unquenchable.

And if thy foot is causing thee to fall away, cut it off; it is better for thee to enter into life lame, than having the two feet to be cast into hell.

And if thine eye is causing thee to fall away, pluck it out; it is better for thee to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast into hell,
where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.
For every one will be salted with fire.
Salt is good; but if the salt have lost its saltness, wherewith will ye season it? Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace with one another.
And departing thence, he cometh into the borders of Judaea, and to the other side of the Jordan; and multitudes again come together to him; and, as he was wont, he again taught them.
And the Pharisees came to him, and asked him whether it was lawful for a man to put away his wife, trying him.
And he answering said to them, What did Moses command you?
And they said, Moses permitted to write a bill of divorcement, and to put her away.
And Jesus said to them, On account of your hardness of heart he wrote you this command.
But, from the beginning of the creation, [[God]] made them male and female.
“For this cause shall a man leave his father and his mother;
and the two shall become one flesh.” So they are no longer two, but one flesh.
What therefore God joined together, let not man put asunder.
And in the house his disciples asked him again about this matter.
And he saith to them, Whoever putteth away his wife, and marrieth another, committeth adultery against her.
And if she put away her husband, and be married to another, she committeth adultery.
And they brought children to him, that he might touch them; and the disciples rebuked those that brought them.
But Jesus seeing it was much displeased, and said to them, Suffer the children to come to me; forbid them not; for to such belongeth the kingdom of God.
Truly do I say to you, Whoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a child, will not enter therein.
And he took them in his arms, and blessed them, laying his hands upon them.
And as he was going out into the way, a certain one running up and kneeling to him, asked him, Good teacher, what shall I do that I may inherit everlasting life?
And Jesus said to him, Why dost thou call me good? None is good but one, that is, God.
Thou knowest the commandments, “Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Defraud not, Honor thy father and thy mother.”
And he said to him, Teacher, all these have I kept from my youth.
And Jesus looking at him, loved him, and said to him, One thing thou lackest; go, sell whatever thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me.
But his countenance fell at that saying, and he went away sorrowful; for he had great possessions.
And Jesus, looking round, saith to his disciples, How hardly shall they who have riches enter the kingdom t of God!
And the disciples were astonished at his words. But Jesus answering again saith to them, Children, how hard it is to enter the kingdom of God!
It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God.
And they were beyond measure astonished, saying among themselves, Who then can be saved?
Jesus looking upon them saith, With men it is impossible, but not with God; for all things are possible with God.
Peter began to say to him, Lo! we left all, and have followed thee.
Jesus said, Truly do I say to you, There is no one who hath left house, or brothers, or sisters, or mother, or father, or children, or lands, for the sake of me and of the glad tidings,
who will not receive a hundredfold in the time that now is, houses, and brothers, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions, and in the world to come everlasting life.
But many who are first will be last; and the last first.
And they were on the road, going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus was leading the way; and they were amazed, and they that followed were afraid. And again taking the twelve aside, he began to tell them what things were about to befall him:
Lo! we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man will be delivered up to the chief priests and to the scribes; and they will condemn him to death, and deliver him up to the gentiles;
and they will mock him, and spit upon him, and scourge him, and put him to death; and after three days he will rise again.
And James and John, the sons of Zebedee, come to him, saying to him, Teacher, we would that thou shouldst do for us whatever we shall ask thee.
And he said to them, What would ye that I should do for you?
And they said to him, Grant to us that we may sit, one on thy right hand and one on thy left, in thy glory.
But Jesus said to them, Ye know not what ye ask. Can ye drink the cup that I drink, or be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?
And they said to him, We can. And Jesus said to them, Ye will drink the cup that I drink, and ye will be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with;
but to sit on my right hand or on my left is not mine to give, but it will be given to those for whom it hath been prepared.
And the ten hearing it began to be much displeased with James and John.
And Jesus, calling them to him, saith to them, Ye know that they who are accounted to rule over the nations lord it over them, and their great men exercise a strict authority over them.
But it is not so among you; but whoever desireth to become great among you, will be your minister;
and whoever of you desireth to become first, will be servant of all;
for even the Son of man came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life a ransom for many.
And they come to Jericho; and as he was going out of Jericho with his disciples and a great multitude, the son of Timaeus, Bartimaeus, a blind beggar, was sitting by the wayside.
And hearing that it was Jesus the Nazarene, he began to cry out and say, Son of David, Jesus, have pity on me!
And many sharply bade him be silent; but he cried out the more, Son of David, have pity on me!
And Jesus stopped, and said, Call him. And they call the blind man, saying to him, Be of good courage, rise, he calleth thee.
And throwing off his garment, he leaped up, and came to Jesus.
And Jesus answering said to him, What dost thou wish me to do for thee? The blind man said to him, My master, to restore my sight.
And Jesus said to him, Go; thy faith hath saved thee. And he immediately received his sight, and followed him on the road.
And when they were drawing near to Jerusalem and to Bethany, at the Mount of Olives, he sendeth forth two of his disciples,
and saith to them, Go to the village over against you; and immediately on entering it ye will find a colt tied, on which no man hath yet sat; loose and bring it.
And if any one say to you, Why do ye this? say, The Lord hath need of it, and will immediately send it back hither.
And they went, and found the colt tied by the door without, on the street; and they loose it.
And some of those who were standing there said to them, What are ye about, loosing the colt?
And they said to them as Jesus had commanded; and they let them go.
And they bring the colt to Jesus, and put their garments on it; and he sat upon it.
And many spread their garments on the road; and others boughs, having cut them from the fields.
And they that went before, and they that followed, cried, Hosanna! Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord!
Blessed is the coming kingdom of our father David! Hosanna in the highest heavens!
And he entered Jerusalem, and the temple; and having looked round on all things, the evening being now come, he went out to Bethany, with the twelve.
And on the morrow, when they had come from Bethany, he was hungry;
and seeing a fig-tree afar off having leaves, he went to see whether he might find anything on it; and on coming to it he found nothing but leaves; for the season of figs had not come.
And he answering said to it, Let no one eat fruit from thee henceforth for ever. And his disciples heard him.
And they come to Jerusalem. And he went into the temple, and began to cast out those who sold and bought in the temple, and overturned the tables of the money-changers, and the seats of those who sold the doves;
and he suffered no one to carry any vessel through the temple.
And he taught, and said to them, Is it not written, “My house shall be called a house of prayer for all the nations? but ye have made it a den of robbers.”
And the chief priests and the scribes heard it, and sought how they might destroy him; for they feared him; because all the multitude was astonished at his teaching.
And when it became late, he went out of the city.
And in the morning, as they were passing by, they saw the fig-tree withered from the roots.
And Peter remembered and said to him, Rabbi, see! the fig-tree which thou didst curse is withered away.
And Jesus answering saith to them, Have faith in God.
Truly do I say to you, that whoever shall say to this mountain, Be thou taken up, and cast into the sea, and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that what he saith will come to pass, he shall have it.
Therefore I say to you, All things whatever ye pray for and ask, believe that ye have obtained, and ye shall have them.
And when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have aught against any one, that your Father who is in heaven may also forgive you your trespasses.

And they come again to Jerusalem. And as he was walking in the temple, there come to him the chief priests and the scribes and the elders;
and they said to him, By what authority doest thou these things? or who gave thee this authority to do these things?
And Jesus said to them, I will ask you one question; and answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do these things.
The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or from men? Answer me.
And they reasoned among themselves, saying, If we say, From heaven, he will say, Why then did ye not believe him?
But shall we say, From men? They feared the people; for all regarded John as truly a prophet.
And they answered and said to Jesus, We do not know. And Jesus saith to them, Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.
And he began to speak to them in parables: A man planted a vineyard, and set a hedge about it, and dug a wine-vat, and built a tower; and let it out to husbandmen, and went abroad.
And at the season he sent to the husbandmen a servant, that he might receive from the husbandmen of the fruits of the vineyard.
And they took him, and beat him, and sent him away empty-handed.
And again he sent to them another servant; and him they wounded in the head, and treated shamefully.
And he sent another; and him they killed; and many others, beating some, and killing some.
Still he had one beloved son; he sent him last to them, saying, They will respect my son.
But those husbandmen said among themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.
And they took him and killed him, and cast him out of the vineyard.
What will the lord of the vineyard do? He will come and destroy the husbandmen, and will give the vineyard to others.
And have ye not read this scripture: “The stone which the builders rejected, the same hath become the cornerstone;
from the Lord did this come, and it is marvelous in our eyes”?
And they sought to seize him, but feared the multitude; for they knew that he spoke the parable against them. And they left him, and went away.
And they send to him some of the Pharisees and of the Herodians, to ensnare him in speech.
And they come and say to him, Teacher, we know that thou art true, and carest for no one; for thou regardest not the person of men, but teachest the way of God in truth. Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or not?
Shall we give, or shall we not give? But he, seeing their hypocrisy, said to them, Why are ye trying me? Bring me a denary, that I may see it.
And they brought one. And he saith to them, Whose is this image and inscription? And they said to him, Caesar's.
And Jesus said to them, Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's. And they marveled at him exceedingly.
Then come to him Sadducees, who say that there is no resurrection; and they asked him, saying,
Teacher, Moses wrote to us, “If a man's brother die, and leave a wife and no child, his brother shall take his wife, and raise up seed to his brother.”
There were seven brothers; and the first took a wife, and dying left no seed.
And the second took her and died, leaving no seed; and the third likewise.
And the seven left no seed. Last of all, the woman also died.
In the resurrection, when they have risen, of which of them will she be wife? for the seven had her for a wife.
Jesus said to them, Do ye not err on this account, that ye know not the Scriptures, nor the power of God?
For when they have risen from the dead, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels in heaven.
And concerning the dead, that they are raised, have ye not read in the book of Moses, at the Bush, how God spoke to him, saying, “I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob”?
He is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Ye err greatly.
And one of the scribes came up, having heard them reasoning together, and perceiving that he had answered them well, asked him, Which commandment is first of all?
Jesus answered, The first is, “Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord;
and thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength.”
The second is this: “Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.” There is no other commandment greater than these.
And the scribe said to him, In truth, Teacher, thou hast well said, that He is one, and that there is no other but he;
and to love him with all the heart, and with all the understanding, and with all the strength, and to love one's neighbor as one's self, is more than all the whole burnt-offerings and the sacrifices.
And Jesus, perceiving that he answered wisely, said to him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of God. And after this no one dared to question him.
And Jesus answered and said, while he was teaching in the temple, How is it that the scribes say, that the Christ is David's son?
David himself said in the Holy Spirit, “The Lord said to my lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool.”
David himself calleth him lord; and how can he be his son? And the great multitude heard him gladly.
And he said in his teaching, Beware of the scribes, who like to walk about in long robes, and love salutations in the markets,
and the chief seats in the synagogues, and the first places at feasts;
who devour widows' houses, and for a pretence make long prayers. These will receive a far greater condemnation.
And he sat over against the treasury, and was beholding how the people cast money into the treasury. And many that were rich were casting in much.
And a certain poor widow came and threw in two mites, which make a farthing.
And he called to him his disciples, and said to them, Truly do I say to you, that this poor widow hath cast in more than all those who are casting into the treasury.
For they all threw in of their abundance; but she out of her penury threw in all that she had, her whole living.
And as he went out of the temple, one of his disciples saith to him, Teacher, see! what stones, and what buildings!
And Jesus said to him, Seest thou these great buildings? There will not be left one stone upon another, that will not be thrown down.
And as he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, over against the temple, Peter and James and John and Andrew asked him privately,
Tell us, when will these things be? and what will be the sign when all these things are about to be accomplished?
And Jesus began to say to them, See that no one deceive you.
Many will come in my name, saying, I am He; and will deceive many.
And when ye hear of wars, and rumors of wars, be not troubled; they must come to pass; but not yet is the end.
For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; there will be earthquakes in divers places; there will be famines. These things are the beginning of travail-pains.
But do ye take heed to yourselves; they will deliver you up to councils, and ye will be taken into synagogues and beaten; and ye will be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony to them.
And the glad tidings must first be published to all the nations.
And when they lead you away to deliver you up, be not anxious beforehand as to what ye shall speak; but whatever shall be given you in that hour, that speak; for it is not ye that speak, but the Holy Spirit.
And brother will deliver up brother to death, and the father his child; and children will rise up against parents, and put them to death.
And ye will be hated by all on account of my name. But he that endureth to the end will be saved.
But when ye see the abomination of desolation standing where it ought not,—let him that readeth understand,—then let those who are in Judaea flee to the mountains;
let not him that is on the house-top go down, nor enter, to take anything out of his house;
and let not him that is in the field turn back to take his garment.
And woe to the women with child, and to those with children at the breast, in those days!
And pray that it may not be in winter.
For those days will be a time of distress, such as hath not been from the beginning of the creation which God created until now, nor shall be.
And if the Lord had not shortened the days, no flesh would have been saved; but for the sake of the chosen whom he chose, he shortened the days.
And then if any one shall say to you, See! here is the Christ; see! there; believe him not.
For false Christs and false prophets will rise up, and will do signs and wonders, to lead astray, if possible, the chosen.
But do ye take heed! I have told you all beforehand.
But in those days, after that distress, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give her light;
and the stars will be falling from heaven, and the powers that are in the heavens will be shaken.
And then will they see the Son of man coming in the clouds with great power and glory.
And then will he send forth the angels, and will gather the chosen ones from the four winds, from the uttermost part of the earth to the uttermost part of heaven.
And from the fig-tree learn its parable. When its branch hath now become tender, and putteth forth its leaves, ye know that summer is near.
So also, when ye see these things coming to pass, know ye that he is near, at the doors.
Truly do I say to you, that this generation will not pass away, till all these things take place.
Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away.
But that day or hour knoweth no one, not even the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but the Father.
Take heed, watch; for ye know not when the time is.
As a man going abroad, having left his house and given authority to his servants, to each one his work, also commanded the porter to watch,
so also watch ye; for ye know not when the master of the house is coming, whether at evening, or at midnight, or at the cock-crowing, or in the morning;
lest coming suddenly, he find you sleeping.
And what I say to you, I say to all: Watch.
And two days after was the passover, and the feast of unleavened bread; and the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might seize him by craft, and put him to death.
For they said, Not at the feast, lest there be an uproar among the people.
And when he was at Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, as he was reclining at table, there came a woman having an alabaster bottle of ointment of pure spikenard, very precious; and breaking the bottle, she poured it on his head.
And there were some that were much displeased, [[and said]] among themselves, Why is this waste of the ointment made?
For this ointment might have been sold for more than three hundred denaries, and given to the poor. And they chid her harshly.
But Jesus said, Let her alone; why do ye trouble her? A good deed hath she done for me.
For the poor ye have always with you, and whenever ye will, ye can do good to them; but me ye have not always.
She hath done what she could; she hath anointed my body beforehand for its burial.
And truly do I say to you, Wherever the glad tidings shall be published throughout the whole world, this too which she hath done will be told for a memorial of her.
And Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went to the chief priests, that he might deliver him up to them.
And they when they heard it were glad, and promised to give him money. And he sought a good opportunity to deliver him up.
And on the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, when they used to kill the passover, his disciples say to him, Where wilt thou that we go and make ready for thee to eat the passover?
And he sendeth forth two of his disciples, and saith to them, Go into the city, and there will meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water; follow him;
and wherever he goeth in, say to the master of the house, The Teacher saith, Where is my guest-chamber, where I may eat the passover with my disciples?
And he will show you a large upper room furnished and prepared; and there make ready for us.
And the disciples went forth, and came into the city, and found as he had told them; and they made ready the passover.
And when it was evening, he cometh with the twelve.
And as they were reclining at table and eating, Jesus said, Truly do I say to you, that one of you will betray me,—one that is eating with me.
They began to be sorrowful, and to say to him one by one, Is it I?
And he said to them, It is one of the twelve, one that is dipping with me in the dish.
For the Son of man indeed goeth away, as it hath been written concerning him; but woe to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! Well were it for that man if he had not been born.
And as they were eating, he took a loaf, and blessed, and broke it, and gave it to them, and said, Take; this is my body.
And he took a cup, and having given thanks, gave it to them; and they all drank of it.
And he said to them, This is my blood of the covenant, which is shed for many.
Truly do I say to you, I shall not drink hereafter of the fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new in the kingdom of God.
And having sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
And Jesus saith to them, Ye will all fall away from me; for it is written, “I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.”
But after I have risen, I will go before you into Galilee.
But Peter said to him, Even if all shall fall away, yet will not I.
And Jesus saith to him, Truly do I say to thee, that even thou, to-day, on this night, before a cock crow twice, wilt thrice deny me.
But he spoke the more vehemently: If I must die with thee, I will not deny thee. And so also said they all.
And they come to a place called Gethsemane; and he saith to his disciples, Sit here, while I pray.
And he taketh with him Peter and James and John; and began to be in great consternation and anguish.
And he saith to them, My soul is exceedingly sorrowful, even to death; remain here and watch.
And going on a little farther, he fell on the ground, and prayed that, if it was possible, the hour might pass from him.
And he said, Abba, Father, all things are possible to thee! take away this cup from me. But not what I will, but what thou wilt.
And he cometh and findeth them sleeping; and he saith to Peter, Simon, sleepest thou? Couldst not thou watch one hour?
Watch, and pray that ye enter not into temptation; the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.
And again he went away and prayed, saying the same words.
And returning, he found them again sleeping, for their eyes were heavy; and they knew not what to answer him.
And he cometh the third time, and saith to them, Sleep on, and take your rest! It is enough! the hour is come: lo! the Son of man is delivered up into the hands of sinners.
Rise, let us be going; lo! he that delivereth me up is at hand.
And immediately, while he was yet speaking, cometh Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, and with him a multitude with swords and clubs, from the chief priests and the scribes and elders.
And his betrayer had given them a signal, saying, Whomever I shall kiss, he is the man; seize him, and lead him away securely.
And on coming he immediately went up to him, and said, Rabbi! and kissed him.
And they laid hands on him and seized him.
And one of those who stood by drew his sword, and smote the servant of the high-priest, and cut off his ear.
And Jesus answering said to them, Ye have come out as against a robber, with swords and clubs, to take me.
I was daily with you in the temple, teaching, and ye did not lay hands on me; but [[thus it is]], that the Scriptures may be fulfilled.
And all forsook him and fled.
And there followed him a certain young man having a linen cloth wrapped round his naked body; and they laid hold of him.
And he left the linen cloth behind, and fled naked.
And they led Jesus away to the high-priest; and all the chief priests and the elders and the scribes come together.
And Peter followed him afar off, even into the court of the palace of the high-priest, and was sitting with the officers, and warming himself at the fire.
And the chief priests and the whole council sought for testimony against Jesus in order to put him to death; and they found none.
For many bore false witness against him, but their testimonies did not agree together.
And some stood up and bore false witness against him, saying,
We heard him say, I will destroy this temple that is made with hands, and in three days I will build another not made with hands.
And not even so did their testimony agree.
And the high-priest stood up in the midst, and asked Jesus, saying, Dost thou make no answer to what these men testify against thee?
But he was silent, and answered nothing. Again the high-priest asked him, and saith to him, Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?
And Jesus said, I am; and ye will see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of Power, and coming with the clouds of heaven.
Then the high-priest rent his garments, and said, What further need have we of witnesses?
Ye have heard the blasphemy; what think ye? And they all condemned him as deserving the punishment of death.
And some began to spit on him, and to cover his face and buffet him, and say to him, Prophesy! And the officers, with blows, took him in charge.
And as Peter was below in the court, there cometh one of the maid-servants of the high-priest;
and seeing Peter warming himself, she looked at him and said, Thou too wast with the Nazarene, Jesus.
But he denied, saying, I do not know nor understand what thou sayest. And he went out into the fore-court; and a cock crew.
And the maid-servant, seeing him, began again to say to those who were standing by, This is one of them.
And he denied it again. And shortly after, those who were standing by said again to Peter, Surely thou art one of them; for thou art a Galilaean.
But he began to curse and to swear, saying, I know not this man of whom ye speak.
And immediately a cock crew a second time. And Peter called to mind the word that Jesus had said to him, Before a cock crows twice, thou wilt thrice deny me. And when he thought thereon, he wept.
And as soon as it was morning, the chief priests, having held a consultation with the elders and the scribes, and the whole council, bound Jesus, and carried him away, and delivered him up to Pilate.
And Pilate asked him, Art thou the king of the Jews? And he answering saith to him, I am.
And the chief priests brought many charges against him.
And Pilate asked him again, Dost thou make no answer? See what things they are testifying against thee!
But Jesus made no further answer; so that Pilate marveled.
Now at the feast he was wont to release to them one prisoner, whom they might ask.
And there was one named Barabbas, who lay bound with insurgents who had committed murder in the insurrection.
And the multitude, coming up, began to ask him to do as he had been wont to do for them.
And Pilate answered them, saying, Will ye that I release to you the king of the Jews?
For he knew that for envy the chief priests had delivered him up.
But the chief priests stirred up the multitude, that he should rather release to them Barabbas.
And Pilate answering again said to them, What then would ye have me do with him whom ye call the king of the Jews?
And they cried out again, Crucify him!
Then Pilate said to them, Why, what evil hath he done? And they cried out the more, Crucify him!
And Pilate, wishing to satisfy the multitude, released to them Barabbas; and, when he had scourged Jesus, delivered him up to be crucified.
And the soldiers led him away into the court, which is the Praetorium; and they call together the whole band.
And they clothe him with purple, and having platted a crown of thorns, they put it on him.
And they began to salute him: Hail, king of the Jews!
And they struck him on the head with a reed, and spit upon him, and kneeling down, did him homage.
And after they had made sport of him, they stripped him of the purple robe, and put his own garments on him. And they lead him out to crucify him.
And they compel one Simon a Cyrenaean, who was passing by, coming from the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to carry his cross.
And they bring him to the place Golgotha; which is, when interpreted, Place of a Skull.
And they gave him wine mingled with myrrh; but he did not take it.
And they crucify him, and divide his garments, casting lots for them, what each should take.
And it was the third hour when they crucified him.
And on the cross the inscription of the charge against him was written: “The king of the Jews.”
And with him they crucify two robbers; one on his right hand, and one on his left.

And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads, and saying, Ha! thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it up in three days,
save thyself, and come down from the cross.
In like manner also the chief priests, with the scribes, making sport among themselves, said, He saved others, cannot he save himself?
Let the Christ, the king of Israel, come down now from the cross, that we may see and believe. And they that were crucified with him were reviling him.
And when the sixth hour had come, there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour.
And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, Eloi, Eloi, lema sabachthani? which is, when interpreted, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?
And some of those who stood by, when they heard it, said, See! he is calling for Elijah.
And one ran and filled a sponge with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave it to him to drink, saying, Hold! Let us see whether Elijah will come to take him down.
And Jesus, having uttered a loud cry, expired.
And the veil of the temple was rent in two from the top to the bottom.
And the centurion who stood over against him, seeing that he so expired, said, Truly this man was the Son of God.
There were also women looking on from a distance; among whom was Mary the Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses, and Salome;
who, when he was in Galilee, followed him, and rendered him their services; and many other women who came up with him to Jerusalem.
And evening having now come, because it was the preparation, that is, the day before the sabbath,
Joseph of Arimathaea, an honorable councilor, who was himself waiting for the kingdom of God, came, and boldly went in to Pilate, and asked for the body of Jesus.
And Pilate wondered that he was already dead; and calling to him the centurion, he asked him whether he had been long dead.
And having been informed by the centurion, he gave the body to Joseph.
And having bought fine linen, he took him down, and wrapped him in the linen, and laid him in a tomb which was hewn out of a rock, and rolled a stone to the door of the tomb.
And Mary the Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses saw where he was laid.
And when the sabbath was past, Mary the Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome, bought spices, that they might come and anoint him.
And very early on the first day of the week, they came to the tomb at the rising of the sun.
And they said to one another, Who will roll away for us the stone from the door of the tomb?
And looking up they see that the stone had been rolled back; for it was very large.
And they entered the tomb, and saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a long white garment; and they were affrighted.
But he saith to them, Be not affrighted; ye seek Jesus the Nazarene who was crucified; he hath risen; he is not here; behold the place where they laid him.
But go, tell his disciples and Peter, that he is going before you into Galilee; there ye will see him, as he said to you.
And they went out, and fled from the tomb; for trembling and amazement had seized them, and they said nothing to any one; for they were terrified.
{The remaining twelve verses, according to Tischendorf and others, made originally no part of Mark's Gospel. As the passage was added very early, however, since it is referred to by Irenaeus in the latter part of the second century, it is here given, as an appendix.} [[And having risen early, on the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary the Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven demons.
She went and reported it to those who had been with him, who were mourning and weeping.
And they, when they heard that he was alive, and had been seen by her, did not believe.
After this, he manifested himself in another form to two of them as they walked, going into the country.
And they went and reported it to the rest; and even them they did not believe.
Afterward he manifested himself to the eleven themselves, as they were reclining at table, and upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they did not believe those who had seen him after he had risen.
And he said to them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the glad tidings to the whole creation.
He that believeth and is baptized will be saved; but he that doth not believe will be condemned.
And these signs will accompany believers: In my name they will cast out demons; they will speak with new tongues;
they will take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it will not hurt them; they will lay their hands on the sick, and they will recover.
So then, the Lord, after he had spoken to them, was taken up into heaven, and sat down on the right hand of God;
and they went forth, and preached every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word by the signs which followed it.]]
Inasmuch as many have undertaken to arrange a narrative of those things which are fully believed among us,
even as they were delivered to us by those who were eye-witnesses from the beginning and became ministers of the word,
it seemed good to me also, having accurately traced up all things from the first, to write to thee a connected account, most excellent Theophilus,
that thou mightst know the exact truth with regard to those things in which thou wast instructed.
There was in the days of Herod, king of Judaea, a certain priest named Zachariah, of the course of Abijah; and he had a wife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth.
And they were both righteous in the sight of God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless.
And they had no child, because Elizabeth was barren, and they were both far advanced in years.
And it came to pass, that, while he was serving as priest before God in the order of his course,
according to the custom of the priesthood the lot fell to him to go into the temple of the Lord and burn the incense.
And the whole multitude of the people was praying without at the time of the incense.
And there appeared to him an angel of the Lord, standing on the right of the altar of incense.
And Zachariah was troubled at the sight, and fear fell upon him.
But the angel said to him, Fear not, Zachariah; for thy prayer was heard, and thy wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a son; and thou shalt call his name John.
And thou wilt have joy and gladness, and many will rejoice for his birth.
For he will be great in the sight of the Lord; and will drink neither wine nor strong drink; and he will be filled with the Holy Spirit from his very birth.
And many of the sons of Israel will he turn to the Lord their God.
And he will go before his face in the spirit and power of Elijah, to turn the hearts of fathers to children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the righteous, to make ready for the Lord a prepared people.
And Zachariah said to the angel, Whereby shall I know this? for I am an old man, and my wife is far advanced in years.
And the angel answering said to him, I am Gabriel, who stand in the presence of God; and I was sent to speak to thee, and to tell thee these glad tidings.
And lo! thou shalt be silent, and not able to speak, until the day when these things shall come to pass, because thou didst not believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their season.
And the people were looking for Zachariah, and wondering that he remained so long in the temple.
And on coming out, he was not able to speak to them; and they perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple; and he was beckoning to them, and remained speechless.
And it came to pass, when the days of his ministration were completed, that he returned to his house.
And after those days his wife Elizabeth conceived, and hid herself five months, saying,
Thus hath the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he looked on me to take away my reproach among men.
And in her sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a city of Galilee, called Nazareth,
to a virgin betrothed to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin's name was Mary.
And the angel came in to her and said, Hail, thou that art highly favored! the Lord is with thee.
And she was troubled at the words, and was considering what this salutation could mean.
And the angel said to her, Fear not, Mary; for thou hast found favor with God.
And lo! thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and hear a son, and shalt call his name Jesus.
He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Most High; and the Lord God will give to him the throne of David his father;
and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end.
Then said Mary to the angel, How shall this be, since I know not a man?
And the angel answering said to her, The Holy Spirit will come upon thee, and the power of the Most High will overshadow thee; wherefore the holy one that is to be born will be called the Son of God.
And lo! Elizabeth, thy kinswoman, she also hath conceived a son in her old age; and this is the sixth month with her who is called barren.
For nothing will be impossible with God.
And Mary said, Lo, the handmaid of the Lord! May it be to me according to thy word. And the angel departed from her.
And Mary arose and went in those days into the hill-country with haste, into a city of Judah.
And she entered the house of Zachariah, and saluted Elizabeth.
And it came to pass, when Elizabeth heard the salutation of Mary, that the babe leaped in her womb; and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit,
and cried out with a loud voice, and said, Blessed art thou among women; and blessed is the fruit of thy womb!
And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?
For lo! as soon as the voice of thy salutation came to my ears, the babe leaped in my womb in exultation.
And blessed is she who hath believed that there will be an accomplishment of those things which were told her from the Lord.
And Mary said, My soul magnifieth the Lord,
and my spirit hath exulted in God my Saviour;
for he hath looked upon the low estate of his handmaiden. For lo! from this time all generations will call me blessed;
for the Mighty One hath done great things for me; and holy is his name;
and his mercy is from generation to generation on them that fear him.
He hath wrought mightily with his arm; he hath scattered the proud in the device of their heart.
He hath cast down princes from thrones, and exalted men of low degree.
The hungry he hath filled with good things, and the rich he hath sent away empty.
He hath given help to Israel his servant, in remembrance of his mercy
toward Abraham and his offspring for ever, as he spoke to our fathers.
And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to her own house.
Now Elizabeth's full time came that she should be delivered; and she brought forth a son.
And her neighbors and her kinsfolk heard that the Lord had showed great mercy toward her; and they rejoiced with her.
And it came to pass that on the eighth day they came to circumcise the child; and they were about to call him Zachariah, after the name of his father.
And his mother answering said, Not so; but he shall be called John.
And they said to her, There is no one of thy kindred that is called by this name.
And they made signs to his father, how he would have him named.
And he asked for a writing-tablet, and wrote, saying, His name is John. And they all marveled.
And his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue was loosed; and he spoke, blessing God.
And fear came on all that dwelt around them; and all these things were talked of throughout the whole of the hill-country of Judaea.
And all that heard them laid them up in their hearts, saying, What then will this child be? For the hand of the Lord was with him.
And Zachariah his father was filled with the Holy Spirit, and prophesied, saying,
Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel! for he hath visited and redeemed his people,
and hath raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of David his servant,—
as he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets of old,
salvation from our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us,
to accomplish his mercy toward our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant,
the oath which he swore to Abraham our father,
to grant to us, that being delivered from the hand of our enemies, we might worship him without fear,
in holiness and righteousness before him, all our days.
And thou, child, shalt be called a prophet of the Most High; for thou shalt go in advance before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways,
to give knowledge of salvation to his people in the remission of their sins
through the tender mercy of our God, whereby the day-spring from on high hath visited us,
to give light to those sitting in darkness and the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace.
And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit; and was in the deserts till the day of his manifestation to Israel.
And it came to pass in those days that there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the world should be registered.
(This registering was the first made while Quirinius was governor of Syria.)
And all went to be registered, each to his own city.
And Joseph also went up from Galilee out of the city of Nazareth into Judaea, to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and lineage of David,
to be registered with Mary who had been betrothed to him, who was with child.
And it came to pass, while they were there, that the days for her delivery were completed.
And she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swathing-clothes, and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the inn.
And there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field, and keeping watch over their flock by night.
And an angel of the Lord came to them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them; and they were in great fear.
And the angel said to them, Fear not; for lo! I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to the whole people;
for to you hath been born this day, in the city of David, a Saviour, who is the Christ, the Lord.
And this shall be the sign to you: Ye shall find a babe wrapped in swathing-clothes, [[lying]] in a manger.
And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying,
“Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace among men of good will!”
And it came to pass, when the angels had gone away from them into heaven, that the shepherds said one to another, Let us go at once to Bethlehem, and see that which hath come to pass, which the Lord hath made known to us.
And they came with haste, and found Mary and Joseph, and the babe lying in the manger.
And when they had seen it, they made known abroad what had been told them concerning this child.
And all who heard wondered at the things which were told them by the shepherds.
But Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart.
And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all which they had heard and seen, as had been told them.
And when eight days were completed for him to be circumcised, his name was called Jesus, the name given by the angel before he was conceived in the womb.
And when the days of their purification according to the law of Moses were completed, they brought him to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord,
as it is written in the law of the Lord: “Every first-born male shall be called holy to the Lord,”
and to offer a sacrifice, according to what is directed in the law of the Lord: “A pair of turtle doves, or two young pigeons.”
And lo! there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon; and he was a righteous and devout man, waiting for the consolation of Israel. And the Holy Spirit was upon him;
and it had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit, that he should not see death before he had seen the Christ of the Lord.
And he came in the Spirit into the temple; and when the parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for him according to the custom of the law,
he took him in his arms, and blessed God, and said,
Lord! now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word;
for mine eyes have seen thy salvation,
which thou hast prepared before the face of all the peoples;
a light to enlighten the gentiles, and to be the glory of thy people Israel.
And his father and his mother marveled at what was spoken concerning him.
And Simeon blessed them, and said to Mary his mother, Behold, this child is appointed for the fall and rising of many in Israel, and for a sign that will be spoken against;—
yea, a sword will pierce through thine own soul,—that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.
And there was Anna, a prophetess, daughter of Phanuel: of the tribe of Asher; she was of great age, and had lived with a husband seven years from her virginity;
and she was a widow eighty-four years old, who never left the temple, worshipping with fastings and prayers night and day.
And she came up at this very time, and gave thanks to God, and spoke of him to all that were looking for the redemption of Jerusalem.
And when they had performed all things according to the law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee, to their own city Nazareth.
And the child grew, and waxed strong, being filled with wisdom; and the grace of God was upon him.
Now his parents used to go yearly to Jerusalem at the feast of the passover.
And when he was twelve years old, and they went up, after the custom of the feast,
and had completed the days, on their returning, the child Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem; and his parents did not know it,
but, supposing him to be in the company, went a day's journey; and they sought him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance;
and not finding him, they returned to Jerusalem in search of him.
And it came to pass, that after three days they found him in the temple sitting in the midst of the teachers, both listening to them and asking them questions.
And all who heard him were astonished at his understanding and his answers.
And when they saw him, they were amazed; and his mother said to him, Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us? behold, thy father and I have been seeking thee in much distress.
And he said to them, Why is it that ye have been seeking me? Did ye not know that I must be about my Father's business?
And they understood not what he spoke to them.
And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject to them. And his mother kept all these things in her heart.
And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and men.
Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judaea, and Herod tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of Ituraea and of the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene,
when Annas and Caiaphas were high-priests, the word of God came to John, the son of Zachariah, in the wilderness.
And he came into all the country about the Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins;
as it is written in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet: “The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord, make straight his paths!
Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be made low; and the crooked places shall be made straight, and the rough ways smooth;
and all flesh shall see the salvation of God.”
He said therefore to the multitudes that came forth to be baptized by him, Brood of vipers, who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance; and begin not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham for our father; for I say to you, that God is able out of these stones to raise up children to Abraham.
And already also is the axe lying at the root of the trees; every tree therefore that beareth not good fruit is to be cut down, and cast into the fire.
And the multitudes asked him, saying, What then must we do?
He answered and said to them, He that hath two coats, let him impart to him that hath none; and he that hath food, let him do likewise.
And there came also publicans to be baptized, and said to him, Teacher, what must we do?
And he said to them, Exact no more than hath been ordered you.
And soldiers also asked him, saying, And what must we do? And he said to them, Do violence to no one, accuse no one falsely, and be content with your wages.
And while the people were in expectation, and all were considering in their hearts concerning John, whether he were the Christ,
John answered and said to them all, I indeed baptize you with water; but he who is mightier than I is coming, the latchet of whose sandals I am not worthy to loose; he will baptize you in the Holy Spirit and in fire.
His winnowing-shovel is in his hand to thoroughly cleanse his threshing-floor, and gather the wheat into his garner; but the chaff he will burn up with unquenchable fire.
And giving many other exhortations he published the glad tidings to the people.
But Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him on account of Herodias the wife of his brother, and on account of all the evil deeds which Herod had done,
added this also to them all, that he shut up John in prison.
And it came to pass, when all the people had been baptized, and Jesus also had been baptized, and was praying, that the heaven was opened,
and the Holy Spirit descended upon him in a bodily shape as a dove; and a voice came from heaven: “Thou art my beloved Son; with thee I am well pleased.”
And Jesus himself was, when he began, about thirty years of age, being, as was supposed, the son of Joseph, who was the son of Heli,
who was the son of Matthath, who was the son of Levi, who was the son of Melchi, who was the son of Jannai, who was the son of Joseph,
who was the son of Mattathias, who was the son of Amos, who was the son of Nahum, who was the son of Esli, who was the son of Naggai,
who was the son of Maath, who was the son of Mattathias, who was the son of Shimei, who was the son of Josech, who was the son of Joda,
who was the son of Joanan, who was the son of Rhesa, who was the son of Zerubbabel, who was the son of Shealtiel, who was the son of Neri,
who was the son of Melchi, who was the son of Addi, who was the son of Kosam, who was the son of Elmadam, who was the son of Er,
who was the son of Jesus, who was the son of Eliezer, who was the son of Jorim, who was the son of Matthath, who was the son of Levi,
who was the son of Simeon, who was the son of Judah, who was the son of Joseph, who was the son of Jonam, who was the son of Eliakim,
who was the son of Melea, who was the son of Menna, who was the son of Mattatha, who was the son of Nathan, who was the son of David,
who was the son of Jesse, who was the son of Obed, who was the son of Boaz, who was the son of Salma, who was the son of Nahshon,
who was the son of Amminadab, who was the son of Admin, who was the son of Arni, who was the son of Hezron, who was the son of Pharez, who was the son of Judah,
who was the son of Jacob, who was the son of Isaac, who was the son of Abraham, who was the son of Terah, who was the son of Nahor,
who was the son of Serug, who was the son of Reu, who was the son of Peleg, who was the son of Eber, who was the son of Shelah,
who was the son of Cainan, who was the son of Arphaxad, who was the son of Shem, who was the son of Noah, who was the son of Lamech,
who was the son of Methuselah, who was the son of Enoch, who was the son of Jared, who was the son of Mahalaleel, who was the son of Cainan,
who was the son of Enos, who was the son of Seth, who was the son of Adam, who was the son of God.
And Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan, and was led in the Spirit in the wilderness
forty days, tempted by the Devil. And he ate nothing in those days; and when they were ended, he was hungry.
And the Devil said to him, If thou art the Son of God, command this stone that it become a loaf of bread.
And Jesus answered him, It is written, “Not on bread alone shall man live.”
And taking him up, he showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.
And the Devil said to him, All this power will I give thee, and their glory; because to me it hath been delivered, and I give it to whomever I will.
If thou then wilt worship me, it shall all be thine.
And Jesus answering said to him, It is written, “Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.”
And he brought him to Jerusalem, and set him on the pinnacle of the temple, and said to him, If thou art the Son of God, cast thyself down from hence;
for it is written, “He will give his angels charge concerning thee, to guard thee;
and in their hands they will bear thee up, that thou mayst not dash thy foot against a stone.”
And Jesus answering said to him, It hath been said, “Thou shalt not make trial of the Lord thy God.”
And when he had brought every temptation to an end, the Devil departed from him for a season.
And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee; and there went out a report concerning him through all the surrounding country
And he taught in their synagogues, honored by all.
And he came to Nazara, where he had been brought up, and, as his custom was, he went into the synagogue on the sabbath-day; and stood up to read.
And there was delivered to him the book of the prophet Isaiah; and unrolling the book, he found the place where it was written,
“The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he anointed me to preach glad tidings to the poor; he hath sent me to proclaim deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty the oppressed,
to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord.”
And rolling up the book, he gave it back to the attendant, and sat down; and the eyes of all in the synagogue were fixed upon him.
And he began to say to them, To-day hath this scripture been fulfilled in your ears.
And they all spoke in his praise, and wondered at the words of grace which proceeded from his mouth; and they said, Is not this Joseph's son?
And he said to them, Ye will doubtless say to me this proverb, “Physician, heal thyself;” whatever things we have heard of as having been done in Capernaum, do here too in thy own country.
And he said, Truly do I say to you, No prophet is acceptable in his own country.
But I tell you in truth, that there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, and there was a great famine throughout all the land;
and yet to none of them was Elijah sent, but to Sarepta in Sidonia, to a woman that was a widow.
And there were many lepers in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet; and not one of them was cleansed, but only Naaman the Syrian.
And all in the synagogue, when they heard this, were filled with wrath.
And they rose up, and forced him out of the city and took him to the brow of the hill on which their city was built, to cast him down headlong;
but he, passing through the midst of them, went away.
And he came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and was teaching them on the sabbath.
And they were astonished at his teaching; for his word was with authority.
And in the synagogue there was a man having a spirit of an unclean demon, and he cried out with a loud voice,
Ha! what have we to do with thee, Jesus of Nazareth? Thou hast come to destroy us. I know who thou art, the Holy One of God.
And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Be silent, and come out of him. And the demon threw him down in the midst, and came out of him, having done him no hurt.
And all were amazed; and they spoke with one another, saying, What kind of word is this, that with authority and power he commandeth the unclean spirits, and they come out?
And there went out a report concerning him into every place of the surrounding country.
And he arose and went from the synagogue into the house of Simon. And Simon's wife's mother was seized with a great fever; and they besought him for her.
And standing over her, he rebuked the fever, and it left her. And immediately she arose and waited on them.
And when the sun was setting, all who had any sick with divers diseases brought them to him; and he laid his hands on every one of them, and healed them.
And demons also came out from many, crying out, and saying, Thou art the Son of God. And he rebuked them, and did not suffer them to speak, because they knew that he was the Christ.
And when it was day, he went out, and betook himself to a desert place; and the multitudes went in search of him; and they came to him, and would have prevented him from leaving them.
But he said to them, I must publish the good tidings of the kingdom of God to the other cities also; because for this I was sent forth.
And he continued to preach in the synagogues of Galilee.
And it came to pass, as the multitude was pressing upon him and hearing the word of God, that he was standing by the lake of Gennesaret,
and saw two boats standing by the lake; but the fishermen had gone out of them, and had washed the nets.
And going into one of the boats, which was Simon's, he asked him to put out a little from the land. And sitting down in the boat, he taught the multitudes.
And when he had done speaking, he said to Simon, Put out into deep water, and let down your nets for a draught.
And Simon answering said, Master, we toiled all night, and took nothing; but at thy word I will let down the nets.
And having done this, they inclosed great multitude of fishes; and their nets began to break.
And they beckoned to their partners in the other boat, to come and help them; and they came, and filled both the boats, so that they began to sink.
And Simon Peter seeing it fell down at the knees of Jesus, saying, Depart from me, Lord, for I am a sinful man.
For he and all that were with him were amazed at the draught of fishes, which they had taken;
and so were also James and John the sons of Zebedee, who were partners with Simon And Jesus said to Simon, Fear not; henceforth thou shalt catch men.
And when they had brought their boats to land, they left everything, and followed him.
And it came to pass, when he was in one of the cities, lo! a man full of leprosy; and seeing Jesus, he fell on his face, and besought him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst cleanse me.
And he put forth his hand and touched him, saying, I will; be thou cleansed. And immediately the leprosy left him.
And he charged him to tell no one: but go, and show thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing as Moses commanded, for a testimony to them.
But so much the more went abroad the report concerning him; and great multitudes came together to hear, and to be healed of their infirmities.
But he was wont to withdraw to desert places, and pray.
And it came to pass on a certain day, that he was teaching, and there were sitting by Pharisees and teachers of the law, who had come from every town of Galilee and Judea, and from Jerusalem; and the power of the Lord was present that he might heal.
And lo! men brought on a bed a man that was palsied; and they endeavored to bring him in, and to set him before him.
And not finding any way to bring him in because of the multitude, they went upon the house-top, and let him down through the tiling with the couch into the midst before Jesus.
And seeing their faith, he said, Man, thy sins have been forgiven thee.
And the scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, Who is this that speaketh blasphemies? Who can forgive sins but God alone?
But Jesus, perceiving their thoughts, answered and said to them, What are ye thinking in your hearts?
Which is easier? to say, Thy sins have been forgiven thee? or to say, Arise, and walk?
But that ye may know that the Son of man hath authority on earth to forgive sins,—he said to the palsied man,—I say to thee, Arise, and take up thy couch, and go to thy house.
And he immediately rose up before them, and took up that whereon he lay, and went away to his house, giving glory to God.
And amazement seized them all, and they gave glory to God, and were filled with fear, saying, We have seen strange things to-day.
And after these things he went out, and saw a publican named Levi, sitting at the custom-house; and he said to him, Follow me.
And leaving everything, he arose and followed him.
And Levi made a great feast for him at his house, and there was a great company of publicans and others, who were reclining at table with them.
And the Pharisees and their scribes murmured against his disciples, saying, Why do ye eat and drink with the publicans and sinners?
And Jesus answering said to them, They who are well do not need a physician, but they who are sick.
I have not come to call righteous men, but sinners to repentance.
And they said to him, The disciples of John fast often, and make prayers, and likewise those of the Pharisees; but thine eat and drink.
But Jesus said to them, Can ye make the companions of the bridegroom fast while the bridegroom is with them?
But the days will come—and when the bridegroom is taken from them, then will they fast in those days.
And he spoke also a parable to them: No one taketh a patch from a new garment and putteth it upon an old one; for then both the new garment would be rent, and the patch from the new garment would not match with the old.
And no one putteth new wine into old skins; for the new wine would burst the skins, and would itself run out, and the skins would be spoilt.
But new wine must be put into new skins.
And no one, having drunk old wine, desireth new; for he saith, The old is good.
And it came to pass on the second sabbath after the first, that he was going through grain-fields; and his disciples plucked the ears of grain, and ate them, rubbing them with their hands.
And some of the Pharisees said, Why are ye doing that which it is not lawful to do on the sabbath?
And Jesus answering them, said, Have ye not even read what David did, when he was himself hungry, and they who were with him?
how he went into the house of God, and took and ate the show-bread, and gave it also to those who were with him, which it is not lawful for any to eat but the priests alone?
And he said to them, The Son of man is lord even of the sabbath.
And it came to pass on another sabbath, that he entered into the synagogue, and taught; and there was a man there whose right hand was withered.
And the scribes and the Pharisees were watching whether he would heal on the sabbath, that they might find an accusation against him.
But he knew their thoughts; and he said to the man having the withered hand, Rise, and stand up in the midst. And he arose, and stood up.
And Jesus said to them, I ask you whether it is lawful on the sabbath to do good, or to do evil; to save life, or to kill?
And looking round on them all, he said to him, Stretch forth thy hand. And he did so; and his hand was restored.
But they were filled with madness, and conferred with one another as to what they should do to Jesus.
And it came to pass in those days, that he went out into the mountain to pray; and he continued all night in prayer to God.
And when it was day, he called to him his disciples; and he chose from them twelve, whom he also named apostles;
Simon, whom he named Peter, and Andrew his brother, and James and John, and Philip and Bartholomew,
and Matthew and Thomas, and James the Son of Alphaeus, and Simon called the zealot,
and Judas the brother of James, and Judas Iscariot, who became a traitor.
And he came down with them, and stood on a level place with a great multitude of his disciples, and a great crowd of the people from all Judaea and Jerusalem and the sea-coast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases.
And they that were harassed with unclean spirits were cured.
And the whole multitude sought to touch him, because power went out of him and healed all.
And raising his eyes toward his disciples, he said, Blessed are ye poor; for yours is the kingdom of God.
Blessed are ye that hunger now; for ye will be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now; for ye will laugh.
Blessed are ye when men hate you, and when they exclude you, and revile and cast out your name as evil, on account of the Son of man.
Rejoice in that day, and leap for joy; for lo! your reward is great in heaven; for thus their fathers did to the prophets.
But woe to you that are rich! for ye have received your consolation.
Woe to you that are full now! for ye will hunger. Woe to you that laugh now! for ye will mourn and weep.
Woe, when all men speak well of you! for so did their fathers of the false prophets.
But I say to you who hear: Love your enemies; do good to those who hate you;
bless those who curse you; pray for those who are spiteful to you.
To him that smiteth thee on one cheek, offer also the other; and him that taketh away thy cloak, forbid not to take thy coat also.
Give to every one that asketh of thee; and from him that taketh away thy goods, demand them not again.
And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also in like manner to them.
And if ye love those who love you, what thanks do ye deserve? for sinners also love those who love them.
For if ye do good to those who do good to you, what thanks do ye deserve? even sinners do the same.
And if ye lend to those from whom ye expect to receive, what thanks do ye deserve? even sinners lend to sinners, to receive as much in return.
But love your enemies, and do good and lend, despairing of no one; and your reward will be great, and ye will be sons of the Most High; for he is kind to the unthankful and wicked.
Be merciful, as your Father is merciful.
And judge not, and ye will not be judged; and condemn not, and ye will not be condemned; forgive, and ye will be forgiven;
give, and it will be given to you; good measure, pressed down, shaken together, running over, will men give into your bosom; for with what measure ye mete, it will be measured to you in return.
And he spoke also a parable to them: Can the blind lead the blind? Will they not both fall into a ditch?
A disciple is not above his teacher; but every one when fully instructed will be as his teacher.
And why dost thou look at the mote in thy brother's eye, and not perceive the beam that is in thine own eye?
How canst thou say to thy brother, Brother, let me take out the mote that is in thine eye, when thou thyself perceivest not the beam in thine own eye? Hypocrite! first cast the beam out of thine own eye, and then thou wilt see clearly to take out the mote that is in thy brother's eye.
For there is no good tree that beareth bad fruit; and again, there is no bad tree that beareth good fruit.
For every tree is known by its own fruit; for from thorns men do not gather figs, nor from a bramble-bush do they gather grapes.
The good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is good; and the evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth that which is evil; for out of the abundance of his heart his mouth speaketh.
But why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?
Every one that cometh to me and heareth my sayings and doeth them, I will show you whom he is like.
He is like a man building a house, who dug deep, and laid its foundation on a rock; and when a flood arose, the stream dashed against that house, and could not shake it; because it was well built.
But he that heareth and doeth not, is like a man that built a house upon the earth without a foundation; against which the stream dashed, and it fell at once, and the ruin of that house was great.
When he had ended all his discourse in the hearing of the people, he entered Capernaum.
And a certain centurion's servant, who was dear to him, was sick, and about to die.
And having heard about Jesus, he sent to him elders of the Jews, and besought him to come and save his servant.
And they came to Jesus, and besought him earnestly, saying, He is worthy that thou shouldst do this for him;
for he loveth our nation, and himself built the synagogue for us.
And Jesus went with them. And when he was now not far from the house, the centurion sent friends, saying, Lord, trouble not thyself; for I am not worthy that thou shouldst come under my roof;
on which account I did not think myself worthy to come to thee; but command with a word, and let my servant be healed.
For even I am a man set under authority, having soldiers under me; and I say to this one, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it.
And Jesus hearing this, wondered at him; and turning round said to the multitude that followed him, I say to you, Not even in Israel have I found such faith.
And they who were sent, returning to the house, found the servant well.
And it came to pass the day after, that he was going to a city called Nain; and many of his disciples were with him, and a great multitude.
And as he came near the gate of the city, lo! there was carried out dead an only son of his mother, and she was a widow; and a great multitude from the city was with her.
And when the Lord saw her, he was moved with compassion for her, and said to her, Weep not.
And he came up, and touched the bier; and they who bore it stood still; and he said, Young man, I say to thee, Rise.
And he that was dead sat up and began to speak; and he gave him to his mother.
And fear seized on all, and they gave glory to God, saying, A great prophet hath risen up among us; and, God hath visited his people.
And this report about him went forth in all Judaea, and in all the neighboring country.
And the disciples of John told him all these things.
And calling to him two of his disciples, John sent them to the Lord, saying, Art thou he that is to come, or are we to look for another?
And the men came to him and said, John the Baptist hath sent us to thee, saying, Art thou he that is to come, or are we to look for another?
In that hour he cured many of diseases, and plagues, and evil spirits, and to many who were blind he gave sight.
And he answered and said to them, Go and tell John what ye have seen and heard; that the blind receive sight, the lame walk, lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, to the poor good tidings are brought;
and blessed is he, whoever shall find no occasion of stumbling in me.
And when the messengers of John had departed, he began to say to the multitudes concerning John, What have ye gone out into the wilderness to see? the reeds shaken by the wind?
But what have ye gone out to see? a man clothed in soft raiment? Lo! they who wear gorgeous apparel, and live luxuriously, are in kings' palaces.
But what have ye gone out to see? A prophet? Yea, I say to you, and more than a prophet.
This is he of whom it is written, “Lo! I send my messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee.”
I say to you, Among those born of women there is no greater prophet than John; but he that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.
And all the people when they heard him, and the publicans, acknowledged God as righteous by being baptized with the baptism of John.
But the Pharisees and the lawyers rejected the purpose of God toward themselves, not being baptized by him.
To what then shall I compare the men of this generation, and what are they like?
They are like children sitting in the market-place, and calling one to another, saying, We piped to you, and ye did not dance; we sung a dirge, and ye did not weep.
For John the Baptist hath come not eating bread, nor drinking wine; and ye say, He hath a demon.
The Son of man hath come eating and drinking; and ye say, Behold, a glutton and a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners!
But wisdom is acknowledged by all her children.
And one of the Pharisees asked him to eat with him; and he went into the Pharisee's house, and reclined at the table.
And lo! a woman who was in the city, a sinner, learning that he was at table in the Pharisee's house, brought an alabaster-bottle of ointment,
and standing behind at his feet, weeping, began to wet his feet with tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment.
And the Pharisee who had invited him, when he saw this, said within himself, This man, if he were a prophet, would know who, and what sort of woman, this is that toucheth him; for she is a sinner.
And Jesus answering said to him, Simon, I have somewhat to say to thee. And he saith, Teacher, say on.
A certain money-lender had two debtors; one owed five hundred denaries, and the other fifty.
When they had nothing to pay, he freely remitted the debt of both. Which of them, now, will love him the most?
Simon answering said, He, I suppose, to whom he remitted the most. And he said to him, Thou hast judged rightly.
And turning to the woman, he said to Simon, Seest thou this woman? I entered thy house, no water didst thou give me for my feet; but she wet my feet with tears, and wiped them with her hair.
No kiss didst thou give me; but she, from the time I came in, did not cease to kiss my feet.
My head with oil thou didst not anoint; but she anointed my feet with costly ointment.
Wherefore, I say to thee, her many sins have been forgiven; for she loved much; but he to whom little is forgiven loveth little.
And he said to her, Thy sins have been forgiven.
And those who were at table with him began to say within themselves, Who is this that even forgiveth sins?
But he said to the woman, Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace.
And it came to pass afterward, that he journeyed through cities and villages, preaching and publishing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God; and the twelve were with him,
and certain women who had been cured of evil spirits and infirmities, Mary called Magdalene, out of whom had come seven demons,
and Joanna, the wife of Chuzas, Herod's steward, and Susanna, and many others, who afforded them aid from their substance.
And a great multitude collecting together, and people from the cities going out to him, he spoke by a parable:
A sower went forth to sow his seed; and as he sowed, some seeds fell by the way-side; and they were trodden down, and the birds of the air devoured them.
And others fell upon rocky ground; and when they had sprung up they withered away, because they had no moisture.
And others fell among thorns; and the thorns sprung up with them, and choked them.
And others fell upon good ground, and sprung up, and bore fruit, a hundred-fold. While saying these things, he cried aloud, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.
And his disciples asked him what this parable meant.
And he said, To you it hath been given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God; but to others [[these things are spoken]] in parables; that while seeing they may not see, and while hearing they may not understand.
Now the meaning of the parable is this. The seed is the word of God.
Those by the way-side are they that hear; then cometh the Devil and taketh away the word from their heart, that they may not believe and be saved.
Those on the rocky ground are they who, when they hear, receive the word with joy; and these have no root; and for a while they believe, and in time of temptation fall away.
And those seeds which fell among the thorns, these are they who, when they have heard, go away and are choked with the cares and riches and pleasures of life, and bring no fruit to perfection.
But the seeds on the good ground, these are they who in an honest and good heart, when they have heard the word, hold it fast, and bear fruit with constancy.
And no one having lighted a lamp, covereth it with a vessel, or putteth it under a bed; but setteth it on a lampstand, that those who come in may see the light.
For nothing is secret, that will not be made manifest; nor hidden, that will not be known, and come to light.
Take heed therefore how ye hear; for whoever hath, to him will be given; and whoever hath not, from him will be taken even what he seemeth to have.
And his mother and his brothers came where he was, and could not get to him on account of the crowd.
And word was brought to him, Thy mother and thy brothers stand without, desiring to see thee.
And he answering said to them, My mother and my brothers are these, who hear the word of God, and do it.
Now it came to pass on a certain day, that he went into a boat with his disciples, and said to them, Let us go over to the other side of the lake; and they put off.
But as they were sailing, he fell asleep. And there came down a storm of wind on the lake, and they were filling with water, and were in jeopardy.
And they came and awoke him, saying, Master, master, we are perishing! And he rose, and rebuked the wind, and the surging of the water; and they ceased, and there was a calm.
And he said to them, Where is your faith? And they were afraid, and wondered, saying one to another, Who then is this, that he commandeth even the winds and the water, and they obey him?
And they sailed to the country of the Gergesenes, which is over against Galilee.
And when he had landed, there met him a certain man out of the city who had demons, and for a long time had worn no clothes, and abode not in a house, but in the tombs.
And seeing Jesus, he cried out, and fell down before him, and said with a loud voice, What have I to do with thee, Jesus, Son of the most high God? I beseech thee, do not torment me.
For he was about to command the unclean spirit to come out of the man; for it had possessed him for a long time, and he had been kept bound and secured with chains and fetters; and bursting the bands, he had been driven by the demon into the wilderness.
And Jesus asked him, saying, What is thy name? And he said, Legion; because many demons had entered into him.
And they besought him not to command them to go away into the abyss.
Now there was there a herd of many swine feeding on the mountain; and they besought him to permit them to go into them. And he permitted them.
And the demons coming out of the man went into the swine; and the herd rushed down the steep into the lake, and were drowned.
And the herdsmen, seeing what was done, fled, and told the news in the city and in the country.
And they went out to see what had been done. And they came to Jesus and found the man from whom the demons had gone out sitting, clothed, and in his right mind, at the feet of Jesus; and they were afraid.
And they who had seen it told them how he that was possessed by demons was made well.
And the whole multitude in the surrounding country of the Gergesenes besought him to depart from them; for they were seized with great fear. And he went on board a boat and returned.
And the man out of whom the demons had gone besought him that he might be with him. But he sent him away, saying,
Return to thy house, and tell what great things God hath done for thee. And he went and published through the whole city what great things Jesus had done for him.
And it came to pass when Jesus returned, that the multitude welcomed him; for they were all waiting for him.
And lo! there came a man, named Jairus, and he was a ruler of the synagogue; and falling at the feet of Jesus, he besought him to come into his house;
for he had an only daughter, about twelve years of age, and she was dying. And as he went, the multitudes thronged him.
And a woman who had had an issue of blood twelve years, and had spent all her living upon physicians, and could not be cured by any one,
came up behind and touched the fringe of his garment; and immediately her issue of blood ceased.
And Jesus said, Who touched me? And when all denied it, Peter and those with him said, Master, the multitudes are thronging thee, and pressing against thee.
But Jesus said, Some one touched me; for I perceived that power went out from me.
And the woman, seeing that she was discovered, came trembling, and falling down before him declared before all the people for what cause she had touched him, and how she was cured immediately.
And he said to her, Daughter, thy faith hath made thee well; go in peace.
While he was yet speaking, there cometh one from the house of the ruler of the synagogue, saying, Thy daughter is dead; trouble not the Teacher any further.
But Jesus hearing this, answered him, Fear not; only believe, and she will be made well.
And going into the house, he suffered no one to go in with him but Peter and John and James, and the father of the maiden, and the mother.
And all were weeping, and lamenting for her. But he said, Weep not; she is not dead, but sleeping.
And they laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead.
But he took hold of her hand, and called aloud, saying, Maiden, arise!
And her spirit returned, and she immediately arose. And he ordered food to be given to her.
And her parents were amazed. But he charged them to tell no one what had been done.
And he called together the twelve, and gave them power and authority over all demons, and to cure diseases.
And he sent them out to proclaim the kingdom of God, and to heal.
And he said to them, Take nothing for the journey, neither a staff, nor a bag, nor bread, nor money, nor have two coats apiece.
And into whatever house ye enter, there abide, and from it take your departure.
And whoever shall not receive you, shake off, when ye leave that city, even the dust from your feet as a testimony against them.
And they departed, and went through the towns publishing the glad tidings, and performing cures everywhere.
And Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was taking place, and was perplexed; because it was said by some that John had risen from the dead;
and by some, that Elijah had appeared; and by others, that one of the old prophets had risen.
But Herod said, John I beheaded; but who is this, about whom I hear such things? And he sought to see him.
And the apostles returned and told him what they had done; and taking them with him, he withdrew privately to a city called Bethsaida.
But the multitudes, when they knew it, followed him; and he welcomed them, and spoke to them about the kingdom of God, and healed those who had need of healing.
And when the day began to decline, the twelve came and said to him, Send the multitude away, that they may go into the villages around, and the open country, and lodge, and get food; for we are here in a desert place.
But he said to them, Do ye give them food. And they said, We have not more than five loaves and two fishes, unless we ourselves should go and buy food for l all these people.
They were about five thousand men. And he said to his disciples, Make them lie down in companies of fifty.
And they did so, and made them all lie down.
Then he took the five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed them, and broke and gave them to the disciples to set before the multitude.
And they ate, and were all filled; and what remained to them of fragments was taken up, twelve baskets.
And it came to pass as he was in a private place praying, that his disciples were with him; and he asked them, saying, Who do the multitudes say that I am?
And they answering said, John the Baptist; and others, Elijah; and others, that one of the old prophets hath risen.
And he said to them, But who do ye say that I am? And Peter answering said, The Christ of God.
But he strictly charged them, and commanded them to tell this to no one;
saying, The Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be put to death, and rise again on the third day.
And he said to all, If any one chooseth to come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross daily, and follow me.
For whoever chooseth to save his life, will lose it; and whoever loseth his life for my sake, he will save it.
For what is a man profited, if he gain the whole world, and lose or forfeit himself?
For whoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, of him will the Son of man be ashamed, when be cometh in his glory, and that of his Father, and of the holy angels.
And I tell you in truth, that there are some of those standing here who will not taste of death, till they have seen the kingdom of God.
And it came to pass about eight days after this discourse, that he took with him Peter and John and James, and went up into the mountain to pray.
And while he was praying, the appearance of his countenance was changed, and his raiment became white and glistening.
And lo! two men were talking with him, who were Moses and Elijah;
who appeared in glory, and spoke of his departure which he was about to fulfill in Jerusalem.
But Peter and those who were with him were weighed down with sleep. But when they awoke, they saw his glory, and the two men that stood with him.
And it came to pass as they were parting from him, that Peter said to Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here; and let us make three tents, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah;—not knowing what he said.
But as he was saying this, there came a cloud and overshadowed them; and they were afraid as they entered the cloud.
And there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, “This is my chosen Son; hear him.”
And when the voice had come, Jesus was found alone. And they kept it secret, and told no one in those days anything of what they had seen.
And it came to pass that on the next day, when they had come down from the mountain, a great multitude met him.
And lo! a man from the multitude cried out, saying, Teacher, I beseech thee, look upon my son, for he is my only child;
and lo! a spirit seizeth him, and suddenly crieth out, and convulseth him so that he foameth, and it departeth from him hardly, taking away all his strength.
And I besought thy disciples to cast it out, and they could not.
And Jesus answering said, O unbelieving and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you, and bear with you? Bring thy son hither.
And while he was yet coming, the demon threw him down, and convulsed him. But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the child, and delivered him to his father.
And they were all amazed at the mighty power of God. But while they were all wondering at all the things which he did, he said to his disciples,
As for you, let these words sink into your ears; for the Son of man is about to be delivered up into the hands of men.
But they knew not the meaning of these words, and it was hidden from them, that they might not perceive it; and they were afraid to ask him about these words.
And there arose a reasoning among them, which of them was greatest.
And Jesus knowing the reasoning of their heart, took a child and set him by his side,
and said to them, Whoever receiveth this child in my name, receiveth me; and whoever receiveth me, receiveth him who sent me. For he that is least among you all, he is great.
And John answering said, Master, we saw one casting out demons in thy name, and we forbade him, because he doth not follow in our company.
But Jesus said to him, Forbid him not; for he that is not against you is for you.
And it came to pass, when the time was near for his being received up, that he himself steadily set his face to go to Jerusalem.
And he sent messengers before him; and they went and entered a city of the Samaritans, to make ready for him.
And they did not receive him, because his face was as if he were going to Jerusalem.
And the disciples James and John, on seeing it, said, Lord, wilt thou have us bid fire come down from heaven, and consume them?
But he turned and rebuked them.
And they went to another village.
And as they were traveling on the way, one said to him, I will follow thee wherever thou goest.
And Jesus said to him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have lodging-places; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head.
And he said to another, Follow me. But he said, Suffer me first to go and bury my father.
And he said to him, Let the dead bury their own dead; but go thou and carry the tidings of the kingdom of God.
And another also said, I will follow thee, Lord; but first let me bid farewell to those who are in my house.
And Jesus said to him, No one who looketh back after putting his hand to the plough is fit for the kingdom of God.
After these things, the Lord appointed also seventy others, and sent them two and two before him into every city and place where he himself was about to come.
And he said to them, The harvest is great, but the laborers are few. Pray therefore the Lord of the harvest to send forth laborers for his harvest.
Go forth; lo! I send you as lambs into the midst of wolves.
Carry no purse, no bag, no sandals; salute no one by the way.
And into whatever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house.
And if a son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it; if not, it shall return to you.
And abide in the same house, eating and drinking such things as they give; for the laborer is worthy of his wages. Do not go from house to house.
And into whatever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat what is set before you,
and heal the sick that are therein, and say to them, The kingdom of God hath come near to you.
But into whatever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go out into its streets and say,
Even the dust of your city that cleaveth to our feet we wipe off to you; but know this, that the kingdom of God hath come near.
And I tell you, that it will be more tolerable in that day for Sodom, than for that city.
Woe to thee, Chorazin! woe to thee, Bethsaida! for if the miracles that were done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would long ago have repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
But it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the judgment, than for you.
And thou, Capernaum! shalt thou be exalted to heaven? thou shalt be brought down to the underworld.
He that hearkeneth to you, hearkeneth to me; and he that rejecteth you, rejecteth me; but he that rejecteth me, rejecteth him that sent me.
And the seventy returned with joy, saying, Lord, even the demons are subject to us in thy name.
And he said to them, I saw Satan fall from heaven like lightning.
Lo! I have given you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the might of the enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you.
Yet rejoice not in this, that the spirits are subject to you; but rejoice that your names have been written in heaven.
In that hour he rejoiced in the Holy Spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that, though thou didst hide these things from the wise and discerning, thou didst reveal them to babes. Yea, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. And turning to the disciples he said,
All things were delivered to me by my Father; and no one knoweth who the Son is, but the Father; and who the Father is, but the Son, and he to whom it is the will of the Son to reveal him.
And turning to the disciples, he said privately, Blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye are seeing.
For I tell you that many prophets and kings desired to see the things which ye are seeing, and saw them not; and to hear the things which ye are hearing, and heard them not.
And lo! a certain lawyer stood up to try him, saying, Teacher, what shall I do to inherit everlasting life?
And he said to him, What is written in the Law? How readest thou?
And he answering said “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbor as thyself.”
And he said to him, Thou hast answered rightly; do this, and thou shalt live.
But he, wishing to justify himself, said to Jesus, And who is my neighbor?
Jesus answering said, A certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among robbers; who after stripping him of his raiment, and wounding him, departed, leaving him half dead.
And by chance a certain priest was going down on that road; and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side.
And in like manner also a Levite, having arrived at the place, came and saw, and passed by on the other side.
But a certain Samaritan, as he was journeying, came where he was, and when he saw him, had compassion,
and went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring on oil and wine, and setting him on his own beast, brought him to an inn, and took care of him.
And the next day, he took out two denaries and gave them to the host, and said, Take care of him; and whatever thou spendest more, I, when I come back, will repay thee.
Which of these three, dost thou think, was neighbor to him that fell among the robbers?
And he said, He that took pity on him. Then said Jesus to him, Go, and do thou likewise.
And it came to pass, as they journeyed, that he entered into a certain village; and a certain woman, named Martha, received him into her house.
And she had a sister called Mary, who sat down at the feet of the Lord, and listened to his word.
But Martha was cumbered about much serving; and she came to him, and said, Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? Tell her therefore to help me.
But the Lord answering said to her, Martha, Martha, thou art anxious and troubled about many things.
But one thing is needful. For Mary hath chosen the good part, which shall not be taken away from her.
And it came to pass, as he was in a certain place praying, that when he ceased one of his disciples said to him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John taught his disciples.
And he said to them, When ye pray, say, Father, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come;
give us day by day our daily bread;
and forgive us our sins, for even we ourselves forgive every one that is indebted to us; and lead us not into temptation.
And he said to them, Which of you shall have a friend, and shall go to him at midnight, and say to him Friend, lend me three loaves;
for a friend of mine hath come to me from a journey, and I have nothing to set before him?
And he from within shall answer and say, Trouble me not; the door is now shut, and I and my children are in bed; I cannot rise and give thee.
I say to you, though he will not rise and give him because he is his friend, yet because of his importunity he will rise and give him as many as he needeth.
And I say to you, Ask, and it will be given you; seek, and ye will find; knock, and the door will be opened to you.
For every one that asketh, receiveth; and he that seeketh, findeth; and to him that knocketh, the door will be opened.
And what father is there, among you, who, if his son ask for bread, will give him a stone? or if he ask for a fish, will instead of a fish give him a serpent?
or, if he ask for an egg, will give him a scorpion?
If ye then, though evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him!
And he was casting out a demon, and it was dumb; and it came to pass, when the demon had gone out, that the dumb man spoke. And the multitudes wondered.
But some of them said, He casteth out the demons through Beelzebul, the prince of the demons;
and others, to make trial of him, asked of him a sign from heaven.
But he, knowing their thoughts, said to them, Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; and house divided against house falleth.
And if Satan also be divided against himself, how shall his kingdom stand? For ye say that I cast out the demons through Beelzebul.
But if I cast out the demons through Beelzebul, through whom do your sons cast them out? Therefore shall they be judges of you.
But if I cast out the demons through the finger of God, then hath the kingdom of God already come to you.
When a strong man armed guardeth his palace, his goods are in peace;
but when one stronger than he cometh upon him and overcometh him, he taketh from him his whole armor wherein he trusted, and divideth his spoils.
He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad.
When the unclean spirit is gone out from a man, it goeth through dry places, seeking rest; and finding none, it saith, I will return to my house whence I came out.
And on coming, it findeth it swept and put in order.
Then it goeth, and taketh with it seven other spirits more wicked than itself, and they enter in, and dwell there; and the last state of that man becometh worse than the first.
And it came to pass, as he was saying these things, that a certain woman lifted up her voice from the crowd, and said to him, Blessed is the womb that bore thee, and the breasts from which thou drewest nourishment.
But he said, Blessed rather are they that hear the word of God and keep it.
And when the crowds were thronging about him, he began to say, This generation is a wicked generation; it seeketh a sign; and no sign will be given it, but the sign of Jonah.
For as Jonah was a sign to the Ninevites, so will also the Son of man be to this generation.
The queen of the south will rise up in the judgment with the men of this generation, and will condemn them; for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and lo! something more than Solomon is here.
The men of Nineveh will stand up in the judgment with this generation, and will condemn it; for they repented at the preaching of Jonah; and lo! something more than Jonah is here.
No one when he has lighted a lamp, puts it into a secret place, or under the bushel, but on the lamp-stand, that they who come in may see the light.
The lamp of the body is thine eye. When thine eye is clear, thy whole body also is in the light; but when it is disordered, thy body also is in darkness.
Take heed therefore, that the light which is within thee be not darkness.
If then thy whole body is enlightened, having no part dark, the whole will be as fully enlightened, as when a lamp with its bright shining giveth thee light.
And when he had done speaking, a Pharisee asked him to dine with him. And he went in and reclined at the table.
And the Pharisee, seeing it, wondered that he did not bathe before dinner.
But the Lord said to him, Now ye Pharisees cleanse the outside of the cup and the platter; but your inside is full of rapacity and wickedness.
Fools, did not he who made the outside, make the inside also?
But give what they contain in alms, and lo! all is clean to you.
But woe to you Pharisees! for ye pay tithes of the mint, and the rue, and every herb; and pass by justice and the love of God. These ought ye to have done, and not to leave those undone.
Woe to you Pharisees! for ye love the chief seats in the synagogues, and salutations in the markets.
Woe to you, for ye are as tombs which are unseen, and men walking over them know it not.
And one of the lawyers answering saith to him, Teacher, in saying these things, thou revilest us also.
And he said, To you lawyers also, woe! for ye load men with burdens grievous to be borne, and ye yourselves touch not the burdens with one of your fingers.
Woe to you! for ye build the tombs of the prophets, and your fathers killed them.
So then ye bear witness to and approve the deeds of your fathers; for they indeed killed them, and ye are building [[their tombs]].
Therefore the wisdom of God also said, I will send them prophets and apostles, and some of them they will kill and persecute;
that the blood of all the prophets, which hath been shed from the foundation of the world, may be required of this generation;
from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zechariah, who was slain between the altar and the temple. Yea, I tell you, it will be required of this generation.
Woe to you lawyers! because ye have taken away the key of knowledge; ye have not entered yourselves, and those who were entering ye have hindered.
And as he came out thence, the scribes and the Pharisees began to be very spiteful, and to press him to speak off hand about many things,
lying in wait to catch something out of his mouth.
In the mean time, when the multitude was gathered together in myriads, so that they trod one upon another, he began to say to his disciples first, Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
But there is nothing covered, that will not be revealed; and hid, that will not be known.
Therefore, whatever ye have said in darkness, will be heard in the light; and what ye have spoken in the ear in closets, will be proclaimed upon the house-tops.
And I say to you my friends, Fear not those who kill the body, and after this can do nothing more.
But I will warn you whom to fear; fear him who after he hath killed hath power to cast into hell; yea, I say to you, fear him.
Are not five sparrows sold for two pennies? and not one of them is forgotten before God.
But even the hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not: ye are of more value than many sparrows.
And I say to you, Every one that acknowledgeth me before men, him will the Son of man also acknowledge before the angels of God.
But he that hath denied me before men, shall be denied before the angels of God.
And every one that shall speak a word against the Son of man, it will be forgiven him; but to him that hath blasphemed against the Holy Spirit, it will not be forgiven.
And when they bring you to the synagogues and the magistrates and the authorities, be not anxious as to how or what ye shall answer, or what ye shall say;
for the Holy Spirit will teach you in that very hour what ye ought to say.
And one from the multitude said to him, Teacher, bid my brother divide the inheritance with me.
But he said to him, Man, who made me a judge or a divider over you?
And he said to them, Take heed and beware of all covetousness; for even when one hath great abundance, his life doth not depend upon his possessions.
And he spoke a parable to them, saying, The ground of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully.
And he thought within himself, saying, What shall I do? for I have not where to store my crops.
And he said, This will I do; I will pull down my barns, and build greater; and there will I store all my crops and my goods;
and I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast many goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, be merry.
But God said to him, Fool! this night will thy soul he required of thee; and whose will those things be which thou hast laid up?
So is he that layeth up treasure for himself, and is not rich towards God.
And he said to his disciples, Therefore I say to you, Be not anxious for the life, what ye shall eat; nor for the body, what ye shall put on.
The life is more than its food, and the body than its raiment.
Consider the ravens, that they neither sow nor reap; which have neither store-house, nor barn; and God feedeth them. Of how much greater value are ye than the birds!
And who of you can by anxious thought add a cubit to his life?
If then ye cannot do even that which is least, why are ye anxious about the rest?
Consider the lilies, that they neither spin nor weave; and yet I say to you, Not even Solomon in all his glory was arrayed like one of these.
But if God so clothes the herbage in the field, which is to-day, and tomorrow is cast into an oven, how much more will he clothe you, O ye of little faith!
And seek not ye what ye shall eat, and what ye shall drink; and be not of a doubtful mind.
For all these things do the nations of the world seek after; and your Father knoweth that ye have need of these things.
But rather seek his kingdom, and these things will also be given you.
Fear not, little flock! for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom.
Sell what ye have, and give alms. Make for yourselves purses which wax not old, treasure in the heavens that faileth not, where no thief approacheth, nor moth destroyeth.
For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
Let your loins be girded about, and your lamps burning;
and be yourselves like men waiting for the return of their lord from the wedding; that when he cometh and knocketh, they may open to him immediately.
Happy are those servants, whom their lord when he cometh shall find watching; truly do I say to you, that he will gird himself, and place them at table, and will come and wait on them.
And if in the second, or if in the third watch, he cometh and findeth them thus, happy are they.
And be sure of this, that if the master of the house had known at what hour the thief was coming, he would not have suffered his house to be broken through.
Be ye also ready; for at an hour when ye think not the Son of man cometh.
And Peter said to him, Lord, dost thou speak this parable to us, or also to all?
And the Lord said, Who then is the faithful, the wise steward, whom his lord will place over his household, to give the portion of food in due season?
Happy is that servant whom his lord, when he cometh, shall find so doing.
I say to you in truth, that he will place him in charge of all his substance.
But if that servant say in his heart, My lord is long in coming; and begin to beat the men-servants and maid-servants, and to eat and drink and be drunken,
the lord of that servant will come in a day when he looketh not for him, and at an hour when he is not aware, and will cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the unfaithful.
And that servant who knew his lord's will, and did not make ready, nor do according to his will, will be beaten with many stripes;
but he that knew not and did things worthy of stripes, will be beaten with few. And from every one to whom much hath been given, will much be required; and to whom much hath been entrusted, of him will the more be demanded.
I came to cast fire upon the earth; and what do I wish, if it hath been already kindled?
But I have a baptism to be baptized with; and how is my soul troubled, till it be accomplished!
Think ye that I came to give peace in the earth? I tell you, nay, but rather division.
For from this time forth five in one house will be divided, three against two, and two against three.
They will be divided, father against son, and son against father; mother against daughter, and daughter against mother; the mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law, and the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.
And he said also to the multitudes, When ye see a cloud rising in the west, ye say at once, A shower is coming; and it is so;
and when ye perceive the south wind blowing, ye say, It will be hot; and it cometh to pass.
Hypocrites! ye know how to judge of the face of the earth and the sky; but how is it that ye know not how to judge of this time
And why even of yourselves do ye not judge what is right?
When thou art going with thine adversary at law to the magistrate, take pains, while on the way, to be released by him; lest he drag thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and the officer cast thee into prison.
I tell thee, Thou wilt not come out thence, till thou hast paid the very last mite.
There were present also at the same time some who told him of the Galilaeans, whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices.
And he answering said to them, Do ye think that these Galilaeans were sinners above all the Galilaeans, because they have suffered such things?
I tell you, nay; but unless ye repent, ye will all in like manner perish.
Or those eighteen, on whom the tower in Siloam fell, and slew them, think ye that they were offenders above all the men that dwell in Jerusalem?
I tell you, nay; but unless ye repent, ye will all in like manner perish.
He spoke also this parable: A certain man had a fig-tree planted in his vineyard; and he came seeking fruit thereon, and found none.
Then said he to the vine-dresser, Lo! three years I have come seeking fruit on this fig-tree, and have found none; cut it down; why cumbereth it the ground?
And he answering saith to him, Lord, let it alone this year also; till I shall dig about it, and dung it;
and if it bear fruit hereafter, well; but if not, thou shalt cut it down.
And he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath.
And lo! there was a woman who had had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years; and she was bent together, and wholly unable to lift herself up.
And Jesus, seeing her, called to her, and said to her, Woman, thou art set free from thy infirmity.
And he laid his hands on her; and immediately she stood upright, and gave glory to God.
But the ruler of the synagogue answering, being filled with indignation because Jesus had performed a cure on the sabbath, said to the multitude, There are six days in which it is proper to work; on those therefore come and be cured, and not on the sabbath-day.
But the Lord answered him and said, Hypocrites, doth not each of you on the sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the stall, and lead him away and water him?
And ought not this woman, a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan hath bound, lo! for eighteen years, to be loosed from this bond on the sabbath-day?
And on his speaking thus, all his adversaries were ashamed; and all the multitude rejoiced for all the glorious things that were done by him.
He said therefore, To what is the kingdom of God like? and to what shall I compare it?
It is like a grain of mustard, which a man took, and cast into his garden; and it grew, and became a tree, and the birds of the air lodged in its branches.
And again he said, To what shall I liken the kingdom of God?
It is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.
And he went through the cities and villages, teaching, and journeying towards Jerusalem.
And one said to him, Lord, are there few that are to be saved? And he said to them,
Strive to enter in through the narrow door; for many, I say to you, will seek to enter in, and will not be able.
When once the master of the house shall have risen, and shut the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, open to us, and he answering shall say to you, I know not whence ye are;
then will ye begin to say, We ate and drank in thy presence, and thou didst teach in our streets.
And he will say, I tell you, I know not whence ye are; depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity.
There will be wailing and gnashing of teeth there, when ye see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, and yourselves thrust out.
And from the east and the west and the north and the south will men come, and take their places at table in the kingdom of God.
And lo! there are last who will be first, and there are first who will be last.
In the same hour there came certain Pharisees, saying to him, Depart, and go hence; for Herod designeth to kill thee.
And he said to them, Go, tell that fox, Lo! I cast out demons and perform cures to-day and to-morrow, and on the third day I make an end.
But to-day and to-morrow and the next day I must go on; for it cannot be that a prophet should perish out of Jerusalem.
Jerusalem! Jerusalem! that killeth the prophets, and stoneth those who are sent to her! How often would I have gathered thy children together, as a hen gathereth her brood under her wings, and ye would not!
Lo! your house is abandoned to you. I declare to you, Ye will not see me until the time come when ye shall say, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.
And it came to pass, when he had come into the house of one of the chief men of the Pharisees on the sabbath to eat bread, that they were watching him.
And lo! there was a certain man before him, who had the dropsy.
And Jesus answering spoke to the lawyers and Pharisees, saying, Is it lawful to cure on the sabbath, or not?
But they were silent. And taking hold of him, he cured him, and sent him away.
And he answered them and said, Who is there of you, who, if his son or his ox fall into a pit, will not immediately pull him out on the sabbath-day?
And they could make no answer to this.
And he spoke a parable to those who were invited, when he observed how they chose out the highest places at the table, saying to them,
When thou art invited by any one to a wedding, do not take the highest place, lest one more honorable than thou may have been invited by him;
and he who invited thee and him come and say to thee, Give place to this man; and then thou wilt begin with shame to take the lowest place.
But when thou art invited, go and recline in the lowest place, that when he who invited thee cometh, he may say to thee, Friend, go up higher. Then wilt thou have honor in the presence of all who are at table with thee.
For every one that exalteth himself will be humbled; and he that humbleth himself will be exalted.
And he said also to him who invited him, When thou makest a dinner or a supper, do not invite thy friends, nor thy brothers, nor thy kinsmen, nor rich neighbors; lest they too invite thee in return, and a recompense be made thee.
But when thou makest a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind;
and thou shalt be blessed, because they cannot recompense thee; but thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of the righteous.
And one of those who were at table with him, hearing this, said to him, Blessed is he who shall eat bread in the kingdom of God.
And he said to him, A certain man made a great supper, and invited many.
And at the hour of supper he sent his servant to say to those who had been invited, Come, for things are now ready.
And all with one accord began to excuse themselves. The first said to him, I have bought a piece of land, and must needs go out and see it; I pray that I may be excused.
And another said, I have bought five yoke of oxen, and am going out to try them; I pray that I may be excused.
And another said, I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come.
And the servant came, and reported these things to his lord. Then the master of the house, being angry, said to his servant, Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor, and the maimed, the blind, and the lame.
And the servant said, Lord, what thou didst command hath been done, and yet there is room.
And the lord said to the servant, Go out into the highways and hedges, and constrain them to come in, that my house may be filled.
For I say to you, that none of those men who were invited shall taste of my supper.
And great multitudes were going with him; and he turned and said to them,
If any one cometh to me, and hateth not his father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.
Whoever doth not bear his own cross and follow me, cannot be my disciple.
For which of you, intending to build a tower, doth not sit down first and count the cost, whether he hath the means to finish it?
lest haply when he hath laid a foundation, and is not able to finish, all that behold begin to make sport of him,
saying, This man began to build, and was not able to finish.
Or what king, setting out to give battle to another king, will not first sit down and consider whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him that cometh against him with twenty thousand?
Else, while the other is yet a great way off, he sendeth an embassy, and asketh conditions of peace.
So likewise, whoever of you doth not forsake all that he hath, cannot be my disciple.
Salt then is good; but if the salt itself have lost its savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned?
It is fit neither for the land, nor for the dunghill; men cast it out. He that hath ears, let him hear.
And all the publicans and the sinners were drawing near to him, to hear him.
And the Pharisees and the scribes murmured, saying, This man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them.
And he spoke to them this parable, saying,
What man of you having a hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, doth not leave the ninety-nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he findeth it?
And when he hath found it, he layeth it on his shoulders, rejoicing.
And when he hath come home, he calleth together his friends and neighbors, saying to them, Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost.
I say to you, that in like manner there will be joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety-nine righteous men who have no need of repentance.
Or what woman having ten pieces of silver, if she lose one piece, doth not light a lamp, and sweep the house, and search carefully till she findeth it?
And when she hath found it, she calleth together her friends and neighbors, saying, Rejoice with me; for I have found the piece which I lost.
I say to you, that thus there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth.
He said also, A certain man had two sons.
And the younger of them said to his father, Father, give me the portion of the property that falleth to me. And he divided to them his living.
And not many days after, the younger son gathered all together, and went abroad into a far country; and there wasted his substance in riotous living.
And when he had spent all, there arose a great famine in that country; and he began to be in want.
And he went and joined himself to one of the citizens of that country; and he sent him into his fields to feed swine.
And he longed to fill himself with the husks that the swine ate; and no one gave to him.
And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired servants of my father's have bread enough and to spare, and I perish here with hunger!
I will arise and go to my father, and will say to him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven and before thee;
I am no longer worthy to be called thy son; make me as one of thy hired servants.
And he arose, and went to his father. But when he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and was moved with compassion, and ran and fell on his neck, and kissed him.
And the son said to him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven and before thee; I am no longer worthy to be called thy son.
But the father said to his servants, Bring out the best robe, and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, and sandals on his feet.
And bring the fatted calf; kill it, and let us eat and make merry.
For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found. And they began to make merry.
Now his elder son was in the field; and as he came and drew near to the house, he heard music and dancing.
And calling one of the servants, he inquired what these things meant.
And he said to him, Thy brother is come; and thy father hath killed the fatted calf, because he hath received him safe and sound.
But he was angry, and would not go in; and his father came out, and entreated him.
And he answering said to his father, Lo! for so many years have I served thee, and never transgressed thy command; and yet to me thou never gavest a kid, that I might make merry with my friends.
But as soon as this thy son came, who devoured thy living with harlots, thou didst kill for him the fatted calf.
And he said to him, Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine.
It was meet that we should make merry and be glad; for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found.
And he said also to the disciples, There was a certain rich man, who had a steward; and the same was accused to him as wasting his goods.
And he called him, and said to him, What is this that I hear of thee? Give an account of thy stewardship; for thou canst be no longer steward.
Then the steward said within himself, What shall I do, now that my lord taketh away from me the stewardship? I cannot dig, I am ashamed to beg.
I am resolved what to do, that, when I am put out of the stewardship, I may be received into their houses.
So he called to him every one of his lord's debtors, and said to the first, How much dost thou owe my lord?
And he said, A hundred measures of oil. And he said to him, Take thy bond, and sit down quickly, and write fifty.
Then he said to another, And how much owest thou? And he said, A hundred measures of wheat. He saith to him, Take thy bond, and write eighty.
And the lord commended the unjust steward for having done wisely; for the sons of this world are wiser toward their generation than the sons of light.
And I say to you, Make to yourselves friends with the unrighteous mammon; that, when it faileth, ye may be received into everlasting habitations.
He that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much; and he that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much.
If therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit to your trust the true riches?
and if ye have not been faithful in that which is another's, who will give you that which is your own?
No servant can serve two masters; for either he will hate one, and love the other; or he will cleave to one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.
And the Pharisees, who were covetous, heard all this, and they derided him.
And he said to them, Ye are they who justify yourselves before men; but God knoweth your hearts; for that which is highly exalted among men is an abomination before God.
The Law and the Prophets were till John; from that time the glad tidings of the kingdom of God have been published, and every one is forcing his way into it.
But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away, than for one tittle of the law to fail.
Whoever putteth away his wife, and marrieth another, committeth adultery; and he who marrieth a woman that hath been put away from her husband, committeth adultery.
There was a certain rich man, who was clothed in purple and fine linen, and feasted sumptuously every day.
And a certain beggar named Lazarus was laid at his gate, full of sores,
and longing to be fed with what fell from the rich man's table. But even the dogs came and licked his sores.
And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried by the angels to the bosom of Abraham. The rich man also died and was buried.
And in the underworld he lifted up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom.
And he called and said, Father Abraham, have pity on me, and send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue; for I am tormented in this flame.
But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou didst receive thy good things in thy lifetime, and Lazarus in like manner his evil things; but now he is comforted here, and thou art tormented.
And besides all this, between us and you there is placed a great gulf, so that those who wish to cross from hence to you may not be able, and that those on that side cannot cross over to us.
Then he said, I pray thee then, father, to send him to my father's house;
for I have five brothers; that he may give earnest warning to them, that they too may not come into this place of torment.
But Abraham saith, They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them.
But he said, Nay, father Abraham; but if one should go to them from the dead, they would repent.
But he said to him, If they hear not Moses and the prophets, they will not be persuaded, though one should rise from the dead.
And he said to his disciples, It is impossible but that stumbling-blocks will come; but woe to him through whom they come!
It were better for him to have a millstone hung round his neck, and be cast into the sea, than to cause one of these little ones to fall away.
Take heed to yourselves. If thy brother sin, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him.
And if he sin against thee seven times in a day, and seven times turn to thee, saying, I repent, thou shalt forgive him.
And the apostles said to the Lord, Give us more faith.
But the Lord said, If ye had faith as a grain of mustard, ye might say to this sycamine-tree, Be plucked up by the roots, and planted in the sea! and it would obey you.
And which of you having a servant plowing, or feeding cattle, will say to him, when he hath come in from the field, Come immediately and place thyself at table?
Will he not rather say to him, Make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thyself and serve me till I have eaten and drunken, and afterward thou shalt eat and drink?
Doth he owe any thanks to that servant, because he did what was commanded?
So also do ye, when ye have done all that hath been commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants; we have done what we were bound to do.
And it came to pass, as he was going to Jerusalem, that he was traveling on the confines of Samaria and Galilee.
And as he entered into a certain village, there met him ten lepers, who stood afar off.
And they lifted up their voice, saying, Jesus, Master, have pity on us.
And when he saw them, he said to them, Go, show yourselves to the priests. And it came to pass, that, as they were on their way, they were cleansed.
And one of them, perceiving that he was freed from his disease, turned back, giving glory to God with a loud voice;
and he fell down on his face at his feet, giving thanks to him; and he was a Samaritan.
And Jesus answering said, Were not the ten cleansed? Where are the nine?
Were there none found returning to give glory to God but this foreigner?
And he said to him, Rise and go; thy faith hath made thee well.
And being asked by the Pharisees when the kingdom of God was coming, he answered them and said, The kingdom of God cometh not in such a manner as to be watched for;
nor will they say, Lo here! or there! for behold, the kingdom of God is in the midst of you.
And he said to the disciples, The days will come, when ye will desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, and will not see it.
And they will say to you, Lo there! lo here! Go not away, and follow not.
For as the lightning, that lighteneth out of one part under heaven, shineth to the other part under heaven, so will the Son of man be in his day.
But first he must suffer much, and be rejected by this generation.
And as it was in the days of Noah, so will it be also in the days of the Son of man.
They ate, they drank, they married, they were given in marriage, until the day when Noah entered the ark, and the flood came and destroyed them all.
In like manner, as it was in the days of Lot; they ate, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded;
but on the day when Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all.
Thus will it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed.
In that day, let not him who is upon the house-top, and whose furniture is in the house, come down to take it away; and he that is in the field, let him likewise not turn back.
Remember Lot's wife.
Whoever shall seek to save his life will lose it; and whoever shall lose it will preserve it.
I tell you, In that night there will be two men on one bed; one will be taken, and the other will be left.
Two women will be grinding together; one will be taken, and the other left.

And they answering say to him, Where, Lord? And he said to them, Where the body is, there also will the eagles be gathered together.
And he spoke a parable to them to show that they ought to pray always, and not be faint-hearted:
saying, There was in a certain city a judge, who feared not God, nor regarded man.
And there was a widow in that city; and she kept coming to him, saying, Avenge me of my adversary!
And he would not for some time. But afterward he said within himself, Though I neither fear God, nor regard man,
yet, because this widow troubleth me, I will avenge her; lest by coming for ever she weary me out.
And the Lord said, Hear what the unjust judge saith.
And will not God avenge his chosen, who cry to him day and night, though he be slow to punish in their behalf?
I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. But yet, when the Son of man cometh, will he find faith on the earth?
And to some who trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and despised all others, he spoke this parable:
Two men went up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee, and the other a publican.
The Pharisee stood and prayed by himself thus: O God, I thank thee that I am not as the rest of men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican.
I fast twice in the week; I give tithes of all that I gain.
But the publican, standing afar off, would not even lift up his eyes to heaven; but smote his breast, saying, O God, be merciful to me a sinner!
I tell you, this man went down to his house justified rather than the other; for every one that exalteth himself will be humbled; but he that humbleth himself will be exalted.
And they brought to him infants also, that he might touch them; and the disciples, on seeing it, rebuked them.
But Jesus called them to him, saying, Suffer the little children to come to me, and forbid them not; for to such belongeth the kingdom of God.
Truly do I say to you, Whoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, will not enter therein.
And a certain ruler asked him, saying, Good teacher, what shall I do to inherit everlasting life?
And Jesus said to him, Why dost thou call me good? None is good but one, that is, God.
Thou knowest the commandments: “Do not commit adultery; Do not kill; Do not steal; Do not bear false witness; Honor thy father and thy mother.”
And he said, All these have I kept from my youth.
And Jesus hearing this said to him, One thing thou still lackest: sell all that thou hast, and distribute to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me.
But when he heard this, he became very sorrowful; for he was very rich.
And Jesus seeing him said, How hardly do they that have riches enter the kingdom of God!
It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God.
And those who heard this said, Who then can be saved?
But he said, What is impossible with men is possible with God.
Then Peter said, Lo! we left what we had, and followed thee.
And he said to them, Truly do I say to you, There is no one that hath left house, or wife, or brothers, or parents, or children, for the sake of the kingdom of God,
who will not receive many fold more in the present time, and in the world to come everlasting life.
And taking the twelve aside, he said to them, Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and all that hath been written by the prophets concerning the Son of man will be accomplished.
For he will be delivered up to the gentiles, and will be mocked, and insulted, and spit upon;
and they will scourge him, and put him to death; and the third day he will rise again.
And they understood none of these things; and the meaning of these words was hidden from them, and they did not comprehend what was said.
And it came to pass, as he drew near to Jericho, that a certain blind man was sitting by the wayside begging.
And hearing a multitude passing by, he asked what this meant.
And they told him that Jesus of Nazareth was passing by.
And he cried out, saying, Jesus, Son of David, have pity on me!
And they who went before sharply bade him hold his peace. But he cried out the more, Son of David, have pity on me!
And Jesus stopped, and ordered him to be brought to him. And when he had come near, he asked him,
What dost thou wish me to do for thee? And he said, Lord, to restore my sight.
And Jesus said to him, Receive thy sight; thy faith hath saved thee.
And immediately he received his sight, and followed him, giving glory to God; and all the people on seeing it gave praise to God.
And he entered and was passing through Jericho.
And lo! a man named Zacchaeus; and he was a chief publican, and he was rich.
And he sought to see Jesus, what sort of man he was; and he could not on account of the multitude; because he was small of stature.
And he ran on before, and climbed up a sycamore-tree to see him; for he was to pass that way.
And when Jesus came to the place, he looked up, and said to him, Zacchaeas, make haste and come down; for today I must abide at thy house.
And he made haste and came down, and received him joyfully.
And when they saw it, they all murmured, saying, He hath gone in to be the guest of a sinner.
And Zacchaeus stood up, and said to the Lord, Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor; and if I have taken anything from any one by false representation, I restore him four-fold.
And Jesus said to him, This day hath salvation come to this house, inasmuch as he also is a son of Abraham;
for the Son of man came to seek and to save that which was lost.
And while they were hearing these things, he proceeded and spoke a parable, because he was near to Jerusalem, and they thought that the kingdom of God would immediately appear.
He said therefore, A certain nobleman went into a far country to receive for himself a kingdom, and to return.
And he called his ten servants, and gave them ten pounds, and said to them, Trade with these, till I come.
But his citizens hated him, and sent an embassy after him, saying, We will not have this man to reign over us.
And it came to pass, when he had returned, having received the kingdom, that he commanded these servants to whom he had given the money to be called to him, that he might know what each had gained by trading.
And the first came, saying, Lord, thy pound hath gained ten pounds.
And he said to him, Well done, good servant! because thou hast been faithful in a very little, have authority over ten cities.
And the second came, saying, Lord, thy pound hath gained five pounds.
And he said also to this servant, And be thou over five cities.
And another came, saying, Lord, behold thy pound, which I have kept laid up in a napkin.
For I feared thee, because thou art a harsh man; thou takest up what thou didst not lay down, and reapest what thou didst not sow.
He saith to him, Out of thy mouth will I judge thee, wicked servant! thou knewest that I was a harsh man, taking up what I laid not down, and reaping what I did not sow;
why then didst thou not put my money into a bank? Then I at my coming might have received it back with interest.
And he said to them that stood by, Take from him the pound, and give it to him that hath the ten pounds.
(And they said to him, He hath ten pounds, Lord.)
I say to you, that to every one who hath, will be given; but from him that hath not, even what he hath will be taken away.
But as for those enemies of mine, who would not that I should reign over them, bring them here, and slay them before me.
And when he had thus spoken, he went forward, going up to Jerusalem.
And it came to pass, as he drew near to Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount called the Mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples,
saying, Go to the village over against us; on entering which ye will find a colt tied, whereon no man ever sat; and loose, and bring it.
And if any one ask you, Why are ye loosing it? ye shall say thus, The Lord hath need of it.
And they who were sent went and found just as he told them.
And as they were loosing the colt, its owners said to them, Why are ye loosing the colt?
And they said, The Lord hath need of it.
And they brought it to Jesus; and having thrown their garments on the colt, they set Jesus thereon.
And as he went on, they spread their garments in the road.
And as he was drawing near, just at the descent of the Mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all the miracles which they had seen;
saying, Blessed be the King in the name of the Lord! Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest heavens!
And some of the Pharisees from among the multitude said to him, Teacher, rebuke thy disciples.
And he answering said, I tell you, that if these are silent, the stones will cry out.
And when he came near, as he beheld the city, he wept over it,
saying, If thou hadst known, even thou, and that in this thy day, the things that concern thy peace! but now they are hidden from thine eyes.
For the days will come upon thee, when thine enemies will cast up a mound about thee, and compass thee round, and shut thee in on every side,
and will level thee with the ground, and thy children within thee; and they will not leave in thee one stone upon another; because thou knewest not the time of thy visitation.
And entering the temple, he began to cast out those who sold,
saying to them, It is written, “And my house shall be a house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of robbers.”
And he was teaching daily in the temple; but the chief priests, and the scribes, and the leading men of the people sought to destroy him.
And they could not find an opportunity of doing any thing; for all the people hung upon him, listening.
And it came to pass, on one of those days, as he was teaching the people in the temple, and publishing the good tidings, that the priests and the scribes with the elders came upon him,
and spoke to him, saying, Tell us, by what authority doest thou these things? Or who is he that gave thee this authority?
And he answering said to them, I also will ask you a question; and tell me:
The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or from men?
And they reasoned among themselves, saying, If we say, From heaven, he will say, Why did ye not believe him?
But if we say, From men, all the people will stone us; for they are persuaded that John was a prophet.
And they answered, that they did not know whence it was.
And Jesus said to them, Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.
And he began to speak to the people this parable: A man planted a vineyard, and let it out to husbandmen, and went abroad for a long time.
And at the season he sent a servant to the husbandmen, that they should give him of the fruit of the vineyard; but the husbandmen beat him, and sent him away empty-handed.
And he sent still another servant; and they beat him also, and treated him shamefully, and sent him away empty-handed.
And he went on to send a third; and they wounded him also, and cast him out.
And the lord of the vineyard said, What shall I do? I will send my beloved son; perhaps they will respect him.
But when the husbandmen saw him, they reasoned among themselves, saying, This is the heir; let us kill him, that the inheritance may become ours.
So they cast him out of the vineyard, and killed him. What then will the lord of the vineyard do to them?
He will come and destroy these husbandmen, and will give the vineyard to others. And when they heard this, they said, God forbid!
But he, looking upon them, said, What then is this which is written, “The stone which the builders rejected, the same hath become the corner-stone”?
Every one who falleth upon that stone will be broken; but on whomever it falleth, it will grind him to powder.
And the scribes and the chief priests sought to lay hands on him in that hour, but they feared the people; for they knew that he spoke this parable against them.
And they kept watch on him, and sent forth spies feigning themselves to be righteous men, that they might take hold of his words, in order to deliver him up to the civil power and to the authority of the governor.
And they asked him, saying, Teacher, we know that thou sayest and teachest rightly, and hast no regard to the person of men, but teachest the way of God truly.
Is it lawful for us to give tribute to Caesar, or not?
But perceiving their craftiness, he said to them,
Show me a denary. Whose image and inscription hath it? And they answered and said, Caesar's.
And he said to them, Render then to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's.
And they could not take hold of his words before the people; and marveling at his answer, they held their peace.
Then some of the Sadducees, who deny that there is a resurrection, came to him, and asked him,
saying, Teacher, Moses wrote to us, “If a man's brother die, having a wife, and the same die without children, his brother shall take his wife, and raise up seed to his brother.”
Now there were seven brothers; and the first took a wife and died childless.
And the second
and the third took her; and in like manner also the seven left no children, and died.
At last the woman also died.
In the resurrection then, of which of them is the woman the wife? for the seven had her for a wife.
And Jesus said to them, The sons of this world marry, and are given in marriage;
but they who have been accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage;
for they cannot die any more; for they are like the angels, and are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection.
But that the dead are raised, even Moses hath shown at the Bush, when he calleth the Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.
Now he is not a God of the dead, but of the living; for all live to him.
Then some of the scribes answering, said, Teacher, thou hast well said.
For they dared no longer to ask him any question.
And he said to them, How is it that men say that the Christ is David's son?
For David himself saith in the book of Psalms, “The Lord said to my lord, Sit thou on my right hand,
till I make thine enemies thy footstool.”
David then calleth him lord; and how is he his son?
And in the hearing of all the people he said to his disciples,
Beware of the scribes, who like to walk about in long robes, and love salutations in the markets, and the chief seats in the synagogues, and the first places at feasts;
who devour widows' houses, and for a pretence make long prayers. These will receive a far greater condemnation.
And he looked up and saw the rich men casting their gifts into the treasury.
And he saw also a certain poor widow casting in thither two mites.
And he said, In truth I say to you, that this poor widow hath cast in more than they all.
For all these out of their abundance cast in to the offerings; but she out of her penury cast in all the living that she had.
And as some were saying of the temple, that it was adorned with goodly stones, and sacred gifts, he said,
As for these things which ye behold, the days will come, in which there will not be left here one stone upon another, that will not be throw down.
And they asked him, saying, Teacher, when then will these things be? and what will be the sign when these things are about to come to pass?
And he said, Take heed that ye be not deceived. For many will come in my name, saying, I am He, and the time is at hand. Go not after them.
And when ye hear of wars and tumults, be not terrified; for these things must first come to pass; but not immediately is the end.
Then he said to them, Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom;
and there will be great earthquakes, and in divers places famines and pestilences; and there will be fearful sights and great signs from heaven.
But before all these things they will lay their hands on you and persecute you, delivering you up to synagogues, and into prisons, and bringing you before kings and governors on account of my name.
It will turn out to you an opportunity for bearing testimony.
Settle it therefore in your hearts not to meditate l beforehand what ye shall answer.
For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries will not be able to withstand or gainsay.
And ye will be delivered up both by parents and brothers and kinsmen and friends; and some of you will they put to death.
And ye will be hated by all on account of my name.
But not a hair of your head will be lost.
By your constancy secure your lives.
But when ye see Jerusalem encompassed by armies, then know that her desolation is at hand.
Then let those who are in Judaea flee to the mountains; and let those who are within the city go out of it, and let not those in the open country enter it.
For these are days of vengeance, that all things which are written may be fulfilled.
But woe to the women with child, and to those having children at the breast, in those days! For there will be great distress in the land, and wrath upon this people;
and they will fall by the edge of the sword, and will be led away captive into all the nations; and Jerusalem will be trodden down by the gentiles, until the times of the gentiles are fulfilled.
And there will be signs in the sun and moon and stars; and on the earth distress of nations, in perplexity at the roaring of the sea and waves;
men's hearts failing them from fear, and from looking for those things which are coming on the world; for the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
And then will they see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.
And when these things begin to come to pass, look up, and lift up your heads; for your redemption draweth nigh.
And he spoke to them a parable: Behold the fig-tree and all the trees;
when they have already shot forth, ye see it, and know of yourselves that summer is now nigh at hand.
So also, when ye see these things coming to pass, know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh at hand.
Truly do I say to you, that this generation will not pass away, till all shall have taken place.
Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away.
But take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be weighed down with surfeiting and drunkenness and worldly cares, and that day come upon you unawares.
For as a snare will it come on all that dwell on the face of the whole earth.
But watch at all times, and pray that ye may be able to escape all the things that are about to come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man.
And during the daytime he was teaching in the temple; but at night he went out, and lodged in the mount called the Mount of Olives.
And all the people came early in the morning to him in the temple, to hear him.
Now the feast of unleavened bread, which is called the passover, was drawing near;
and the chief priests and the scribes were seeking how they might kill him; for they feared the people.
And Satan entered into Judas called Iscariot, who was of the number of the twelve.
And he went away, and consulted with the chief priests and captains, how he might deliver him up to them.
And they were glad, and covenanted to give him money.
And he agreed with them, and sought a good opportunity to deliver him up to them in the absence of the multitude.
Then came the day of unleavened bread, when the passover must be killed;
and he sent Peter and John, saying, Go and make ready for us the passover, that we may eat it.
And they said to him, Where wilt thou that we make it ready?
And he said to them, Lo! when ye have entered the city, there will meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water; follow him into the house where he goeth in;
and ye shall say to the master of the house, The Teacher saith to thee, Where is the guest-chamber, where I may eat the passover with my disciples?
And he will show you a large upper room furnished; there make ready.
And they went and found as he had said to them; and they made ready the passover.
And when the hour had come, he placed himself at table, and the apostles with him.
And he said to them, Earnestly have I desired to eat this passover with you, before I suffer.
For I say to you, that I shall eat it no more, until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God.
And he took a cup, and gave thanks, and said, Take this, and divide it among yourselves.
For I say to you, that I shall not drink henceforth of the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of God shall have come.
And he took a loaf, and gave thanks, and broke it, and gave it to them, saying, This is my body, which is given for you; this do in remembrance of me.
And in like manner he took the cup after supper, saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is about to be shed for you.
But lo! the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the table.
For the Son of man indeed goeth away, as it hath been determined; but woe to that man by whom he is betrayed.
And they began to inquire among themselves, which of them it was that was about to do this.
And there arose also a contention among them, which of them should be accounted the greatest.
And he said to them, The kings of the nations rule as lords over them, and they who exercise authority over them are called benefactors.
But it is not to be so with you; but let the greatest among you be as the youngest; and he that is chief, as he that serveth.
For which is greater? he who reclineth at the table, or he who serveth? Is not he that reclineth at the table? But I am in the midst of you as he who serveth.
Ye however are they who have continued steadfastly with me in my trials.
And I appoint to you a kingdom, as my Father appointed to me;
that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom; and ye shall sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
Simon, Simon, lo! Satan hath asked for you, that he may sift you as wheat.
But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. And do thou, when thou hast returned to me, strengthen thy brethren.
And he said to him, Lord, I am ready to go with thee both to prison and to death.
And he said, I tell thee, Peter, a cock will not crow this day, till thou hast thrice denied that thou knowest me.
And he said to them, When I sent you without purse, or bag, or sandals, were ye in need of anything? And they said, Of nothing. Then he said to them,
But now, he that hath a purse, let him take it, and likewise a bag; and he that hath not, let him sell his garment, and buy a sword.
For I say to you, that this which is written must be accomplished in me: “And he was reckoned among transgressors.” For that which concerneth me also hath an end.
And they said, Lord, behold, here are two swords. And he said to him, It is enough!
And going out, he went, as he was wont, to the Mount of Olives; and the disciples followed him.
And when he was at the place, he said to them, Pray that ye may not enter into temptation.
And he withdrew from them about a stone's throw; and kneeling down he prayed,
saying, Father, if thou art willing to remove this cup from me—yet not my will, but thine be done!
And there appeared to him an angel from heaven, strengthening him.
And being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly. And his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling to the ground.
And rising up from prayer, he came to the disciples, and found them sleeping for sorrow,
and said to them, Why sleep ye? Rise, and pray that ye may not enter into temptation.
While he was yet speaking, lo! a multitude, and he that was called Judas, one of the twelve, was at the head of them; and he drew near to Jesus to kiss him.
But Jesus said to him, Judas, dost thou betray the Son of man with a kiss?
And they who were about him, seeing what would follow, said, Lord, shall we smite with the sword?
And one of them smote the servant of the high-priest, and cut off his right ear.
But Jesus answering said, Permit thus far; and touched his ear, and healed him.
Then Jesus said to the chief priests and captains of the temple and elders who had come to him, Ye have come out as against a robber, with swords and clubs;
when I was daily with you in the temple, ye did not put forth your hands against me; but this is your hour, and the power of darkness.
And they seized him, and led him away, and brought him into the house of the high-priest. And Peter followed afar off.
And when they had kindled a fire in the midst of the court, and had sat down together, Peter sat down among them.
But a certain maid-servant saw him sitting at the fire, and steadily looking at him said, This man also was with him.
And he denied him, saying, Woman, I do not know him.
And after a little while another saw him, and said, Thou also art one of them. And Peter said, Man, I am not.
And in about one hour's time, another confidently affirmed, saying, In truth this man also was with him; for he is a Galilaean.
And Peter said, Man, I know not what thou sayest. And immediately, while he was yet speaking, a cock crew.
And the Lord turned and looked upon Peter; and Peter remembered the word of the Lord, that he had said to him, Before a cock crows this day, thou wilt thrice deny me.
And he went out, and wept bitterly.
And the men that held Jesus mocked him, and beat him;
and having blindfolded him, they asked him, saying, Prophesy, who is it that struck thee?
And many other things did they scoffingly say against him.
And when it was day, the elders of the people, both chief priests and scribes, came together, and brought him before their council, saying,
If thou art the Christ, tell us. And he said to them, If I tell you, ye will not believe;
and if I ask, ye will not answer.
But from this time the Son of man will sit on the right hand of the power of God.
Then they all said, Art thou then the Son of God? And he said to them, Ye say what is true; for I am.
And they said, What further need have we of testimony? For we have ourselves heard from his own mouth.
And the whole assemblage of them arose, and carried him before Pilate.
And they began to accuse him, saying, We found this man perverting our nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, and saying that he himself is the Christ, the king.
And Pilate asked him, saying, Art thou the king of the Jews? And he answering said to him, I am.
And Pilate said to the chief priests and the crowd, I find nothing criminal in this man.
But they were the more violent, saying, He stirreth up the people, teaching throughout all Judaea, beginning from Galilee, even to this place.
And when Pilate heard this, he asked whether the man was a Galilaean.
And on learning that he belonged to Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who was himself also at Jerusalem at this time.
Now Herod, when he saw Jesus, was very glad; for he had been wishing to see him for a long time, because he had heard about him; and he hoped to see some sign wrought by him.
And he put many questions to him; but he gave him no answer.
And the chief priests and scribes stood vehemently accusing him.
And Herod also with his guard of soldiers set him at nought and mocked him, and having arrayed him in a gorgeous robe, sent him back to Pilate.
And Herod and Pilate on that day became friends with each other; for they had before been at enmity.
And Pilate, when he had called together the chief priests and the rulers and the people,
said to them, Ye have brought to me this man, as one that perverteth the people; and behold, I have examined him before you, and have found nothing in this man to sustain the charges which ye bring against him.
No, nor yet Herod; for he hath sent him back to us; and lo! nothing deserving death hath been done by him.
I will therefore chastise, and release him.
Now it was necessary for him to release to them one at the feast.
And they cried out all at once, saying, Away with this man, and release to us Barabbas;
who, for a certain sedition made in the city, and for murder, had been cast into prison.
But Pilate again spoke to them, wishing to release Jesus.
But they cried out, saying, Crucify, crucify him!
And he said to them the third time, Why, what evil hath this man done? I have found him guilty of nothing deserving death; I will therefore chastise, and release him.
But they were urgent with loud voices, demanding that he should he crucified; and their voices prevailed.
And Pilate gave sentence that what they demanded should be done.
And he released him who for sedition and murder had been cast into prison, whom they asked for; but Jesus he delivered up to their will.
And when they had led him away, they laid hold on one Simon a Cyrenaean, coming out of the country, and laid on him the cross, that he might bear it after Jesus.
And there followed him a great multitude of the people, and of women who were bewailing and lamenting him.
But Jesus turning to them said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me; but weep for yourselves, and for your children.
For lo! the days are coming, in which they will say, Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never bore, and the breasts that never gave nourishment.
Then will they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us.
For if they do these things in the green tree, what will be done in the dry?
And two others, who were malefactors, were led with him to be put to death.
And when they had come to the place which is called the Skull, they there crucified him, and the malefactors; one on the right hand, and the other on the left.
And Jesus said, Father, forgive them! for they know not what they do. And they divided his garments, casting lots.
And the people stood looking on; and the rulers sneered, saying, Others he saved; let him save himself, if this is the Christ of God, the chosen one.
And the soldiers also came up to him and made sport of him, offering him vinegar,
and saying, If thou art the king of the Jews, save thyself.
There was also an inscription over him: “This is the king of the Jews.”
And one of the crucified malefactors railed at him, saying, Art thou not the Christ? save thyself and us.
But the other answering said, rebuking him, Dost not thou fear God, since thou art in the same condemnation?
And we indeed justly; for we are receiving the due reward of our deeds; but this man hath done nothing amiss.
And he said, Jesus, remember me when thou comest in thy kingdom.
And he said to him, Truly do I say to thee, Today shalt thou be with me in Paradise.
And it was now about the sixth hour, and there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour,
the sun having failed; and the veil of the temple was rent in two.
And Jesus cried with a loud voice, and said, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit! And having said this, he expired.
And the centurion, seeing what was done, gave glory to God, saying, Surely this was a righteous man.
And all the multitudes that had come together to that sight, when they had seen the things which were done, returned, beating their breasts.
And all his acquaintances stood at a distance, and women that came with him from Galilee, beholding these things.
And lo! a man named Joseph, of Arimathaea, a city of the Jews, being a councilor, and a good and righteous man,
who was not consenting to their purpose and deed, and was waiting for the kingdom of God,—
this man went to Pilate, and asked for the body of Jesus.
And he took it down, and wrapped it in linen, and laid it in a tomb that was hewn out of the rock; wherein no one had yet lain.
And it was the day of preparation, and the sabbath was now coming on.
And the women also, who had come with him from Galilee, followed after, and saw the tomb, and how his body was laid.
And they returned, and prepared spices and ointments; and on the sabbath they rested, according to the commandment.
Now on the first day of the week, very early in the morning, they came to the tomb, bringing the spices which they had prepared.
And they found the stone rolled away from the tomb;
and on entering they found not the body of the Lord Jesus.
And it came to pass, as they were much perplexed about this, lo! two men stood by them in glittering apparel;
and when they were terrified, and bowed their faces to the earth, the men said to them, Why seek ye the living among the dead?
He is not here, but hath risen. Remember how be spoke to you while yet in Galilee,
saying, The Son of man must be delivered up into the hands of sinners, and be crucified, and rise again on the third day.
And they remembered his words.
And returning from the tomb, they told all these things to the eleven, and to all the rest.
It was Mary the Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary the mother of James; and the other women with them told these things to the apostles.
And these words seemed to them as an idle tale, and they did not believe them.

And lo! two of them were going the same day to a village called Emmaus, distant a hundred and sixty furlongs from Jerusalem.
And they were conversing together about all those things which had taken place.
And it came to pass, while they were conversing and reasoning, that Jesus himself drew near, and went with them.
But their eyes were restrained from knowing him.
And he said to them, What discourse is this which ye have one with another, as ye are walking? And they stood sad.
And one, whose name was Cleopas, answering said to him, Art thou the only sojourner in Jerusalem that doth not know the things which have come to pass there in these days?
And he said to them, What things? And they said to him, The things relating to Jesus the Nazarene, who was a prophet mighty in word and deed before God and all the people;
and how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him up to be condemned to death, and crucified him.
But we are hoping that it is he who is to redeem Israel; moreover, besides all this, it is the third day since these things were done.
And furthermore certain women of our company have amazed us; for going early to the tomb,
they did not find his body, and came, saying that they had even seen a vision of angels, who said that he was alive.
And some of those who were with us went to the tomb, and found it to be as the women had said; but him they saw not.
And he said to them, O dull of apprehension, and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken!
Was it not necessary that the Christ should suffer these things, and enter into his glory?
And beginning with Moses and all the Prophets he explained to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself.
And they drew near to the village whither they were going; and he made as though he would go further.
But they constrained him, saying, Abide with us, for it is towards evening, and the day is now far spent. And he went in to stay with them.
And it came to pass, as he was at table with them, that he took the bread, and blessed it, and broke and gave it to them.
And their eyes were opened, and they knew him; and he vanished out of their sight.
And they said one to another, Did not our hearts burn within us while he talked with us on the way, while he opened to us the Scriptures?
And they rose up the same hour, and returned to Jerusalem; and they found the eleven and those who were with them gathered together,
saying, The Lord hath risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon.
And they told what had happened on the way, and how he became known to them in the breaking of the bread.
And while they were thus speaking, he himself stood in the midst of them.
But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they beheld a spirit.
And he said to them, Why are ye troubled? and why do doubts arise in your hearts?
See my hands and my feet, that it is I myself. Handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

And while they still disbelieved for joy, and wondered, he said to them, Have ye anything here to eat?
And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish.
And he took and ate it before them.
And he said to them, These are my words which I spoke to you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled which are written in the Law of Moses, and the Prophets, and the Psalms, concerning me.
Then he opened their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures.
And he said to them, Thus it is written, that the Christ should suffer, and should rise from the dead on the third day,
and that repentance for the remission of sins should be preached in his name among all the nations, beginning at Jerusalem.
Ye are witnesses of these things.
And I send forth upon you that which hath been promised by my Father; but do ye tarry in the city, until ye are endued with power from on high.
And he led them out as far as to Bethany; and he lifted up his hands and blessed them.
And it came to pass, while he blessed them, that he parted from them.
And they returned to Jerusalem with great joy,
and were continually in the temple, praising God.
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
The same was in the beginning with God.
All things were made through him; and without him was nothing made that hath been made.
In him is life; and the life was the light of men.
And the light hath been shining in the darkness; and the darkness received it not.
There was a man, sent from God, whose name was John.
He came as a witness, to bear witness of the light, that through him all might believe.
He was not the light, but came to bear witness of the light.
The true light, which enlighteneth every man, was coming into the world.
He was in the world, and the world was made through him, and the world knew him not.
He came to his own, and his own received him not.
But as many as received him, to them he gave power to become children of God,—to those who believed in his name;
who were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
And the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us, full of grace and truth; and we beheld his glory, a glory as of an only begotten of a father.
John beareth witness of him, and crieth, saying, This was he of whom I said, He that cometh after me hath gone before me; for he was before me.
For out of his fullness have we all received, and grace upon grace.
For the Law was given through Moses; grace and truth came through Jesus Christ.
No one hath ever seen God; the only begotten God, who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath made him known.
And this is the witness of John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem, to ask him, Who art thou?
And he declared, and did not deny; and he declared, I am not the Christ.
And they asked him, What then? Art thou Elijah? And he said, I am not. Art thou the prophet? And he answered, No.
They said therefore to him, Who art thou? that we may give an answer to those who sent us; what sayest thou of thyself?
He said, I am “a voice of one crying aloud in the wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord,” as said Isaiah the prophet.
And they were sent from the Pharisees;
and they asked him and said to him, Why then dost thou baptize, if thou art not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the prophet?
John answered them, saying, I baptize in water. There standeth one among you whom ye know not,
he who cometh after me, the latchet of whose sandal I am not worthy to loose.
These things took place in Bethany beyond the Jordan, where John was baptizing.
The next day he seeth Jesus coming to him, and saith, Behold, the Lamb of God, who taketh away the sin of the world!
This is he of whom I said, After me cometh a man, who hath gone before me; for he was before me.
And I knew him not; but that he might be made manifest to Israel, therefore I came baptizing in water.
And John bore witness, saying, I have seen the Spirit descending as a dove from heaven, and it abode upon him.
And I knew him not; but he who sent me to baptize in water, the same said to me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on him, he it is that baptizeth in the Holy Spirit.
And I have seen and have borne witness, that this is the Son of God.
On the morrow John was again standing, and two of his disciples;
and looking upon Jesus as he was walking, he saith, Behold, the Lamb of God!
The two disciples heard him speaking, and they followed Jesus.
Jesus turning and seeing them following, saith to them, What seek ye? And they said to him, Rabbi, (that is to say, when interpreted, Teacher,) where dost thou dwell?
He saith to them, Come, and ye shall see. They came therefore and saw where he dwelt; and they abode with him that day. It was about the tenth hour.
One of the two who heard what John said, and followed him, was Andrew, Simon Peter's brother.
He first findeth his own brother Simon, and saith to him, We have found the Messiah; (which is, when interpreted, the Christ.)
He brought him to Jesus. Jesus looking upon him said, Thou art Simon, the son of John; thou shalt be called Cephas; (which signifieth Peter, that is, Rock.)
On the morrow he determined to go forth into Galilee, and findeth Philip. And Jesus saith to him, Follow me.
Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter.
Philip findeth Nathanael, and saith to him, We have found him of whom Moses in the Law, and the Prophets wrote, Jesus, the son of Joseph, who is of Nazareth.
And Nathanael said to him, Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? Philip saith to him, Come and see.
Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and saith of him, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile.
Nathanael saith to him, Whence dost thou know me? Jesus answered and said to him, Before Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig-tree, I saw thee.
Nathanael answered him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the king of Israel.
Jesus answered and said to him, Because I said to thee, I saw thee under the fig-tree, dost thou believe? Thou shalt see greater things than these.
And he saith to him, Truly, truly do I say to you, Ye will see heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man.
And on the third day there was a marriage-feast in Cana of Galilee; and the mother of Jesus was there.
And both Jesus and his disciples were invited to the feast.
And they had no wine, because the wine of the feast had failed. Then the mother of Jesus saith to him, There is no wine.
Jesus saith to her, Woman, what have I to do with thee? My hour is not yet come.
His mother saith to the servants, Whatever he saith to you, do it.
Now there were set there six water-pots of stone, in conformity with the Jews' custom of purifying, containing two or three firkins apiece.
Jesus saith to them, Fill the water-pots with water. And they filled them up to the brim.
And he saith to them, Draw out now, and bear it to the master of the feast. And they bore it.
But when the master of the feast tasted the water that had been made wine, not knowing whence it was, but the servants who drew the water knew, he called the bridegroom
and said to him, Every man setteth on the good wine first, and when men have drunk freely, that which is worse. Thou hast kept the good wine until now.
This beginning of the signs Jesus made in Cana of Galilee, and manifested his glory; and his disciples believed in him.
After this he went down to Capernaum, he and his mother, and his brothers, and his disciples; and they abode there not many days.
And the passover of the Jews was near; and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
And he found in the temple those who sold oxen, and sheep, and doves, and the money-changers sitting.
And having made a scourge of cords, he drove them all out of the temple, both the sheep and the oxen; and poured out the money of the exchangers, and overthrew the tables;
and said to those who sold the doves, Take these things hence; make not my Father's house a house of merchandise.
His disciples remembered that it was written, “Zeal for thy house will consume me.”
The Jews therefore answered and said to him, What sign dost thou show us, seeing thou doest these things?
Jesus answered and said to them, Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.
Then said the Jews, Forty-six years was this temple in building; and wilt thou raise it up in three days?
But he spoke of the temple of his body.
When therefore he had risen from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this; and they believed the Scripture, and the word which Jesus had spoken.
And when he was in Jerusalem at the passover, at the feast, many believed in his name, when they saw his signs which he wrought.
But Jesus did not trust himself to them, because he knew all men;
and had no need that any one should testify concerning man; for he himself knew what was in man.
And there was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews.
This man came to him by night, and said to him, Rabbi, we know that thou hast come as a teacher from God; for no one can do these signs which thou doest, unless God be with him.
Jesus answered and said to him, Truly, truly do I say to thee, Unless a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
Nicodemus saith to him, How can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter his mother's womb a second time, and be born?
Jesus answered, Truly, truly do I say to thee, Unless a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of heaven.
That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit, is spirit.
Marvel not that I said to thee, Ye must be born again.
The wind bloweth where it will; and thou hearest the sound thereof, but knowest not whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the Spirit.
Nicodemus answered and said to him, How can these things be?
Jesus answered and said to him, Art thou the teacher of Israel, and understandest not these things?
Truly, truly do I say to thee, We speak that which we know, and testify that which we have seen; and ye receive not our testimony.
If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how will ye believe if I tell you heavenly things?
And no one hath ascended into heaven, but he who came down from heaven, even the Son of man.
And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up
that every one who believeth in him may have everlasting life.
For God so loved the world, that he gave the only begotten Son, that every one who believeth in him may not perish, but may have everlasting life.
For God sent not the Son into the world to condemn the world, but that through him the world might be saved.
He that believeth in him is not condemned; he that believeth not hath already been condemned, because he hath not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God.
And this is the condemnation, that the light hath come into the world, and men loved the darkness rather than the light; for their deeds were evil.
For every one that doeth evil hateth the light, and cometh not to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved.
But he that doeth the truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God.
After these things Jesus and his disciples came into the land of Judaea; and there he remained with them, and baptized.
And John also was baptizing in AEnon, near Salim, because there was much water there; and they came, and were baptized.
For John was not yet thrown into prison.
Then there arose a question on the part of John's disciples with a Jew about purifying.
And they came to John, and said to him, Rabbi, he who was with thee beyond the Jordan, to whom thou hast borne witness, behold, he baptizeth, and all men are going to him.
John answered and said, A man can receive nothing, unless it be given him from heaven.
Ye yourselves bear me witness, that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I was sent before that man.
He that hath the bride is the bridegroom; but the friend of the bridegroom, who standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom's voice. This my joy then hath become full.
He must increase, but I must decrease.
He that cometh from above is above all. He that is from the earth is earthly, and speaketh earthly things; he that cometh from heaven
testifieth what he hath seen and heard; and no one receiveth his testimony.
He that hath received his testimony hath set his seal that God is true.
For he whom God sent speaketh the words of God; for he giveth not the Spirit by measure.
The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand.
He that believeth in the Son hath everlasting life; and he that disobeyeth the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him.
When therefore Jesus knew that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and baptized more disciples than John,
(though Jesus himself did not baptize, but his disciples,)
he left Judaea, and went again to Galilee.
And he must necessarily pass through Samaria.
He cometh therefore to a city of Samaria, called Sychar, near the piece of land which Jacob gave to his son Joseph.
And Jacob's well was there. Jesus therefore, being wearied with the journey, was sitting thus by the well. It was about the sixth hour.
There cometh a woman of Samaria to draw water. Jesus saith to her, Give me to drink.
For his disciples had gone away into the city to buy food.
The Samaritan woman saith to him, How is it that thou, who art a Jew, askest drink of me, who am a Samaritan woman? For Jews have no dealings with Samaritans.
Jesus answered and said to her, If thou hadst known the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldst have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water.
The woman saith to him, Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with, and the well is deep. Whence hast thou the living water?
Art thou greater than our father Jacob, who gave us the well, and drank thereof himself, and his sons, and his cattle?
Jesus answered and said to her, Every one that drinketh of this water, will thirst again;
but whoever drinketh of the water that I will give him, will never thirst; but the water that I will give him will become within him a well of water springing up to everlasting life.
The woman saith to him, Sir, give me this water, that I may not thirst, nor come hither to draw.
He saith to her, Go, call thy husband, and come hither.
The woman answered, I have no husband. Jesus saith to her, Thou saidst well, that thou hast no husband.
For thou hast had five husbands; and he whom thou now hast is not thy husband; in this thou hast spoken truly.
The woman saith to him, Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet.
Our fathers worshipped on this mountain; and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship.
Jesus saith to her, Believe me, woman, the hour is coming, when ye shall neither on this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, worship the Father.
Ye worship that which ye know not; we worship that which we know; for salvation is from the Jews.
But the hour is coming, and now is, when the true worshippers will worship the Father in spirit and in truth; for such worshippers the Father seeketh.
God is a spirit; and they who worship must worship in spirit and in truth.
The woman saith to him, I know that Messiah cometh (who is called Christ); when he hath come, he will tell us all things.
Jesus saith to her, I who speak to thee am he.
And upon this his disciples came, and marveled that he was talking with a woman. Yet no one said, What dost thou seek? or, Why dost thou talk with her?
The woman then left her water-pot, and went away into the city, and saith to the men,
Come, see a man who told me all things which I have done. Is this the Christ?
They went out of the city, and came to him.
In the mean while the disciples asked him, saying, Rabbi, eat.
But he said to them, I have food to eat that ye know not of.
The disciples therefore said to one another, Hath any one brought him anything to eat?
Jesus saith to them, My food is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work.
Do ye not say, There are yet four months, and the harvest cometh? Lo! I say to you, lift up your eyes, and look on the fields, that they are white for harvest.
Already is the reaper receiving wages, and gathering fruit unto everlasting life; that both the sower and the reaper may rejoice together.
And herein is fulfilled the true saying, One soweth, and another reapeth.
I have sent you to reap that whereon ye have not labored. Others have labored, and ye have entered into their labor.
And many of the Samaritans of that city believed in him because of the words of the woman, who testified, He told me all things which I have done.
When therefore the Samaritans came to him, they besought him to remain with them; and he remained there two days.
And many more believed on account of his word;
and said to the woman, No longer do we believe on account of what thou hast told us; for we have ourselves heard him, and know that this is in truth the Saviour of the world.
And after the two days he went from that place into Galilee.
For Jesus himself testified, that a prophet hath no honor in his own country.
When therefore he came into Galilee, the Galilaeans received him, having seen all that he did in Jerusalem at the feast; for they also went to the feast.
So he came again into Cana of Galilee, where he made the water wine. And there was a certain nobleman, whose son was sick, at Capernaum.
He, having heard that Jesus had come out of Judaea into Galilee, went to him, and asked him to go down and heal his son; for he was at the point of death.
Then Jesus said to him, Unless ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe.
The nobleman saith to him, Sir, come down before my child die.
Jesus saith to him, Go; thy son liveth. The man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him, and went away.
And as he was now going down, the servants met him, and brought word that his child was living.
Then he inquired of them the hour when he began to mend. And they said to him, Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him.
So the father knew that it was in the same hour in which Jesus said to him, Thy son is living. And he himself believed, and his whole house.
This again, a second sign, Jesus wrought, when he had come out of Judaea into Galilee.
After these things there was the feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
Now there is at Jerusalem, by the sheep-gate, a pool, which is called in Hebrew Bethzatha, having five porches.
In these were lying a multitude of diseased persons, blind, lame, withered.

And a certain man was there, who had had his infirmity thirty-eight years.
Jesus saw this man lying there, and knowing that he had been for a long time diseased, saith to him, Dost thou wish to be made well?
The diseased man answered him, Sir, I have no man, when the water is troubled, to put me into the pool; but while I am coming, another goeth down before me.
Jesus saith to him, Rise, take up thy bed, and walk.
And immediately the man was made well, and took up his bed, and walked. And that day was the sabbath.
The Jews therefore said to him that was cured, It is the sabbath; and it is not lawful for thee to take up the bed.
He answered them, He that made me well, the same said to me, Take up thy bed, and walk. T
hey asked him, Who is the man that said to thee, Take up, and walk?
But the diseased man knew not who it was; for Jesus had withdrawn himself, there being a crowd in the place.
Afterwards Jesus found him in the temple, and said to him, Behold, thou art made well; sin no more, lest something worse befall thee.
The man went away, and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well.
And on this account the Jews persecuted Jesus, because he did these things on the sabbath.
But he answered them, My Father is working up to this time, and I work.
On this account the Jews sought the more to kill him, because he not only broke the sabbath, but also said that God was his own Father, making himself equal with God.
Then answered Jesus and said to them, Truly, truly do I say to you, The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father doing; for whatever He doeth, these things the Son also doeth in like manner;
for the Father loveth the Son, and showeth him all things which he himself doeth; and greater works than these will he show him, so that ye will wonder.
For as the Father raiseth up the dead, and giveth them life, so the Son also giveth life to whom he will.
For neither doth the Father judge any one, but hath committed all judgment to the Son;
that all may honor the Son, as they honor the Father. He that honoreth not the Son, honoreth not the Father, who sent him.
Truly, truly do I say to you, He that heareth my word, and believeth him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and cometh not into condemnation, but hath passed out of death into life.
Truly, truly do I say to you, The hour is coming and now is, when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God; and they that hear will live.
For as the Father hath life in himself, so did he give to the Son also to have life in himself.
And he gave him authority to execute judgment, because he is a son of man.
Marvel not at this; for the hour is coming, in which all that are in the tombs will hear his voice,
and will come forth, they that have done good, to a resurrection of life; they that have done evil, to a resurrection of condemnation.
I can of myself do nothing. As I hear, I judge; and my judgment is just, because I seek not my own will, but the will of him that sent me.
If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true.
There is another who beareth witness of me; and ye know that the witness which he witnesseth of me is true.
Ye have sent to John, and he hath borne witness to the truth.
But the testimony which I receive is not from man; but these things I say, that ye may be saved.
He was the burning and shining lamp: and ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his light.
But the testimony which I have, is greater than that of John; for the works which the Father hath given me to perform, the works themselves which I do, bear witness of me, that the Father hath sent me.
And the Father who sent me, he hath borne witness of me. Ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his form.
And ye have not his word abiding in you; for whom he sent, him ye believe not.
Ye search the Scriptures, because ye yourselves think that in them ye have everlasting life; and it is they which testify of me;
and ye are not willing to come to me, that ye may have life.
I receive not honor from men;
but I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you.
I have come in my Father's name, and ye receive me not; if another come in his own name, him ye will receive.
How can ye believe while ye receive honor from one another, and seek not the honor that is from him who alone is God?
Do not think that I shall accuse you to the Father; there is one that accuseth you, even Moses, in whom ye have placed your hope.
For if ye believed Moses, ye would believe me; for he wrote of me.
But if ye do not believe his writings, how will ye believe my words?
After these things Jesus went away across the lake of Galilee, that of Tiberias.
And a great multitude followed him, because they saw the signs which he wrought on the diseased.
And Jesus went up into the mountain, and sat there with his disciples.
And the passover, the feast of the Jews, was near.
Jesus then lifting up his eyes, and seeing that a great crowd was coming to him, saith to Philip, Whence are we to buy bread, that these may eat?
But this he said to try him; for he himself knew what he was going to do.
Philip answered him, Two hundred denaries' worth of bread is not sufficient for them, that each one may take a tittle.
One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, saith to him,
There is a lad here, who hath five barley-loaves, and two small fishes; but what are they among so many?
Jesus said, Make the men lie down. Now there was much grass in the place. So the men lay down, in number about five thousand.
Jesus then took the loaves, and having given thanks, distributed to those that were lying down; in like manner also of the fishes, as much as they desired.
And when they were filled, he saith to his disciples, Gather up the fragments that remain over, that nothing may be lost.
So they gathered them up, and filled twelve baskets with the fragments of the five barley-loaves, which remained over and above to those that had eaten.
The men therefore seeing the sign which he wrought, said, This is truly the prophet that was to come into the world.
Jesus therefore, knowing that they were about to come and take him by force to make him a king, withdrew again to the mountain alone.
But when evening came, his disciples went down to the lake,
and having gone on board a boat, were going over the lake to Capernaum. And darkness had overtaken them, and Jesus had not yet come to them.
And as a strong wind was blowing, the waves ran high.
When therefore they had rowed about twenty-five or thirty furlongs, they saw Jesus walking on the lake, and drawing near the boat; and they were afraid.
But he saith to them, It is I, be not afraid.
Then they were willing to receive him into the boat; and immediately the boat was at the land whither they were going.
The day following, the multitude which stood on the other side of the lake having seen that there was no other boat there but one, and that Jesus did not go with his disciples into the boat, but that his disciples went away alone,
(but there came other boats from Tiberias near the place where they ate the bread, when the Lord had given thanks;)
when therefore the multitude saw that Jesus was not there nor his disciples, they went on board the boats, and came to Capernaum, seeking Jesus.
And having found him on the other side of the lake, they said to him, Rabbi, when didst thou come hither?
Jesus answered them and said, Truly, truly do I say to you, Ye seek me, not because ye saw signs, but because ye ate of the loaves, and were filled.
Labor not for the food that perisheth, but for the food that endureth to everlasting life, which the Son of man giveth to you; for on him hath the Father set his seal, even God.
Then they said to him, What are we to do, that we may work the works of God?
Jesus answered and said to them, This is the work of God, that ye believe in him whom he sent.
They said therefore to him, What sign doest thou, that we may see, and believe thee? What dost thou work?
Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, as it is written, “He gave them bread from heaven to eat.”
Jesus therefore said to them, Truly, truly do I say to you, Moses hath not given you the bread from heaven; but my Father is giving you the true bread from heaven.
For the bread of God is that which is coming down from heaven, and giving life to the world.
They said therefore to him, Lord, evermore give us this bread.
Jesus therefore said to them, I am the bread of life; he that cometh to me will not hunger; and he that believeth in me will never thirst.
But I said to you, that ye have even seen, and do not believe.
All that the Father giveth me will come to me; and him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out;
for I have come down from heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him that sent me.
And this is the will of him that sent me, that of all which he hath given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up in the last day.
For this is the will of my Father, that every one who looketh on the Son and believeth in him, shall have everlasting life; and I will raise him up in the last day.
The Jews therefore murmured about him, because he said, I am the bread which came down from heaven;
and they said, Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, one whose father and mother we know? How is it then that this man saith, I have come down from heaven?
Jesus therefore answered and said to them, Murmur not among yourselves.
No one can come to me, unless the Father, who sent me, draw him: and I will raise him up in the last day.
It is written in the prophets, “And they shall all be taught of God.” Every one that hath heard the Father, and hath learnt from him, cometh to me.
Not that any one hath seen the Father, but he who is from God; he hath seen the Father.
Truly, truly do I say to you, He that believeth hath everlasting life.
I am the bread of life.
Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, and died.
This is the bread which is coming down from heaven, that one may eat of it and not die.
I am the living bread which came down from heaven; if any one eat of my bread, he will live for ever. Yea, and the bread which I will give for the life of the world is my flesh.
The Jews therefore contended with one another, saying, How can this man give us his flesh to eat?
Jesus therefore said to them, Truly, truly do I say to you, Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.
He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood hath everlasting life; and I will raise him up in the last day.
For my flesh is true food, and my blood is true drink.
He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood dwelleth in me, and I in him.
As the living Father sent me, and I live by reason of the Father; so he that eateth me, he also shall live by reason of me.
This is the bread which came down from heaven; not as the fathers ate, and died; he that eateth this bread will live for ever.
These things he said in a synagogue, while teaching in Capernaum.
Many therefore of his disciples, when they heard this, said, This teaching is hard; who can listen to it?
Jesus therefore knew within himself that his disciples were murmuring about this, and said to them, Doth this offend you?
What then if ye behold the Son of man ascending where he was before?
It is the spirit which maketh alive; the flesh profiteth nothing. The words which I have spoken to you are spirit, and are life.
But there are some of you who do not believe. For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were that did not believe, and who it was that would betray him.
And he said, For this cause I have told you, that no one can come to me, unless it hath been given him from the Father.
From this time many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him.
Jesus therefore said to the twelve, Do ye also wish to go away?
Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast words of everlasting life;
and we have believed and known, that thou art the Holy One of God.
Jesus answered them, Did not I choose you twelve? and one of you is a devil!
He spoke of Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot; for it was he that was about to betray him, being one of the twelve.
After these things Jesus walked in Galilee; for he would not walk in Judaea, because the Jews sought to kill him.
Now the feast of the Jews, the feast of tabernacles, was at hand.
His brothers therefore said to him, Depart hence, and go into Judaea, that thy disciples also may see thy works which thou art doing.
For no one doeth anything in secret, and yet himself seeketh to be known openly. If thou doest these things, manifest thyself to the world.
For even his brothers did not believe in him.
Jesus saith to them, My time is not yet come; but your time is always ready.
The world cannot hate you; but me it hateth, because I testify of it, that its works are evil.
Go ye up to the feast; I go not up to this feast; for my time is not yet fully come.
Having said these things, he remained in Galilee.
But when his brothers had gone up to the feast, then he also went up, not openly, but as it were in secret.
The Jews therefore sought him at the feast, and said, Where is that man?
And there was much debating among the multitude concerning him. Some said, He is a good man; others said, Nay, but he deceiveth the multitude.
No one, however, spoke openly of him, for fear of the Jews.
But when it was now the midst of the feast, Jesus went up into the temple and taught.
The Jews therefore marveled, saying, How knoweth this man letters, having never learned?
Jesus therefore answered them, and said, My teaching is not mine, but his that sent me.
If any one is desirous to do his will, he will know concerning the teaching, whether it is from God, or whether I speak from myself.
He that speaketh from himself seeketh his own glory; but he that seeketh the glory of him that sent him, he is true, and in him is no unrighteousness.
Hath not Moses given you the Law? and none of you keepeth the Law! Why do ye seek to kill me?
The multitude answered, Thou hast a demon! Who seeketh to kill thee?
Jesus answered and said to them, I have done one good work, and ye are all wondering.
Moses hath given you circumcision, (not that it is from Moses, but from the fathers;) and ye on the sabbath circumcise a man.
If a man receive circumcision on the sabbath, that the law of Moses may not be broken, are ye angry at me, because I have restored soundness to the whole body of a man on the sabbath?
Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment.
Then some of the men of Jerusalem said, Is not this he whom they seek to kill?
and see! he speaketh boldly, and they say nothing to him. Have the rulers discovered certainly that this man is the Christ?
Still, as to this man, we know whence he is; but when the Christ cometh, no one knoweth whence he is.
Jesus therefore cried aloud, teaching in the temple and saying, Ye both know me, and ye know whence I am; and I have not come of myself, but there is in truth one who sent me, whom ye know not.
I know him, because I am from him, and he hath sent me.
Therefore they sought to take him; but no one laid hands on him, because his hour had not yet come.
But of the multitude many believed in him, and said, When the Christ cometh, will he do more signs than these which this man doeth?
The Pharisees heard the multitude thus debating concerning him; and the chief priest and the Pharisees sent officers to seize him.
Jesus therefore said, Yet a little while I am with you, and then I go to him that sent me.
Ye will seek me and not find me; and where I am, ye cannot come.
The Jews therefore said among themselves, Whither will this man go, that we shall not find him? Will he go to the dispersed among the Greeks, and teach the Greeks?
What meaneth this which he said, Ye will seek me, and not find me; and where I am, ye cannot come?
On the last day, which is the great day, of the feast, Jesus stood and cried aloud, saying, If any one thirst, let him come to me, and drink.
He that believeth in me, from within him, as the Scripture hath said, will flow rivers of living water.
But this he said of the Spirit, which those that believed in him were to receive; for the Spirit was not yet, because Jesus was not yet glorified.
Some of the multitude therefore, when they heard these words, said, This is in truth the prophet. Others said, This is the Christ.
Others said, Doth the Christ then come from Galilee?
Hath not the Scripture said, that the Christ cometh from the seed of David, and from Bethlehem, the town where David was?
So there was a division among the multitude because of him.
And some of them wished to seize him; but no one laid hands on him.
The officers therefore came to the chief priests and Pharisees, who said to them, Why did ye not bring him?
The officers answered, Never man spoke like this man.
The Pharisees answered them, Have ye also been deceived?
Hath any one of the rulers believed in him? or of the Pharisees?
but this multitude that know not the Law are accursed.
Nicodemus saith to them, being one of them,
Doth our law judge a man, unless it first hear from him, and know what he doeth?
They answered and said to him, Art thou too from Galilee? Search and see that no prophet ariseth from Galilee.
{Joh 7:53 - 8:12: This passage is omitted as ungenuine by Tischendorf and most critical editors of the Greek Testament. It is found in some manuscripts, but not in the most ancient. It is, however, very generally regarded as a genuine relic of the teaching of Christ, though not forming a part of the fourth Gospel. I give it in the text of Tregelles, omitting the words which he incloses in brackets. Tregelles, however, does not suppose it to be genuine.} [[And they went each to his house;
but Jesus went to the mount of Olives.
And early in the morning he came again to the temple, and all the people were coming to him. And he sat down and taught them.
And the scribes and the Pharisees bring to him a woman taken in adultery; and having set her in the midst,
they say to him, Teacher, this woman was taken in adultery, in the very act.
Now in the Law Moses commanded us to stone such persons; what then dost thou say?
But this they said to try him, that they might be able to accuse him. But Jesus stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground.
But when they continued asking him, he lifted himself up, and said to them, Let him that is without sin among you first cast a stone at her.
And again he stooped down, and wrote on the ground.
And when they heard this, they went out one by one, beginning with the oldest; and Jesus was left alone, and the woman who was in the midst.
And Jesus lifted himself up and said to her, Woman, where are they? Did no one condemn thee!
And she said, No one, Lord. And Jesus said, neither do I condemn thee; go, and sin no more.
Again therefore Jesus spoke to them, saying, I am the light of the world; he that followeth me shall not walk in the darkness, but shall have the light of life.]]
The Pharisees therefore said to him, Thou bearest witness of thyself; thy witness is not true.
Jesus answered and said to them, Though I bear witness of myself, my witness is true; for I know whence I came, and whither I go; ye know not whence I come, or whither I go.
Ye judge according to the flesh; I judge no one.
But even if I myself should judge, my judgment is true, because I am not alone, but I and he who sent me.
Moreover, it is written in your law, that the witness of two men is true.
I am one who bear witness of myself, and the Father who sent me beareth witness of me.
They said therefore to him, Where is thy Father? Jesus answered, Ye know neither me, nor my Father. If ye knew me, ye would know my Father also.
These words he spoke in the treasury, while teaching in the temple; and no one laid hands on him, because his hour had not yet come.
Again therefore he said to them, I go away, and ye will seek me, and will die in your sin. Whither I go, ye cannot come.
The Jews therefore said, Will he kill himself, that he saith, Whither I go, ye cannot come?
And he said to them, Ye are from beneath, I am from above; ye are of this world, I am not of this world.
Therefore I said to you, that ye will die in your sins; for unless ye believe that I am He, ye will die in your sins.
They said therefore to him, Who art thou? Jesus said to them, In the first place, I am just that which I speak to you.
I have many things to say, and to judge, concerning you; but he who sent me is true; and I speak to the world what I heard from him.
They understood not that he spoke to them of the Father.
Jesus therefore said, When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then ye will know that I am He, and do nothing of myself, but speak these things as the Father taught me.
And he that sent me is with me; he hath not left me alone, for I always do the things that please him.
As he spoke these words, many believed in him.
Jesus therefore said to those Jews who believed in him, If ye continue in my word, ye are truly my disciples;
and ye will know the truth, and the truth will make you free.
They answered him, We are Abraham's offspring, and have never been in bondage to any one; how sayest, thou, Ye will be made free?
Jesus answered them, Truly, truly do I say to you, Every one that committeth sin is a bond-servant of sin.
And the bond-servant abideth not in the house for ever; the son abideth for ever.
If therefore the Son make you free, ye will be free indeed.
I know that ye are Abraham's offspring; but ye seek to kill me, because my word is not received within you.
I speak what I have seen with the Father; and ye accordingly do what ye have seen with your father.
They answered and said to him, Abraham is our father. Jesus saith to them, If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham.
But now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath spoken to you the truth, which I heard from God; this did not Abraham.
Ye do the works of your father. They said to him, We were not born of fornication; we have one Father, God.
Jesus said to them, If God were your father, ye would love me; for from God I proceeded forth and am come; neither came I of myself, but he sent me.
Why do ye not understand my language? It is because ye cannot listen to my word.
Ye are of your father the Devil, and what your father desireth ye are ready to do. He was a murderer from the beginning; and he abideth not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh from his own nature; for he is a liar, and the father of it.
But because I speak the truth, ye believe me not.
Which of you convicteth me of sin? If I speak truth, Why do ye not believe me?
He that is of God heareth God's words; for this cause ye do not hear, because ye are not of God.
The Jews answered and said to him, Say we not well, that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a demon?
Jesus answered, I have not a demon, but I honor my Father, and ye dishonor me.
But I seek not my own glory; there is one that seeketh and judgeth.
Truly, truly do I say to you, If any one keep my word, he will never see death.
The Jews said to him, Now we know that thou hast a demon. Abraham died, and the prophets; and thou sayest, If any one keep my word, he will never taste of death.
Art thou greater than our father Abraham, who died? The prophets also died. Whom dost thou make thyself?
Jesus answered, If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing. It is my Father that glorifieth me, of whom ye say, He is our God:
yet ye know him not; but I know him. And if I should say, I know him not, I should be a liar like you. But I know him, and keep his word.
Your father Abraham exulted that he might see my day; and he saw it, and was glad.
The Jews therefore said to him, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen Abraham?
Jesus said to them, Truly, truly do I say to you, From before Abraham was, I have been.
They therefore took up stones to throw at him; but Jesus concealed himself, and went out of the temple.
And as he was passing along, he saw a man who had been blind from his birth.
And his disciples asked him, saying, Rabbi, who sinned, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?
Jesus answered, Neither did this man sin, nor his parents; but that the works of God might be made manifest in him.
We must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day; the night is coming, when no one can work.
As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.
Having thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made clay with the spittle, and anointed his eyes with the clay,
and said to him, Go, wash in the pool of Siloam; (which is, when translated, Sent.) He went away therefore, and washed and came seeing.
The neighbors therefore, and they who before had seen him as a beggar, said, Is not this he that sits and begs?
Some said, This is he. Others said, No, but he is like him. He said, I am he.
They said therefore to him How then were thine eyes opened?
He answered, The man who is called Jesus made clay and anointed my eyes, and said to me, Go to Siloam, and wash. I went therefore and washed, and received sight.
And they said to him, Where is that man? He saith, I do not know.
They bring to the Pharisees him who had once been blind.
And the day on which Jesus made the clay and opened his eyes was the sabbath.
Again therefore the Pharisees also asked him how he received his sight. He said to them, He put clay on my eyes, and I washed them, and I see.
Therefore some of the Pharisees said, This man is not from God, because he keepeth not the sabbath. Others said, How can a man that is a sinner do such signs. And there was a division among them.
They say therefore to the blind man again, What dost thou say of him for having opened thine eyes? And he said, He is a prophet.
The Jews therefore did not believe concerning him, that he had been blind, and received his sight, until they called the parents of him that had received his sight.
And they asked them, saying, Is this your son, who ye say was born blind? How then doth he now see?
His parents, answered and said, We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind;
but by what means he now seeth, we know not; or who opened his eyes, we know not; ask him, he is of age; he will speak for himself.
This his parents said, because they feared the Jews. For the Jews had already agreed, that if any one should acknowledge him as the Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue.
Therefore his parents said, He is of age; ask him.
They therefore called a second time the man that had been blind, and said to him, Give glory to God; we know that this man is a sinner.
He therefore answered, Whether he is a sinner, I know not; one thing I know, that, whereas I was blind, now I see.
They said to him, What did he do to thee? How did he open thine eyes?
He answered them, I have already told you, and ye did not hear; why would ye hear it again? Are ye also inclined to become his disciples?
They reviled him, and said, Thou art his disciple; but we are disciples of Moses.
We know that God hath spoken to Moses; but as for this man, we know not whence he is.
The man answered and said to them, Why, herein is a marvelous thing, that ye know not whence he is, and yet he opened my eyes.
We know that God heareth not sinners; but if any one is a worshipper of God, and doeth his will, him he heareth.
Since the world began, it was never heard that any one opened the eyes of a man born blind.
If this man were not from God, he could do nothing.
They answered and said to him, Thou wast wholly born in sins, and dost thou teach us? And they cast him out.
Jesus heard that they had cast him out; and he found him, and said, Dost thou believe in the Son of man?
He answered and said, And who is he, Lord, that I may believe in him?
Jesus said to him, Thou hast both seen him, and it is he that talketh with thee.
And he said, I believe, Lord; and he prostrated himself before him.
And Jesus said, For judgment came I into this world; that they who see not might see, and that they who see might become blind.
Some of the Pharisees who were with him heard this, and said to him, Are we also blind?
Jesus said to them, If ye were blind, ye would not have sin; but now ye say, We see. Your sin remaineth.
Truly, truly do I say to you, He that entereth not through the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber;
but he that entereth through the door is the shepherd of the sheep.
To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice; and his own sheep he calleth by name, and leadeth them out.
When he hath put forth all his own, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him, because they know his voice.
But a stranger they will not follow, but will flee from him; because they know not the voice of strangers.
This parable Jesus spoke to them; but they did not understand what the things were which he spoke to them.
Jesus therefore said, Truly, truly do I say to you, I am the door of the sheep.
All those who came are thieves and robbers; but the sheep did not hear them.
I am the door; if any one enter through me, he will be saved, and will go in and out, and find pasture.
The thief cometh not but to steal, and to kill, and to destroy; I came that they might have life, and have abundance.
I am the good shepherd; the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep.
He that is a hireling and not a shepherd, nor the owner of the sheep, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep;
because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep.
I am the good shepherd, and I know my sheep, and they know me,
even as the Father knoweth me, and I know the Father; and I give my life for the sheep.
And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold; them also I must bring; and they will hear my voice, and there will be one flock, one shepherd.
On this account the Father loveth me, because I lay down my life, that I may take it again.
No one taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have authority to lay it down, and I have authority to take it again; this charge I received from my Father.
Again there arose a division among the Jews on account of these words.
Many of them said, He hath a demon, and is mad; why do ye hear him?
Others said, These are not the words of one that hath a demon. Can a demon open the eyes of the blind?
And the feast of the dedication came at Jerusalem. It was winter;
and Jesus was walking in the temple, in Solomon's porch.
Then came the Jews around him, and said to him, How long dost thou hold our minds in suspense? If thou art the Christ, tell us plainly.
Jesus answered them, I have told you, and ye do not believe. The works that I do in my Father's name, these bear witness of me.
But ye do not believe, because ye are not of my sheep, as I said to you.
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me;
and I give them everlasting life; and they shall never perish, nor shall any one tear them out of my hand.
That which my Father hath given me is greater than all; and no one is able to tear [[them]] out of the Father's hand.
I and the Father are one.
The Jews again took up stones to stone him.
Jesus answered them, Many good works have I shown you from the Father; for which of those works do ye stone me?
The Jews answered him, Not for a good work do we stone thee, but for blasphemy, and because thou, who art a man, makest thyself God.
Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your Law, “I said, ye are gods”?
If he called them gods, to whom the word of God came, and the Scripture cannot be made void,
say ye of him whom the Father sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest, because I said, I am the Son of God?
If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not.
But if I do them, though ye believe not me, believe the works; that ye may learn and know that the Father is in me, and I in the Father.
They sought therefore to seize him; and he went forth out of their hands.
And he went away again beyond the Jordan, to the place where John was at first baptizing; and there he abode.
And many came to him, and said, John indeed wrought no sign; but everything that John said of this man was true.
And many believed in him there.
But there was a certain man sick, Lazarus of Bethany, the town of Mary and her sister Martha.
It was the Mary who anointed the Lord with ointment, and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick.
The sisters therefore sent to him, saying, Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick.
And Jesus hearing this said, This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God may be glorified through it.
Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus.
When therefore he heard that he was sick, he remained in the place where he was two days.
Then after this he saith to the disciples, Let us go into Judaea again.
The disciples say to him, Rabbi, the Jews but just now were seeking to stone thee, and goest thou thither again?
Jesus answered, Are there not twelve hours in the day? If a man walk in the day, he stumbleth not, because he seeth the light of this world;
but if a man walk in the night, he stumbleth; because the light is not in him.
This he spoke, and afterwards said to them, Our friend Lazarus hath fallen asleep; but I go that I may awake him out of sleep.
The disciples therefore said to him, Lord, if he hath fallen asleep, he will recover.
But Jesus had spoken of his death; but they thought that he spoke of the taking of rest in sleep.
Then therefore Jesus said to them plainly: Lazarus is dead.
And I am glad for your sakes that I was not there; that ye may believe; but let us go to him.
Then said Thomas, who was called Didymus, to his fellow-disciples, Let us also go, that we may die with him.
Having come, therefore, Jesus found that he had been four days in the tomb.
Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off;
and many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary, to comfort them concerning their brother.
Martha therefore, as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming, went to meet him; but Mary continued sitting in the house.
Then said Martha to Jesus, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died;
and even now I know that whatever thou shalt ask of God, God will give it thee.
Jesus saith to her, Thy brother will rise again.
Martha saith to him, I know that he will rise again in the resurrection at the last day.
Jesus said to her, I am the resurrection and the life: he that believeth in me, though he have died, will live;
and whoever liveth and believeth in me will never die. Believest thou this?
She saith to him, Yea, Lord; I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, he who was to come into the world.
And having said this, she went away, and called Mary her sister secretly, saying, The Teacher is here and calleth for thee.
She, when she heard this, riseth quickly and cometh to him.
Now Jesus had not yet come into the town, but was still in the place where Martha met him.
The Jews then who were with her in the house and comforting her, when they saw that Mary rose up hastily and went out, followed her, thinking that she was going to the tomb to weep there.
Then Mary, when she came where Jesus was, as soon as she saw him fell down at his feet, saying to him, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died.
Jesus therefore when he saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping who came with her, was greatly moved in his spirit, and much troubled,
and said, Where have ye laid him? They say to him, Lord, come and see.
Jesus wept.
The Jews therefore said, See, how he loved him!
But some of them said, Could not he, who opened the eyes of the blind man, have also caused that this man should not have died?
Jesus therefore, again greatly moved within himself, cometh to the tomb. It was a cave, and a stone lay against it.
Jesus saith, Take away the stone. Martha, the sister of him that was dead, saith to him, Lord, by this time the body is offensive; for he hath been dead four days.
Jesus saith to her, Did I not tell thee, that if thou wouldst believe, thou shouldst see the glory of God?
They therefore took away the stone. And Jesus lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father! I thank thee that thou hast heard me.
Yet I knew that thou hearest me always; but for the sake of the multitude standing around I said it, that they might believe that thou didst send me.
And having thus spoken, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth!
He that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with grave-clothes; and his face was bound about with a napkin. Jesus saith to them, Loose him, and let him go.
Many of the Jews therefore who had come to Mary, and had seen what he did, believed in him.
But some of them went away to the Pharisees, and told them what Jesus had done.
Therefore the chief priests and the Pharisees gathered a council, and said, What are we to do, seeing that this man worketh many signs?
If we thus let him alone, all will believe in him; and the Romans will come, and take away both our place and nation.
And a certain one of them, Caiaphas, being high-priest that year, said to them, Ye know nothing at all;
nor do ye consider that it is expedient for us that one man die for the people, and not the whole nation perish.
And this he spoke not from himself; but being high-priest that year he prophesied that Jesus was about to die for the nation;
and not for the nation only, but that he might also gather together in one body the children of God that are scattered abroad.
Therefore from that day forth they consulted together to put him to death.
Jesus therefore no longer walked openly among the Jews, but departed thence to the country near the wilderness, to a city called Ephraim, and there abode with the disciples.
And the passover of the Jews was at hand; and many went out of the country up to Jerusalem before the passover, to purify themselves.
They sought therefore for Jesus, and said one to another, as they stood in the temple, What think ye? that he will not come to the feast?
Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had given orders, that, if any one knew where he was, he should give information, that they might seize him.
Jesus, therefore, six days before the passover, came to Bethany, where Lazarus was, whom Jesus raised from the dead.
They made therefore a supper for him there, and Martha served; but Lazarus was one of those who reclined at the table with him.
Then Mary, taking a pound of ointment of pure spikenard, very costly, anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair; and the house was filled with the odor of the ointment.
But Judas Iscariot, one of his disciples, he who was about to betray him, saith,
Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred denaries, and given to the poor?
And this he said, not because he cared for the poor, but because he was a thief, and kept the purse, and bore what was put therein.
Then said Jesus, Let her alone, that she may keep it until the day of my burial.
For the poor ye have always with you, but me ye have not always.
The great multitude of the Jews therefore knew that he was there; and they came, not only on account of Jesus, but that they might see Lazarus also, whom he raised from the dead.
But the priests consulted together that they might put Lazarus also to death;
because on his account many of the Jews were going away, and believing in Jesus.
On the next day, a great multitude that had come to the feast, hearing that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,
took branches of palm-trees, and went forth to meet him, crying aloud, Hosanna! blessed is he who cometh in the name of the Lord, even the king of Israel!
And Jesus, having found a young ass, sat thereon, as it is written,
“Fear not, daughter of Zion! lo! thy king cometh, sitting on an ass's colt.”
These things his disciples did not understand at the first; but when Jesus had been glorified, then they remembered that these things were written of him, and that they had done these things to him.
The multitude therefore that was with him when he called Lazarus out of the tomb and raised him from the dead bore witness.
For this cause also the multitude met him, because they had heard that he had wrought, this sign.
The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, Ye see that ye effect nothing; o! the world hath gone after him.
Now there were certain Greeks among those who came up to worship at the feast.
These came therefore to Philip, who was of Bethsaida of Galilee, and asked him, saying, Sir, we wish to see Jesus.
Philip goeth and telleth Andrew; Andrew and Philip go and tell Jesus.
But Jesus answereth them, saying, The hour hath come that the Son of man should be glorified.
Truly, truly do I say to you, Unless a grain of wheat fall into the ground and die, itself abideth alone; but if it die, it beareth much fruit.
He that loveth his life loseth it; and he that hateth his life in this world will keep it unto everlasting life.
If any one be a servant to me, let him follow me; and where I am, there also will my servant be; if any one serve me, the Father will honor him.
Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour! But for this cause I came to this hour.
Father, glorify thy name! Then came there a voice from heaven: Yea, I have glorified it, and will glorify it again.
The multitude therefore that stood by, hearing this, said that it thundered. Others said, An angel hath spoken to him.
Jesus answered and said, This voice hath come not for my sake, but for yours.
Now is the judgment of this world; now will the prince of this world be cast out;
and I, if I be lifted up from the earth, shall draw all men to me.
This he said, signifying what kind of death he was to die.
The multitude therefore answered him, We have heard out of the Law that the Christ abideth for ever; how then dost thou say that the Son of man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of man?
Jesus therefore said to them, Yet a little while is the light among you. Walk while ye have the light, that darkness may not overtake you; and he that walketh in the darkness knoweth not whither he goeth.
While ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye may become sons of light. These things spoke Jesus, and went away, and hid himself from them.
But though he had wrought so many signs before them, they did not believe in him;
that what was spoken by Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, “Lord, who hath believed our report? and to whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed?”
For this cause they could not believe, because Isaiah said again,
“He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart; lest they should see with their eyes, and understand with their heart, and turn from their ways, and I should heal them.”
These things said Isaiah, because he saw his glory, and spoke of him.
Yet even of the rulers many believed in him; but on account of the Pharisees they did not acknowledge him, lest they should be put of the synagogue;
for they loved the glory that is of men more than the glory that is of God.
But Jesus cried aloud, and said, He that believeth in me, believeth not in me, but in him that sent me;
and he that beholdeth me, beholdeth him that sent me.
I have come a light into the world, that whoever believeth in me may not remain in the darkness.
And if any one hear my words, and keep them not, I do not judge him; for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.
He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words, hath one that judgeth him; the word that I have spoken, that will judge him in the last day.
Because I have not spoken from myself; but the Father who sent me hath himself committed to me what I should say, and what I should speak;
and I know that what he hath committed to me is everlasting life. What I speak therefore, I speak as the Father hath directed me.
Now before the feast of the passover, Jesus, knowing that his hour had come that he should depart out of this world to the Father, having loved his own who were in the world, loved them unto the end.
And supper being served,—the Devil having already put it into the heart of Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon, to betray him,—
he, knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands, and that he came forth from God, and was going to God,
riseth from the supper, and layeth aside his garments, and took a towel, and girded himself.
Then he poureth water into the basin, and began to wash the disciples' feet, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was girded.
So he cometh to Simon Peter; who saith to him, Lord, dost thou wash my feet?
Jesus answered and said to him, What I do thou knowest not now, but thou wilt know hereafter.
Peter saith to him, Thou shalt never wash my feet. Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me.
Simon Peter saith to him, Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head.
Jesus saith to him, He that hath bathed needeth not to wash himself, but is wholly clean; and ye are clean, but not all.
For he knew who was about to betray him; for this reason he said, Ye are not all clean.
So after he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and placed himself again at the table, he said to them, Know ye what I have done to you?
Ye call me the Teacher, and the Lord; and ye say well; for so I am.
If I then, the Lord and the Teacher, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another's feet.
For I have given you an example, that ye also should do as I have done to you.
Truly, truly do I say to you, A servant is not greater than his lord, nor one who is sent greater than he that sent him.
If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.
I speak not of you all; I know whom I chose; but that the Scripture may be fulfilled, “He that eateth bread with me, hath lifted up his heel against me.”
I tell you now before it hath come to pass, that when it hath come to pass ye may believe that I am He.
Truly, truly do I say to you, He that receiveth whomever I send, receiveth me; and he that receiveth me, receiveth him who sent me.
Having said this, Jesus was troubled in spirit, and testified, and said, Truly, truly do I say to you, that one of you will betray me.
The disciples therefore looked at one another, doubting of whom he spoke.
There was reclining on Jesus' bosom one of his disciples, whom Jesus loved.
To him therefore Simon Peter maketh a sign, and saith to him, Tell who it is of whom he is speaking.
He, therefore, leaning back on the breast of Jesus, saith to him, Lord, who is it?
Jesus answereth, It is he for whom I shall dip the morsel and give it to him. Having therefore dipped the morsel, he taketh and giveth it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot.
And after the morsel, Satan entered into him. Jesus therefore saith to him, What thou doest, do quickly.
Now no one at the table knew for what intent he said this to him.
For some thought, because Judas kept the purse, that Jesus said to him, Buy what we need for the feast; or that he should give something to the poor.
He then, having received the morsel, went out immediately; and it was night.
When therefore he had gone out, Jesus saith, Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him.
If God is glorified in him, God will also glorify him in himself, and will immediately glorify him.
My children, yet a little while I am with you. Ye will seek me; and, as I said to the Jews, Whither I go, ye cannot come, so now I say to you.
A new commandment I give you, that ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another.
By this will all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one for another.
Simon Peter saith to him, Lord, whither dost thou go? Jesus answered, Whither I go, thou canst not follow me now; but thou wilt follow me afterward.
Peter saith to him, Lord, why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down my life for thee.
Jesus answereth, Wilt thou lay down thy life for me? Truly, truly do I say to thee, A cock will not crow, till thou hast thrice denied me.
Let not your heart be troubled. Have faith in God, and have faith in me.
In my Father's house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would have told you. For I go away to prepare a place for you;
and when I have gone away and prepared a place for you, I will come again, and will take you to myself; that where I am, ye also may be.
And ye know the way whither I go.
Thomas saith to him, Lord, we know not whither thou goest; how then do we know the way?
Jesus saith to him, I am the way, and the truth, and the life; no one cometh to the Father but through me.
If ye knew me, ye would know my Father also; and from this time ye know him, and have seen him.
Philip saith to him, Lord, show us the Father, and we shall be satisfied.
Jesus saith to him, Have I been so long time with you, and dost thou not know me, Philip? He that hath seen me hath seen the Father; how is it that thou sayest, Show us the Father?
Dost thou not believe that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? The words that I speak to you, I speak not from myself; but the Father, who dwelleth in me, doeth his works.
Believe me, that I am in the Father, and the Father in me; but if not, believe for the very works' sake.
Truly, truly do I say to you, He that believeth in me, the works that I do shall he do also, and greater than these shall he do; because I am going to the Father,
and whatever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do; that the Father may be glorified in the Son.
If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it.
If ye love me, ye will keep my commandments;
and I will pray the Father, and he will give you another Comforter, that he may be with you for ever;
the Spirit of truth, which the world cannot receive, because it doth not behold it, nor know it; ye know it, because it abideth with you, and will be in you.
I will not leave you bereaved; I am coming to you.
Yet a little while, and the world beholdeth me no more; but ye will behold me, because I live, and ye will live.
In that day ye will know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you.
He that hath my commandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me; and he that loveth me will be loved by my Father; and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him.
Judas, not Iscariot, saith to him, And how is it, Lord, that thou art going to manifest thyself to us, and not to the world?
Jesus answered and said to him, If any one loveth me, he will keep my word; and my Father will love him, and we will come to him, and make our abode with him.
He that loveth me not, keepeth not my words; and the word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's who sent me.
These things have I spoken to you, while abiding with you;
but the Comforter, the Holy Spirit which the Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things, and bring to your remembrance all things which I have said to you.
Peace I leave with you; my peace I give to you; not as the world giveth, do I give to you. Let not your heart be troubled, nor let it be afraid.
Ye heard me say to you, I am going away, and am coming again to you. If ye loved me, ye would have rejoiced that I go to the Father; for the Father is greater than I.
And now I have told you before it hath come to pass, that when it hath come to pass ye may believe.
I shall not talk much more with you. For the prince of the world cometh, and hath nothing in me.
But [[this must be]] that the world may know that I love the Father, and that as the Father gave me commandment so I do. Arise, let us go hence.
I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman.
Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away; and every branch that beareth fruit he cleanseth, that it may bear more fruit.
Ye are clean already, by reason of the word which I have spoken to you.
Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, if it abide not in the vine, so neither can ye, unless ye abide in me.
I am the vine, ye are the branches. He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same beareth much fruit; for apart from me ye can do nothing.
If any one abideth not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered; and men gather it, and cast it into the fire, and it is burned.
If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ask whatever ye will, and it shall be done for you.
Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; and ye will become my disciples.
As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved you; abide in my love.
If ye keep my commandments, ye will abide in my love, even as I have kept my Father's commandments, and abide in his love.
These things have I spoken to you, that my joy may remain in you, and that your joy may be made full.
This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you.
Greater love hath no one than this, that he lay down his life for his friends.
Ye are my friends, if ye do what I command you.
No longer do I call you servants; for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth: but I have called you friends; for all things which I have heard from my Father, I have made known to you.
Ye did not choose me, but I chose you, and appointed you, that ye should go and bear fruit, and that your fruit should remain; that whatever ye ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you.
This I command you, that ye love one another.
If the world hateth you, ye know that it hath hated me before it hated you.
If ye were of the world, the world would love its own; but because ye are not of the world, but I chose you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you.
Remember what I said to you, A servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my words, they will keep yours also.
But all these things will they do to you on account of my name, because they know not him that sent me.
If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have sin; but now they have no excuse for their sin.
He that hateth me, hateth my Father also.
If I had not done among them the works which no other man hath done, they would not have sin; but now they have both seen and hated both me and my Father.
But this cometh to pass, that the word may be fulfilled that is written in their Law: “They hated me without a cause.”
When the Comforter is come, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he will bear witness of me.
And ye also are witnesses, because ye have been with me from the beginning.
These things have I spoken to you, that ye may not fall away.
They will put you out of the synagogues; yea, the hour is coming when every one that killeth you will think that he is offering sacrifice to God.
And these things will they do, because they neither know the Father nor me.
But I have spoken these things to you, that, when the time cometh, ye may remember that I myself told you of them. But these things I told you not at the beginning, because I was with you.
But now I go to him that sent me; and none of you asketh me, Whither goest thou?
But because I have spoken these things to you, sorrow hath filled your hearts.
But I tell you the truth; it is expedient for you that I depart. For if I do not depart, the Comforter will not come to you; but if I go, I will send him to you.
And when he is come, he will bring conviction to the world, of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment.
Of sin, because they believe not in me;
of righteousness, because I go to the Father, and ye see me no more;
of judgment, because the prince of this world hath been judged.
I have yet many things to say to you, but ye cannot bear them now.
But when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all the truth. For he will not speak from himself, but whatever he shall hear, that he will speak; and he will tell you the things to come.
He will glorify me, for he will receive of what is mine, and will tell it to you.
Every thing that the Father hath is mine. For this cause I said, that he receiveth of what is mine, and will tell it to you.
A little while, and ye no longer behold me; and again a little while, and ye will see me.
Some of his disciples therefore said to one another, What is this that he saith to us, A little while, and ye behold me not, and again a little while, and ye will see me? and, Because I go to the Father?
They said therefore, What is this that he saith, A little while? We do not know what he is speaking of.
Jesus knew that they were desirous of asking him, and said to them, Is it of this that ye are inquiring of one another, that I said, A little while, and ye behold me not, and again a little while, and ye will See me?
Truly, truly do I say to you, that ye will weep and lament, but the world will rejoice; ye will be sorrowful, but your sorrow will be turned into joy.
A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow, because her hour is come; but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembereth no more the anguish, through joy that a man is born into the world.
So ye also now have sorrow; but I shall see you again, and your heart will rejoice, and your joy no one taketh from you.
And in that day ye will ask nothing of me. Truly, truly do I say to you, Whatever ye shall ask the Father, he will give it you in my name.
Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name; ask, and ye will receive, that your joy may be made full.
These things I have spoken to you in parables. The time is coming, when I shall no more speak to you in parables, but shall tell you plainly of the Father.
In that day ye will ask in my name; and I do not tell you that I will pray the Father for you;
for the Father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came forth from God.
I came forth from the Father, and have come into the world; again, I leave the world, and go to the Father.
His disciples say, Lo! now thou speakest plainly, and speakest no parable.
Now are we sure that thou knowest all things, and needest not that any one should ask thee; by this we believe that thou camest forth from God.
Jesus answered them, Do ye now believe?
Behold, the hour is coming, yea, is now come, when ye will be scattered, every one to his own, and will leave me alone; and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.
These things I have spoken to you, that in me ye may have peace. In the world ye have tribulation; but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world.
When Jesus had thus spoken, he lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father! the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that the Son may glorify thee;
according as thou gavest him authority over all flesh, that he should give everlasting life to all whom thou hast given him.
And this is the everlasting life, to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou didst send.
I have glorified thee on the earth, having finished the work which thou gavest me to do;
and now, Father! do thou glorify me with thyself, with the glory which I had with thee before the world was.
I manifested thy name to the men whom thou gavest me out of the world. Thine they were, and thou gavest them to me; and they have kept thy word.
Now they know that all things whatever thou hast given me are from thee;
for I have given to them the words which thou hast given me; and they received them, and knew surely that I came forth from thee, and believed that thou didst send me.
I pray for them; I pray not for the world, but for those whom thou hast given me; for they are thine;
and all things that are mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified in them.
And I am no longer in the world; and they are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father! keep them in thy name which thou hast given me, that they may be one, even as we are.
While I was with them, I kept them in thy name which thou hast given me, and guarded them; and no one of them is lost except the son of perdition, that the Scripture may be fulfilled.
But now I come to thee; and these things I speak in the world, that they may have my joy made full in them.
I have given them thy word; and the world hath hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.
I do not pray thee to take them out of the world, but to keep them from evil.
They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.
Sanctify them in thy truth; thy word is truth.
As thou didst send me into the world, I also sent them into the world.
And in their behalf I sanctify myself, that they also may be sanctified in the truth.
Yet not for these alone do I pray, but also for those who believe in me through their word;
that they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me and I in thee, that they also may be in us, that the world may believe that thou didst send me.
And the glory which thou hast given me, I have given them, that they may be one, even as we are one;
I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them, as thou hast loved me.
Father! as to that which thou hast given me, I desire that they also be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou hast given me; for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world.
Righteous Father! and yet the world knew thee not! but I knew thee, and these knew that thou didst send me.
And I made known to them thy name, and will make it known; that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them.
When Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his disciples across the brook Kedron, where was a garden, into which he entered with his disciples.
And Judas also, his betrayer, knew the place; because Jesus often resorted thither with his disciples.
Judas then, having received the band of soldiers, and officers from the chief priests and Pharisees, cometh thither with torches and lanterns and weapons.
But Jesus, knowing all things that were coming upon him, went forth, and saith to them, Whom do ye seek?
They answered him, Jesus the Nazarene. Jesus saith to them, I am he. Now Judas also, his betrayer, was standing with them.
As soon then as he said to them, I am he, they went backward, and fell to the ground.
Again therefore he asked them, Whom do ye seek? And they said, Jesus the Nazarene.
Jesus answered, I have told you that I am he. If therefore ye are seeking me, let these men go.
That the saying might be fulfilled which he spoke, “Of those whom thou hast given me, I have lost none.”
Then Simon Peter, having a sword, drew it and smote the servant of the high-priest, and cut off his right ear. And the servant's name was Malchus.
Jesus therefore said to Peter, Put up the sword into the sheath. The cup which the Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?
So the band and the captain, and the officers of the Jews, took Jesus and bound him,
and carried him to Annas first; for he was father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was high-priest that year.
And it was Caiaphas who counseled the Jews, that it was expedient that one man should die for the people.
And Simon Peter and the other disciple followed Jesus. That disciple was an acquaintance of the high-priest, and went with Jesus into the court of the palace of the high-priest.
But Peter was standing outside at the door. The other disciple therefore, who was an acquaintance of the high-priest, went out and spoke to her that kept the door, and brought in Peter.
Then the maid-servant that kept the door saith to Peter, Art thou also one of this man's disciples? He saith, I am not.
And the servants and the officers were standing there, having made a fire of coals, for it was cold, and were warming themselves; and Peter was standing with them and warming himself.
The high-priest then asked Jesus about his disciples, and about his teaching.
Jesus answered him, I have spoken plainly to the world; I always taught in a synagogue and in the temple, where all the Jews assemble, and in secret I spoke nothing.
Why askest thou me? Ask those who have heard, what I have spoken to them; behold, these know what I have said.
And when he had said this, one of the officers who was standing by struck Jesus on the face, saying, Is it thus that thou answerest the high-priest?
Jesus answered him, If I spoke what is evil, testify to the evil; but if well, why dost thou strike me?
Annas therefore sent him bound to Caiaphas the high-priest.
And Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. So they said to him, Art thou also one of his disciples? He denied and said, I am not.
One of the servants of the high-priest, being a kinsman of him whose ear Peter cut off, saith, Did not I see thee in the garden with him?
Then Peter denied again; and immediately a cock crew.
Then they lead Jesus from Caiaphas to the governor's palace; and it was early. And they did not themselves go into the palace, that they might not be defiled, but might eat the passover.
Pilate therefore went out to them, and saith, What accusation do ye bring against this man?
They answered and said to him, If he had not been doing evil, we would not have delivered him up to thee.
Pilate therefore said to them, Take him yourselves, and judge him according to your law. The Jews therefore said to him, It is not lawful for us to put any one to death.
That the words of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke, signifying what kind of death he was to die.
Pilate therefore went into the palace again, and called Jesus, and said to him, Art thou the King of the Jews?
Jesus answered, Dost thou say this of thyself, or did others tell thee concerning me?
Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? Thy own nation and the chief priests delivered thee up to me. What hast thou done?
Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this world, my servants would have fought, that I should not be delivered up to the Jews; but now is my kingdom not from hence.
Pilate therefore said to him, Art thou a king then? Jesus answered, Thou sayest what is true; for I am a king. For this end have I been born, and for this cause have I come into the world, that I may bear witness to the truth. Every one that is of the truth listeneth to my voice.
Pilate saith to him, What is truth? And having said this, he went out again to the Jews, and saith to them, I find nothing criminal in him.
But ye have a custom that I should release to you one at the passover: do ye desire, therefore, that I release to you the king of the Jews?
Then they cried out again, saying, Not this man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a robber.
Then therefore Pilate took Jesus and scourged him.
And the soldiers platted a crown of thorns, and put it on his head, and put on him a purple robe, and approached him
and said, Hail, king of the Jews! and they gave him blows on the face.
Again Pilate went forth, and saith to them, Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may know that I find nothing criminal in him.
Jesus therefore came forth, wearing the crown of thorns, and the purple robe. And [[Pilate]] saith to them, Behold the man!
When therefore the chief priests and the officers saw him, they cried out, saying, Crucify! crucify! Pilate saith to them, Take him yourselves, and crucify him; for I find nothing criminal in him.
The Jews answered him, We have a law, and according to the law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.
When Pilate therefore heard this, he was the more afraid;
and went again into the palace, and saith to Jesus, Whence art thou? But Jesus gave him no answer.
Pilate saith to him, Dost thou not speak to me? Dost thou not know that I have power to release thee, and have power to crucify thee?
Jesus answered, Thou wouldst have no power against me, unless it had been given thee from above; for this cause he that delivered me up to thee hath the greater sin.
From this time Pilate sought to release him. But the Jews cried out, saying, If thou release this man, thou art not a friend of Caesar. Every one that maketh himself a king, setteth himself against Caesar.
When therefore Pilate heard these words, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down on the judgment-seat, in a place called the Pavement, but in Hebrew, Gabbatha.
Now it was the preparation of the passover. It was about the sixth hour. And he saith to the Jews, Behold your king!
Upon this they cried out, Away with him! Away with him! Crucify him! Pilate saith to them, Shall I crucify your king? The chief priests answered, We have no king but Caesar.
Then therefore he delivered him up to them to be crucified. They therefore took Jesus;
and bearing his own cross, he went forth into the place called Place of a Skull; in Hebrew, Golgotha;
where they crucified him, and with him two others, one on each side, and Jesus in the midst.
And Pilate wrote an inscription also, and put it on the cross. And the writing was, “Jesus the Nazarene, the king of the Jews.”
This inscription therefore was read by many of the Jews; for the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city; and it was written in Hebrew, Latin, and Greek.
Therefore the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate, Write not, The king of the Jews; but that he said, I am king of the Jews.
Pilate answered, What I have written, I have written.
Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments and made four parts, to every soldier a part, and also his coat. Now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.
They said therefore among themselves, Let us not rend it, but cast lots for it, whose it shall be. That the scripture might be fulfilled: “They parted my garments among them, and for my vesture they cast lots.” These things the soldiers did.
Now there stood by the cross of Jesus his mother and his mother's sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary the Magdalene.
Jesus therefore, when he saw his mother, and the disciple whom he loved standing by, saith to his mother, Woman, behold thy son!
Then he saith to the disciple, Behold thy mother! And from that hour the disciple took her to his own home.
After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now finished, in order that the Scripture might be accomplished, saith, I thirst.
A vessel was brought full of vinegar; and putting a sponge filled with vinegar upon a stalk of hyssop, they raised it to his mouth.
When therefore he had received the vinegar, he said, It is finished! and he bowed his head, and yielded up his spirit.
The Jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that the bodies might not remain upon the cross on the sabbath, for that sabbath was a great day, besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away.
So the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first, and of the other who was crucified with him.
But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was already dead, they broke not his legs;
but one of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and immediately there came out blood and water.
And he that hath seen hath borne witness, and his witness is true; and he knoweth that he saith what is true, that ye also may believe.
For these things came to pass, that the scripture might be fulfilled, “A bone of him shall not be broken.”
And again another scripture saith, “They shall look on him whom they pierced.”
And after this, Joseph of Arimathaea, being a disciple of Jesus, but concealing it for fear of the Jews, besought Pilate that he might take away the body of Jesus; and Pilate gave him leave. They came therefore and took him away.
Nicodemus also, he who at the first went to him by night, came bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about a hundred pounds weight.
Then they took the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen cloths with the spices, as is the manner of the Jews in preparing for burial.
Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden, and in the garden a new tomb, in which no one had ever been laid.
There then, on account of the Jews' preparation-day, they laid Jesus; for the tomb was at hand.
But on the first day of the week Mary the Magdalene cometh early, while it was yet dark, to the tomb, and seeth that the stone had been taken away from the tomb.
She runneth therefore, and cometh to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple, whom Jesus loved, and saith to them, They have taken away the Lord out of the tomb, and we know not where they have laid him.
Peter therefore went forth, and the other disciple, and they set out for the tomb.
And they ran both together; and the other disciple outran Peter, and came first to the tomb.
And stooping down, he seeth the linen cloths lying; but he did not go in.
Then cometh also Simon Peter following him, and he went into the tomb; and he beholdeth the linen cloths lying,
and the napkin that was about his head, not lying with the linen cloths, but folded up in a place by itself.
Then therefore went in also the other disciple, who came first to the tomb; and he saw, and believed.
For not even yet did they know the Scripture, that he must rise from the dead.
So the disciples went away again to their home.
But Mary was standing without by the tomb weeping. And as she wept, she stooped down into the tomb,
and beholdeth two angels in white sitting, one at the head, and one at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain.
And they say to her, Woman, why dost thou weep? She saith to them, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him.
Having said this, she turned back, and beheld Jesus standing; and knew not that it was Jesus.
Jesus saith to her, Woman, why dost thou weep? whom dost thou seek? She, supposing that it was the gardener, saith to him, Sir, if thou hast borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away.
Jesus saith to her, Mary! She turned and saith to him in Hebrew, Rabboni! Which signifieth, Teacher!
Jesus saith to her, Touch me not; for I have not yet ascended to the Father; but go to my brethren, and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and my God and your God.
Mary the Magdalene cometh, bringing word to the disciples that she had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her.
When therefore it was evening on that day, which was the first day of the week, and the doors where the disciples were had been shut for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst, and said to them, Peace be to you!
And having said this, he showed them his hands and his side. The disciples therefore were glad, when they saw the Lord.
Then he said to them again, Peace be to you! As the Father hath sent me, I also send you.
And having said this, he breathed on them, and saith to them, Receive the Holy Spirit.
Whosever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whosever ye retain, they are retained.
But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came.
The other disciples therefore said to him, We have seen the Lord. But he said to them, Unless I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the place of the nails, and put my hand into his side, I shall not believe.
And after eight days the disciples were again within, and Thomas with them. Jesus cometh, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said, Peace be to you!
Then he saith to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands, and reach forth thy hand, and put it into my side; and be not faithless, but believing.
Thomas answered and said to him, My Lord and my God!
Jesus saith to him, Because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed; blessed are they who have not seen, and yet have believed.
Many other signs did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book.
But these have been written, that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing ye may have life in his name.
After these things he manifested himself again to the disciples at the lake of Tiberias. And he manifested himself in this manner.
There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas called Didymus, and Nathanael of Cana of Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two others of his disciples.
Simon Peter saith to them, I am going a fishing. They say to him, We also will go with thee. They set out and went into the boat, and on that night caught nothing.
But when the morning was coming on, Jesus stood on the shore; but the disciples did not know that it was Jesus.
Then Jesus saith to them, Children, have ye any fish? They answered him, No.
And he said to them, Cast the net on the right side of the boat, and ye will find. And they cast it, and now they were not able to draw it for the multitude of the fishes.
Therefore that disciple whom Jesus loved saith to Peter, It is the Lord. Simon Peter therefore, hearing that it was the Lord, girded on his outer garment, for he had on nothing but his under one, and threw himself into the lake.
And the other disciples came in the boat, (for they were not far from land, only about two hundred cubits,) dragging the net with the fishes.
When therefore they had come to land, they see a fire of coals there, and a fish lying thereon, and bread.
Jesus saith to them, Bring of the fish which ye have now caught.
Simon Peter therefore went on board, and drew the net to land full of great fishes, a hundred and fifty three; and though there were so many, the net was not broken.
Jesus saith to them, Come and breakfast. But no one of the disciples durst ask him, Who art thou? knowing that it was the Lord.
Jesus cometh and taketh the bread, and giveth them, and the fish likewise.
This is now the third time that Jesus manifested himself to his disciples, after he had risen from the dead.
So when they had breakfasted, Jesus saith to Simon Peter, Simon, son of John, lovest thou me more than these? He saith to him, Yea, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee. He saith to him, Feed my lambs.
He saith to him again a second time, Simon, son of John, lovest thou me? He saith to him, Yea, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee. He saith to him, Tend my sheep.
He saith to him the third time, Simon, son of John, lovest thou me? Peter was grieved because he said to him the third time, Lovest thou me? And he said to him, Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith to him, Feed my sheep.
Truly, truly do I say to thee, when thou wast young, thou didst gird thyself, and walk whither thou wouldst; but when thou hast grown old, thou wilt stretch forth thy hands, and another will gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldst not.
This he said, signifying by what manner of death he was to glorify God. And having thus spoken, he saith to him, Follow me.
Peter, turning round, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following,—who also at supper leaned back on his breast, and said, Lord, who is he that betrayeth thee?—
Peter, seeing him, saith to Jesus, Lord, and how will it be with him?
Jesus saith to him, If it be my will that he remain till I come, what is it to thee? Follow thou me.
This report therefore went abroad among the brethren, that this disciple was not to die. And yet Jesus did not say to him, He will not die; but, If it be my will that he remain till I come, what is it to thee?
This is the disciple who testifieth of these things, and hath written these things; and we know that his testimony is true.

The former narrative I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus both did and taught from the beginning
until the day in which, after he had through the Holy Spirit given commandments to the apostles whom he had chosen, he was taken up;
to whom also he showed himself living, after he had suffered, by many sure proofs, appearing to them during forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God.
And while in assembly with them, he commanded them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for what had been promised by the Father, which [[said he]] ye heard from me;
for John indeed baptized with water, but ye will be baptized in the Holy Spirit not many days hence.
They therefore, having come together, asked him, saying, Lord, art thou at this time about to restore the kingdom to Israel?
But he said to them, It belongeth not to you to know times or seasons, which the Father appointed by his own authority.
But ye will receive power when the Holy Spirit hath come upon you; and ye will be my witnesses, both in Jerusalem and in all Judaea, and in Samaria, and to the end of the earth.
And having thus spoken, while they beheld, he was taken up; and a cloud received him out of their sight.
And while they were looking earnestly into heaven as he went up, lo! two men stood by them in white apparel,
who said, Men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? This Jesus, who hath been taken up from you into heaven, will come in the same manner in which ye beheld him going into heaven.
Then they returned to Jerusalem, from the mount called Olivet, which is near Jerusalem, within a sabbath-day's journey.
And when they had come in, they went up into the upper room where they were making their abode, namely, Peter and John and James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus, and Simon the zealot, and Judas the brother of James.
These all continued with one accord in prayer, with women and Mary the mother of Jesus, and his brothers.
And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the brethren, and said, (the number of the names together was about one hundred and twenty,)
Brethren, it was necessary that this scripture should be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit through the mouth of David spoke before concerning Judas, who became guide to those who took Jesus.
For he was numbered among us, and obtained the allotment of this ministry.
Now this man purchased a field with the wages of the iniquity; and falling headlong he burst asunder in the middle, and all his bowels gushed out.
And it became known to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that that field is called in their own tongue, Aceldamach, that is, Field of Blood.
For it is written in the book of Psalms, “Let his habitation be made desolate, and let no one dwell therein;” and, “Let another take his office.”
Of these men, therefore, who accompanied us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,
from the baptism of John until the day when he was taken up from us, must one be made a witness with us of his resurrection.
And they proposed two, Joseph called Barsabbas, who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias.
And they prayed saying, Thou, Lord, who knowest the hearts of all men, show which of these two thou hast chosen
to take the part of this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell away, that he might go to his own place.
And they cast lots for them; and the lot fell upon Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.
And on the day of Pentecost they were all together in one place.
And suddenly there came out of heaven a sound, as of a rushing mighty wind; and it filled the whole house where they were sitting;
and there appeared to them tongues as of fire, distributing themselves; and one sat upon each of them.
And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak with other tongues, even as the Spirit gave them utterance.
Now there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, from every nation under heaven.
And when this sound took place, the multitude came together, and were confounded, because every one heard them speaking in his own language.
And they were amazed, and marveled, saying, Behold, are not all these who speak Galilaeans?
and how is it that we every one hear them in our own language, wherein we were born?
Parthians and Medes and Elamites, and those who inhabit Mesopotamia, Judaea and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia,
Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts of Libya about Cyrene, and Romans who sojourn here, both Jews and Proselytes,
Cretans and Arabians—how is it that we hear them speaking in our tongues the wonderful works of God?
And they were all amazed and were in doubt, saying one to another, What can this mean?
Others making sport of it, said, They are full of new wine.
But Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice, and said to them, Men of Judea, and all that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known to you, and hearken to my words.
For these are not drunken, as ye suppose; for it is the third hour of the day;
but this is what was spoken through the prophet Joel,
“It shall be in the last days, saith God, that I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters will prophesy, and your young men will see visions, and your old men will dream dreams;
and even on my servants, and on my handmaids, I will pour out of my Spirit in those days, and they will prophesy.
And I will show wonders in heaven above, and signs on the earth beneath, blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke;
the sun will be turned into darkness and the moon into blood, before the day of the Lord cometh, the great and notable day.
And it shall be that every one that calleth on the name of the Lord shall be saved.”
Men of Israel, hear these words! Jesus the Nazarene, a man approved of God to you by miracles, and wonders, and signs, which God wrought by him in the midst of you, as ye yourselves know,—
this man, being delivered up by the settled purpose and foreknowledge of God, ye, by the hand of godless men, crucified and slew.
But God raised him up, having loosed the pains of death, because it was not possible that he should be held by it.
For David saith concerning him, “I saw the Lord always before me; because he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved.
Therefore my heart rejoiced, and my tongue exulted; moreover also, my flesh shall dwell in hope;
because thou wilt not abandon my soul to the underworld, nor wilt thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption.
Thou didst make known to me the ways of life; thou wilt make me full of joy with thy countenance.”
Brethren, I may speak to you with freedom of the patriarch David, that he both died and was buried, and his tomb is among us to this day.
Being then a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn to him with an oath that he would set one sprung from his loins upon his throne,
he foresaw and spoke of the resurrection of Christ, that neither was he abandoned to the underworld, nor did his flesh see corruption.
This Jesus God raised up, whereof we all are witnesses.
Being therefore exalted by the right hand of God, and having received from the Father the promised Holy Spirit, he hath poured forth this, which ye both see and hear.
For David did not ascend into the heavens; but he himself saith, The Lord said to my lord, “Sit thou on my right hand,
until I make thine enemies thy footstool.”
Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God hath made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom ye crucified.
And when they heard this, they were pierced to the heart, and said to Peter and the rest of the apostles, Brethren, what must we do?
But Peter said to them, Repent, and let every one of you be baptized to the name of Jesus Christ for forgiveness of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.
For the promise is to you and to your children, and to all that are afar off, as many as the Lord our God shall call.
And with many other words did he testify and exhort, saying, Save yourselves from this perverse generation.
They therefore received his word, and were baptized; and there were added on that day about three thousand souls.
And they were constantly attending on the teaching of the apostles, and the imparting [[of their substance]], the breaking of bread, and the prayers.
And fear came upon every soul; and many wonders and signs were wrought through the apostles.
And all that believed were together, and had all things common;
and they sold their possessions and goods, and divided them among all, as any one had need.
And attending daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread in a private house, they partook of their food with gladness and singleness of heart,
praising God, and having favor with all the people. And the Lord added to the church daily those who were in the way of salvation.
And Peter and John were going up together to the temple, at the hour of prayer, which is the ninth hour.
And a certain man lame from his birth was carried along, whom they laid daily at the gate of the temple which is called Beautiful, to ask alms of those who entered the temple;
who, seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple, asked alms.
And Peter fixing his eyes upon him, with John, said, Look upon us.
And he gave heed to them, expecting to receive something from them.
Then Peter said, Silver and gold have I none; but what I have I give thee. In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene, rise up and walk.
And grasping him by the right hand, he raised him up; and immediately his feet and ankles received strength.
And leaping forth he stood, and walked, and entered with them into the temple, walking and leaping, praising God.
And all the people saw him walking, and praising God;
and they recognized him as the man that sat for alms at the Beautiful Gate of the temple; and they were filled with wonder and amazement at that which had happened to him.
And as he held fast to Peter and John, all the people ran together to them in the porch that is called Solomon's greatly wondering.
But Peter seeing it, answered the people: Men of Israel, why wonder ye at this? Or why look ye earnestly on us, as though by our own power or godliness we had made this man to walk?
The God of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, the God of our fathers, hath glorified his servant Jesus, whom ye indeed delivered up, and denied him in the presence of Pilate, when he had decided to release him.
But ye denied the holy and righteous one, and asked that a murderer should be granted to you.
But the author of life ye killed; whom God raised from the dead, whereof we are witnesses.
And his name, through faith in his name, made this man strong, whom ye see and know; yea, the faith which is through him gave him this perfect soundness in the presence of you all.
And now, brethren, I know that ye acted in ignorance, as did also your rulers.
But God thus fulfilled what he had before announced by the mouth of all the prophets, that his Christ should suffer.
Repent therefore and turn from your ways, that your sins may be blotted out, in order that the times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord,
and that he may send forth Christ Jesus, who was before appointed for you;
whom heaven indeed must receive until the times of a restoration of all things; of which times God spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets from the days of old.
Moses indeed said, “A prophet will the Lord your God raise up to you from among your brethren, as be raised up me; him shall ye hear in all things, whatever he shall speak to you.
And it shall come to pass, that every soul which doth not hear that prophet shall be utterly destroyed from among the people.”
And all the prophets also, Samuel and those who followed, as many as spoke, announced these days.
Ye are the sons of the prophets, and of the covenant which God made with our fathers, saying to Abraham, “And in thy posterity shall all the families of the earth be blessed.”
To you first, God, having raised up his servant, sent him to bless you in turning away every one of you from your iniquities.
And while they were speaking to the people, the priests and the captain of the temple and the Sadducees came upon them,
being indignant that they taught the people, and proclaimed in Jesus the resurrection from the dead.
And they laid hands upon them, and put them in prison until the next day; for it was now evening.
Many however of those who heard the word believed; and the number of the men became five thousand.
And it came to pass on the next day, that their rulers and elders and scribes,
and Annas the high-priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and as many as were of the kindred of the high-priest, were gathered together at Jerusalem.
And when they had set them in the midst, they asked, By what power, or by what name, did ye do this?
Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them, Rulers of the people, and elders of Israel!
If we are this day examined in respect to a good deed done to a cripple, by what means he hath been restored,
be it known to you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead,—by him doth this man stand here before you sound.
This is the stone which was set at nought by you the builders, which is become a cornerstone.
And there is salvation in no other; for there is not another name under heaven, that hath been given among men, by which we must be saved.
And when they beheld the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that they were unlearned and common men, they wondered; and they recognized them as having been with Jesus.
And seeing the man that had been cured standing with them, they could say nothing in reply.
But when they had commanded them to go aside out of the council, they conferred among themselves,
saying, What shall we do to these men? for that indeed a remarkable sign hath been wrought by them is manifest to all that dwell in Jerusalem; and we cannot deny it.
But that it spread no further among the people, let us strictly forbid them with threats to speak any longer in this name to any one.
And they called them, and commanded them not to speak at all, nor teach, in the name of Jesus.
But Peter and John answered and said to them, Whether it is right in the sight of God to hearken to you rather than to God, judge ye.
For we cannot but speak the things which we saw and heard.
So, having further threatened them, they let them go, finding no way to punish them, on account of the people; because all were glorifying God for that which had been done.
For the man was above forty years old, on whom this sign of the healing had been wrought.
And being released they went to their own company, and reported all that the chief priests and elders had said to them.
And on hearing it, they lifted up their voice to God with one accord, and said, Lord, thou art he that made heaven and earth and sea, and all things that are in them;
who by the mouth of thy servant David said, “Why did the heathen rage, and the peoples meditate vain things?
The kings of the earth came up, and the rulers assembled together, against the Lord, and against his Anointed.”
For in truth against thy holy servant Jesus, whom thou didst anoint, did both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the gentiles, and the peoples of Israel, assemble in this city,
to do whatever thy hand and thy will before determined to be done.
And now, Lord, look upon their threatenings, and grant to thy servants that with all boldness they may speak thy word,
while thou stretchest forth thy hand to heal, and signs and wonders are wrought through the name of thy holy servant Jesus.
And when they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were assembled; and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and they spoke the word of God with boldness.
And the multitude of those who believed were of one heart, and of one soul; and not one of them said that aught of the things which he possessed was his own; but they had all things common.
And with great power did the apostles give their testimony to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus; and great grace was upon them all.
For there was no one among them that was in want; for as many as were possessors of lands or houses sold them, and brought the prices of the things that were sold,
and laid them at the feet of the apostles; and distribution was made to every one, according as he had need.
And Joseph, who by the apostles was surnamed Barnabas, (which is, when interpreted, Son of consolation,) a Levite, born in Cyprus,
having land, sold it, and brought the money, and laid it at the feet of the apostles.
But a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, sold a possession,
and kept back part of the price, his wife also having knowledge of it; and brought a certain part, and laid it at the feet of the apostles.
But Peter said, Ananias, why did Satan fill thy heart that thou shouldst lie to the Holy Spirit, and keep back part of the price of the land?
While it remained, was it not thine own? And after it was sold, was it not in thine own power? Why didst thou conceive this thing in thy heart? Thou didst not lie to men, but to God.
And Ananias, hearing these words, fell down, and expired. And great fear came on all that heard of it.
And the young men arose, and wrapt him up, and carried him out, and buried him.
And it was about the space of three hours after, when his wife, not knowing what had happened, came in.
Peter said to her, Tell me whether ye sold the land for so much. And she said, Yes, for so much.
And Peter said to her, Why is it that ye agreed together to try the Spirit of the Lord? Lo! the feet of those who have buried thy husband are at the door, and they will carry thee out.
And she fell down immediately at his feet, and expired; and the young men, when they came in, found her dead, and carried her out, and buried her by her husband.
And great fear came upon all the church, and upon all that heard of these things.
And many signs and wonders were wrought among the people by the hands of the apostles; and they were all with one accord in Solomon's porch.
But of the rest no one dared to join himself to them. But the people highly honored them;
and more and more were believers added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women;
so that in the streets they brought out the sick, and laid them on beds and couches, in order that at least the shadow of Peter, as he passed, might overshadow some of them.
The multitude also belonging to the cities around came together to Jerusalem bringing the sick, and those plagued by unclean spirits; and they were all healed.
But the high-priest and all that were with him, which is the sect of the Sadducees, rose up and were filled with indignation,
and laid hands on the apostles, and put them in the public prison.
But an angel of the Lord in the night opened the prison-doors, and brought them forth and said,
Go, stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life.
And hearing this, they went into the temple at daybreak and taught. But the high-priest and they that were with him came and called together the council, and all the elders of the sons of Israel, and sent to the prison to have them brought.
But the officers that came did not find them in the prison; and they returned and brought word,
saying, The prison we found shut in all security and the keepers standing at the doors: but when we opened them, we found no one within.
And when the priest, and the captain of the temple, and the chief priests heard these words, they were at a loss concerning them, to what this would come.
But one came and brought them word, Lo! the men whom ye put in prison are standing in the temple and teaching the people.
Then went the captain with the officers, and brought them without violence, that they might not be stoned; for they feared the people.
And having brought them, they set them before the council. And the high-priest questioned them,
saying, We strictly commanded you not to teach in this name, and lo! ye have filled Jerusalem with your teaching, and mean to bring this man's blood upon us.
But Peter and the apostles answered and said, We ought to obey God rather than men.
The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew by hanging him on a cross;
him hath God exalted by his right hand, as a Leader and Saviour, to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins.
And we are his witnesses of these things, and so also is the Holy Spirit which God hath given to those who obey him.
But when they heard this, they were filled with rage, and were resolving to kill them.
But there stood up one in the council, a Pharisee, named Gamaliel, a doctor of the law, in high esteem with all the people, and commanded to put the men forth a little while,
and said to them [[of the council]], Men of Israel, take heed to yourselves as to what ye are about to do in respect to these men.
For before these days arose Theudas, boasting himself to be somebody; to whom a number of men, about four hundred, joined themselves: who was slain, and all, as many as obeyed him, were scattered, and came to nought.
After this man arose Judas the Galilaean, in the days of the registering, and drew people away after him; he also perished, and all, as many as obeyed him, were dispersed.
And now I say to you, Refrain from these men, and let them alone; for if this design or this work be of men, it will come to nought;
but if it be of God, ye will not be able to overthrow them; lest haply ye be found also fighting against God.
And they were persuaded by him; and having called the apostles, they beat them, and commanded them not to speak in the name of Jesus, and released them.
They therefore went away from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame in behalf of that name;
and every day, in the temple, and in houses, they ceased not to teach, and to publish the glad tidings concerning Jesus the Christ.
But in those days, when the number of the disciples was multiplying, there arose a murmuring of the Hellenists against the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily ministration.
And the twelve called the multitude of the disciples to them, and said, It doth not seem to us proper, that we should leave the word of God, and provide for tables.
Therefore, brethren, look out among you seven men of good repute, full of the Spirit and of wisdom, whom we will appoint over this business;
but we will give ourselves closely to prayer, and to the ministry of the word.
And what was said pleased the whole multitude. And they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolaus a proselyte of Antioch,
whom they set before the apostles; and when they had prayed, they laid their hands on them.
And the word of God increased; and the number of the disciples in Jerusalem was greatly enlarged; and a great multitude of the priests were obedient to the faith.
And Stephen, full of grace and power, wrought great wonders and signs among the people.
But some of those who belonged to the so-called synagogue of the Freedmen, and of the Cyrenaeans and Alexandrians, and of those from Cilicia and Asia, arose and disputed with Stephen;
and they were not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit with which he spoke.
Then they suborned men, who said, We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses, and God.
And they stirred up the people, and the elders, and the scribes, and came upon him, and seized him, and brought him to the council,
and set up false witnesses, who said, This man ceaseth not to speak words against the holy place, and the Law.
For we have heard him say, This Jesus the Nazarene will destroy this place, and change the customs which Moses delivered to us.
And all that sat in the council, looking steadily upon him, saw his face like the face of an angel.
And the high-priest said, Are then these things so?
And he said, Brethren and fathers, hearken. The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Haran,
and said to him, “Go forth from thy country and thy kindred, and come into the land which I will show thee.”
Then came he out of the land of the Chaldaeans, and dwelt in Haran; and from thence, after his father was dead, he caused him to remove into this land wherein ye now dwell;
and he gave him no inheritance in it, no, not so much as to set his foot on; and he promised to give it to him for a possession, and to his posterity after him, when as yet he had no child.
And God spoke in this manner: “That his posterity should sojourn in a foreign land, and that they would bring them into bondage, and ill-treat them four hundred years;
and the nation to which they shall be in bondage will I judge,” said God; “and after that they shall come forth, and shall worship me in this place.”
And he gave him the covenant of circumcision; and so he begat Isaac, and circumcised him on the eighth day; and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob the twelve patriarchs.
And the patriarchs, moved with envy, sold Joseph into Egypt; and God was with him,
and delivered him out of all his afflictions, and gave him favor and wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh king of Egypt; and he made him governor over Egypt, and all his house.
Now there came a famine over all the land of Egypt and Canaan, and great distress; and our fathers found no Sustenance.
But Jacob, hearing that there was grain in Egypt, sent out our fathers first.
And at the second time Joseph was recognized by his brothers, and the kindred of Joseph became known to Pharaoh.
Then Joseph sent and called his father Jacob to him, and all his kindred, seventy five souls.
And Jacob went down [[into Egypt]], and died, he and our fathers.
And they were removed to Shechem, and laid in the tomb that Abraham bought for a sum of money of the sons of Hamor, the father of Shechem.
But as the time of the promise drew near, which God solemnly made to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt,
until another king arose, who knew not Joseph.
The same dealt subtly with our race, and ill-treated our fathers, so that they should cast out their infants, that they might not be preserved alive.
In which time Moses was born, and was exceedingly fair; who was nourished in his father's house three months.
And when he was cast out, Pharaoh's daughter took him up, and nourished him for herself as a son.
And Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty in his worlds and deeds.
And when he was forty years old, it came into his heart to visit his brethren, the sons of Israel.
And seeing one of them suffer wrong, he defended him, and avenged him that was oppressed by smiting the Egyptian.
For he supposed his brethren would understand that God through his hand would give them salvation; but they understood not.
And the next day he showed himself to them as they were contending, and urged them to peace, saying, Ye are brethren; why do ye wrong one another?
But he who was wronging his neighbor thrust him away, saying, “Who made thee a ruler and a judge over us?
Dost thou mean to kill me, as thou didst kill the Egyptian yesterday?”
And Moses fled at this saying, and became a sojourner in the land of Midian, where he begat two sons.
And when forty years were completed, there appeared to him in the wilderness of Mount Sinai an angel in the flaming fire of a bush.
And Moses seeing it wondered at the sight; and as he drew near to behold it, the voice of the Lord came [[to him]],
saying, “I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob.” And Moses trembled and durst not behold.
And the Lord said to him, “Loose the sandals from thy feet; for the place where thou standest is holy ground.
I have surely seen the oppression of my people in Egypt, and I have heard their groaning, and am come down to deliver them; and now, come, I will send thee into Egypt.”
This Moses, whom they denied, saying, “Who made thee a ruler and a judge?” this very man did God send both as a ruler and a redeemer with the hand of the angel who appeared to him in the bush.
This very man brought them out, working wonders and signs in the land of Egypt, and in the Red Sea, and in the wilderness forty years.
This is the Moses who said to the sons of Israel, “A prophet will God raise up to you from among your brethren, as he raised up me.”
This is he that was in the assembly in the wilderness with the anger who spake to him on Mount Sinai, and with our fathers; who received the living oracles to give to us;
to whom our fathers would not be obedient, but thrust him from them, and in their hearts turned back into Egypt,
saying to Aaron, “Make us gods who shall go before us; for as for this Moses, who brought us out of the land of Egypt, we know not what is become of him.”
And they made a calf in those days, and offered sacrifice to the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their own hands.
But God turned away, and gave them up to worship the host of heaven; as it is written in the book of the Prophets, “Did ye offer to me slain beasts and sacrifices for forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel?
And ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of the god Rephan, the figures which ye made to worship them; and I will carry you away beyond Babylon.”
Our fathers had the tabernacle of the testimony in the wilderness, as he that spoke to Moses commanded that he should make it according to the pattern that he had seen;
which also our fathers received and brought in with Joshua, at their taking possession of the gentiles whom God drove out from before our fathers, until the days of David;
who found favor before God, and asked that he might find a habitation for the God of Jacob.
But Solomon built him a house.
Yet the Most High dwelleth not in [[temples]] made with hands; as saith the prophet,
“Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool. What house will ye build for me? saith the Lord; or what is the place of my rest?
Did not my hands make all these things?”
Stiffnecked, and uncircumcised in heart and ears! ye do always resist the Holy Spirit; as your fathers did, so do ye.
Which of the prophets did not your fathers persecute? And they slew those who foretold the coming of the righteous one, of whom ye have now become the betrayers and murderers;
ye who received the Law as ordained through angels, and did not keep it.
But when they heard these things, their hearts were filled with rage, and they gnashed their teeth at him.
But, being full of the Holy Spirit, he looked up earnestly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God,
and said, Lo, I behold the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God.
And they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and rushed upon him with one accord;
and having cast him out of the city, they stoned him. And the witnesses laid down their garments at the feet of a young man named Saul;
and they stoned Stephen, making supplication, and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.
And kneeling down he cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And saying this, he fell asleep.
And Saul was consenting to his death. And there arose on that day a great persecution against the church which was at Jerusalem; and all were scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judaea and Samaria, except the apostles.
And devout men carried Stephen to his burial, and made great lamentation over him.
But Saul ravaged the church, entering house after house, and dragging both men and women, committed them to prison.
Now those that had been scattered abroad went through the country preaching the word.
And Philip went down to a city of Samaria, and preached to them the Christ.
And the multitudes with one accord gave heed to the things spoken by Philip, when they heard and saw the signs which he wrought.
For from many that had unclean spirits came they out crying with a loud voice; and many that were palsied, and that were lame, were cured.
And there was great joy in that city.
But before their arrival a certain man, named Simon, was in the city, a man practising sorcery, and amazing the people of Samaria, saying that he himself was some great person;
to whom they gave heed, from the least to the greatest, saying, This man is the Power of God, which is called Great.
And to him they gave heed, because they had for a long time been amazed by his sorceries.
But when they believed Philip, publishing the glad tidings concerning the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women.
And Simon himself also believed, and having been baptized he continued with Philip, and was amazed when he beheld the miracles and signs which were wrought.
And the apostles at Jerusalem, hearing that Samaria had received the word of God, sent to them Peter and John;
who, having come down, prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Spirit.
For it had not yet fallen upon any of them; but they had only been baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus.
Then they laid their hands on them, and they received the Holy Spirit.
But Simon, seeing that the Spirit was given through the laying on of the apostles' hands, offered them money,
saying, Give me also this power, that on whomever I lay my hands, he may receive the Holy Spirit.
But Peter said to him, Thy money perish with thee! because thou didst think to obtain the gift of God with money.
Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter; for thy heart is not right in the sight of God.
Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray the Lord, if haply the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee.
For I perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity.
And Simon answering said, Pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of the things which ye have spoken may come upon me.
They then, when they had testified and spoken the word of the Lord, were returning to Jerusalem, and publishing the glad tidings in many villages of the Samaritans.
But an angel of the Lord spoke to Philip, saying, Arise, and go towards the south, to the way that goeth down from Jerusalem to Gaza. This is a desert way.
And he arose and went; and lo! a man of Ethiopia, a eunuch, a high officer of Candace queen of the Ethiopians, who had the charge of all her treasure, and had come to Jerusalem to worship,
was returning and sitting in his chariot; and he was reading the prophet Isaiah.
And the Spirit said to Philip, Go near and join thyself to this chariot.
And Philip ran up, and heard him reading Isaiah the prophet, and said, Well, but dost thou understand what thou art reading?
And he said, How can I, unless some one shall guide me? And he invited Philip to come up and sit with him.
And the passage of the scripture which he was reading was this: “He was led as a sheep to the slaughter; and like a lamb dumb before his shearer, so he openeth not his mouth.
In his humiliation judgment was refused him; and who shall describe his generation? for his life is taken away from the earth.”
And the eunuch answering said, I pray thee, of whom doth the prophet say this? Of himself, or of some other man?
And Philip opened his mouth, and beginning with this scripture declared to him the glad tidings concerning Jesus.
And as they went along the road, they came to a certain water; and the eunuch saith, See, here is water; what is there to hinder my being baptized?

And he commanded that the chariot should stop; and they both went down into the water, both Philip and the eunuch; and he baptized him.
But when they had come up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip; and the eunuch saw him no more, for he went on his way rejoicing.
But Philip was found at Azotus; and passing through, he published the glad tidings in all the cities, till he came to Caesarea.
But Saul, yet breathing out threatening and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest,
and asked of him letters to Damascus to the synagogues, that if he found any who were of this way of belief, whether they were men or women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem.
And as he journeyed, he came near Damascus; and suddenly there shone around a him a light from heaven;
and he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying to him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And he answered, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest.
But arise, and go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do.
And the men that journeyed with him stood speechless, hearing the voice, but seeing no one.
And Saul arose from the earth; but when his eyes were opened, he saw nothing; and they led him by the hand, and brought him into Damascus.
And he was three days without sight, and neither ate nor drank.
And there was a certain disciple at Damascus, named Ananias, and to him the Lord said in a vision, Ananias! And he said, Behold, I am here, Lord.
And the Lord said to him, Arise, and go into the street called Straight, and inquire in the house of Judas for one called Saul, of Tarsus; for lo! he prayeth,
and hath seen a man, named Ananias, coming in and putting his hand on him, that he might receive sight.
But Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard from many about this man, how great evils he hath done to thy saints at Jerusalem.
And here he hath authority from the chief priests to bind all that call on thy name.
But the Lord said to him, Go; for this man is to me a chosen vessel, to bear my name before nations, and kings, and the sons of Israel.
For I myself will show him how great things he must suffer for my name's sake.
And Ananias went away, and entered the house; and putting his hands on him, he said, Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus who appeared to thee in the way thou camest, hath sent me, that thou mayst receive sight, and be filled with the Holy Spirit.
And immediately there fell off from his eyes as it were scales; and he received sight, and arose, and was baptized.
And having taken some food he was strengthened. And he was some days with the disciples in Damascus.
And immediately he preached Jesus in the synagogues, that he is the Son of God.
And all that heard him were amazed, and said, Is not this he that destroyed in Jerusalem those who called on this name? And he hath come hither for this purpose, that he may bring them bound to the chief priests.
But Saul gained still more strength, and confounded the Jews who dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is the Christ.
But after many days had passed, the Jews took counsel together to kill him;
but their plot became known to Saul; and they were even watching the gates day and night to kill him.
But his disciples took him by night, and let him down through the wall, lowering him in a basket.
And when he had come to Jerusalem, he attempted to join himself to the disciples; and they were all afraid of him, not believing that he was a disciple.
But Barnabas took him, and brought him to the apostles, and related to them how he had seen the Lord on the road, and that he had spoken to him, and hew he had preached boldly at Damascus in the name of Jesus.
And he was with them going in and out at Jerusalem,
speaking boldly in the name of the Lord. And he often spoke and disputed with the Hellenists; but they were endeavoring to slay him.
But the brethren obtaining knowledge of it, brought him down to Caesarea, and sent him forth to Tarsus.
The church therefore throughout all Judaea and Galilee and Samaria had peace, being built up, and walking in the fear of the Lord; and by the exhortation of the Holy Spirit it was greatly increased.
And it came to pass, that as Peter went through the whole country, he came down also to the saints who dwelt at Lydda.
And there he found a certain man named AEneas, who had lain on a bed eight years, and was palsied.
And Peter said to him, AEneas, Jesus the Christ healeth thee; arise, and make thy bed. And he arose immediately.
And all that dwelt in Lydda and Sharon saw him; and they turned to the Lord.
Now at Joppa there was a certain disciple named Tabitha, which name being interpreted is the same as Dorcas, that is, Gazelle. This woman was full of good works and alms-deeds which she did.
And it came to pass in those days, that she fell sick, and died; and when they had washed her, they laid her in an upper chamber.
And as Lydda was near Joppa, the disciples, having heard that Peter was there, sent to him two men with the entreaty, Do not delay to come to us.
Then Peter arose, and went with them. When he was come, they brought him into the upper chamber; and all the widows came to him weeping, and showing the coats and cloaks which Dorcas made while she was with them.
But Peter put them all forth, and kneeled down and prayed; and turning to the body he said, Tabitha, arise. And she opened her eyes; and seeing Peter, she sat up.
And he gave her his hand, and raised her up; and calling the saints and the widows, he presented her alive.
And it became known throughout all Joppa; and many believed in the Lord.
And it came to pass, that he tarried many days in Joppa with one Simon, a tanner.
Now a certain man in Caesarea, named Cornelius, a centurion of the band called the Italian band,
a devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, giving much alms to the people, and praying to God always,
saw in a vision plainly, about the ninth hour of the day, an angel of God coming in to him, and saying to him, Cornelius!
And he, looking steadily at him, and becoming affrighted, said, What is it, Lord? And he said to him, Thy prayers and thine alms have come up for a memorial before God.
And now send men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, who is surnamed Peter;
he lodgeth with one Simon a tanner, whose house is by the seaside.
And when the angel that spoke to him had departed, he called two of his household servants, and a devout soldier of those who waited on him,
and having told them every thing sent them to Joppa.
On the morrow, as they were on their journey, and were drawing near the city, Peter went up on the housetop to pray, about the sixth hour.
And he became very hungry and wished to eat; but while they were making ready, a trance came upon him,
and he beheld heaven opened, and a sort of vessel descending, as it were a large sheet having cords at the four corners, and let down upon the earth;
wherein were all the four-footed beasts and creeping things of the earth, and birds of the air.
And there came a voice to him, Arise, Peter; slay, and eat.
But Peter said, Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten anything common and unclean.
And a voice came to him again, the second time, That which God hath cleansed, call not thou common.
This was done three times; and the vessel was immediately taken up into heaven.
Now, while Peter was doubting within himself what the vision which he had seen meant, lo! the men who were sent from Cornelius had made inquiry for Simon's house, and stood before the gate;
and they called, and asked whether Simon, surnamed Peter, lodged there.
And while Peter was meditating on the vision, the Spirit said to him, Behold, men are seeking thee;
but arise, and go down, and go with them, without scruple; for I have sent them.
And Peter went down to the men and said, Behold, I am he whom ye are seeking; for what cause have ye come?
And they said, Cornelius a centurion, a righteous man, and one that feareth God, and of good report among all the nation of the Jews, was warned from God by a holy angel to send for thee to his house, and to hear words from thee.
Then he called them in, and lodged them. And on the morrow he arose and went forth with them, and certain of the brethren from Joppa accompanied him.
And the morrow after, he came into Caesarea. And Cornelius was expecting them, and had called together his kinsmen and near friends.
And as Peter came in, Cornelius met him, and fell down at his feet, and did him reverence.
But Peter raised him up, saying, Stand up; I myself also am a man.
And while talking with him, he went in, and found many who had come together.
And he said to them, Ye know that it is an unlawful thing for a Jew to keep company with one of another nation, or to come near him; but God showed me that I should not call any man common or unclean.
Wherefore I came without objection, when sent for. I ask therefore, for what reason did ye send for me?
And Cornelius said, Four days ago, I was fasting till this hour; and at the ninth hour was praying in my house; and lo! a man stood before me in bright clothing,
and said, Cornelius, thy prayer hath been heard, and thine alms have been remembered before God.
Send therefore to Joppa, and call for Simon, who is surnamed Peter; he lodgeth in the house of Simon a tanner, by the sea-side; and he, when he cometh, will speak to thee.
I therefore sent to thee immediately; and thou hast done well in coming here. Now therefore we are all present before God, to hear all things that have been commanded thee from the Lord.
And Peter opened his mouth, and said, Of a truth I perceive that God is not a respecter of persons,
but in every nation he that feareth him and worketh righteousness is acceptable to him—
the word which he sent to the sons of Israel, publishing glad tidings of peace through Jesus Christ; he is Lord of all men.
Ye yourselves know what was spoken of through the whole of Judaea, beginning from Galilee after the baptism which John preached,
relating to Jesus of Nazareth, that God anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power; who went about doing good, and healing all that were overpowered by the Devil; for God was with him.
And we are witnesses of all things which he did both in the country of the Jews and in Jerusalem; whom they also slew by hanging him on a cross.
Him God raised up on the third day, and caused him to be manifested,
not to all the people, but to witnesses before appointed by God, to ourselves, who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead;
and he commanded us to preach to the people, and to testify that it is he who hath been appointed by God to be judge of the living and the dead.
To him all the prophets bear witness, that through his name every one that believeth in him shall receive forgiveness of sins.
While Peter was yet speaking these words, the Holy Spirit fell on all that heard the word.
And those of the circumcision who believed, as many as came with Peter, were astonished that on the gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy Spirit;
for they heard them speaking with tongues, and magnifying God. Then answered Peter,
Can any one forbid water, that these should not be baptized, who have received the Holy Spirit even as we have?
And he commanded that they should be baptized in the name of the Lord. Then they entreated him to remain some days.
And the apostles and the brethren throughout Judaea heard that the gentiles also had received the word of God.
And when Peter went up to Jerusalem, they that were of the circumcision contended with him,
saying, Thou didst go in to men uncircumcised, and didst eat with them.
But Peter rehearsed the matter to them in order from the beginning, saying,
I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in a trance I saw a vision, a sort of vessel descending, as it were a great sheet, let down from heaven by four corners, and it came even to me;
on which fixing my eyes, I observed, and saw the four-footed beasts of the earth, and the wild beasts, and the creeping things, and the birds of the air.
And I also heard a voice saying to me, Arise, Peter; slay and eat.
But I said, Not so, Lord; for nothing common or unclean ever entered my mouth.
But a voice answered the second time out of heaven, That which God hath cleansed, call not thou common.
And this was done three times; and all were again drawn up into heaven.
And lo! immediately there stood three men at the house where I was, having been sent to me from Caesarea.
And the Spirit bade me go with them. And these six brethren also came with me, and we entered the man's house.
And he told us how he had seen the angel in his house, standing and saying to him, Send to Joppa, and call for Simon, surnamed Peter;
who will speak to thee words by which thou shalt be saved, and all thy house.
And as I began to speak, the Holy Spirit fell on them, as on us at the beginning.
And I remembered the word of the Lord, that he said, John indeed baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized in the Holy Spirit.
Since then God gave the like gift to them as to us, on believing in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I, that I could withstand God?
And when they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, So then to the gentiles also God hath granted repentance unto life.
Now they who were scattered abroad by the persecution that arose on account of Stephen traveled as far as Phenicia, and Cyprus, and Antioch, speaking the word to none but Jews.
But some of them were men of Cyprus and Cyrene, who, when they had come to Antioch, spoke to the Greeks, publishing the glad tidings of the Lord Jesus.
And the hand of the Lord was with them; and a great number believed, and turned to the Lord.
But the talk concerning them came to the ears of the church which was in Jerusalem; and they sent forth Barnabas, to go as far as Antioch;
who, when he came, and saw the grace of God, rejoiced, and exhorted all to cleave to the Lord with purpose of heart;
for he was a good man, and full of the Holy Spirit and of faith. And a great multitude was added to the Lord.
And he went to Tarsus, to seek for Saul;
and when he had found him, he brought him to Antioch. And it came to pass, that for a whole year they came together in the church, and taught a great multitude; and the disciples were first called Christians in Antioch.
And in those days prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch.
And one of them named Agabus stood up, and signified by the Spirit, that there was about to be a great famine over the whole world; which came to pass in the days of Claudius.
And according as any one of the disciples was prospered, they determined every one of them to send relief to the brethren who dwelt in Judaea;
which also they did, sending it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.
Now about that time, Herod the king laid his hands upon certain of the church, to oppress them.
And he slew James, the brother of John, with the sword.
And seeing that it pleased the Jews, he proceeded to apprehend Peter also; (then were the days of unleavened bread;)
and he seized him and put him in prison, and delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers to keep him; intending after the passover to bring him forth to the people.
Peter therefore was kept guarded in prison; but earnest prayer was made by the church to God in his behalf.
And when Herod was about to bring him forth, on that night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains, and keepers before the door were guarding the prison.
And lo! an angel of the Lord came to him, and a light shone in the room; and he smote Peter on the side, and roused him, saying, Rise up quickly. And his chains fell from his hands.
And the angel said to him, Gird thyself, and bind on thy sandals; and he did so. And he saith to him, Throw thy garment round thee, and follow me.
And he went out, and followed; and he knew not that what was done by the angel was real, but thought he saw a vision.
And when they had passed the first, and the second guard, they came to the iron gate that leadeth to the city, which opened to them of itself; and they went out and passed on through one street, and the angel immediately departed from him.
And when Peter had come to himself, he said, Now I know certainly, that the Lord hath sent forth his angel, and hath delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from all the expectation of the people of the Jews.
And when he understood the matter, he came to the house of Mary the mother of John, surnamed Mark, where many were gathered together, and praying.
And as he knocked at the door of the gate, a maid-servant came to listen, named Rhoda;
and recognizing Peter's voice, she opened not the gate for gladness; but ran in, and told them that Peter was standing before the gate.
And they said to her, Thou art mad. But she positively affirmed that it was even so. Then they said, It is his angel.
But Peter continued knocking; and opening the door, they saw him, and were amazed.
But beckoning to them with his hand to be silent, he related how the Lord had brought him out of the prison. And he said, Go and tell these things to James, and to the brethren. And he departed, and went to another place.
And when it was day, there was no small commotion among the soldiers, as to what had become of Peter.
And Herod, when he had sought for him and found him not, examined the keepers, and commanded that they should be led away [[to execution]]. And he went down from Judea to Caesarea, and there abode.
And he was highly displeased with the Tyrians and Sidonians; but they came to him with one accord, and having made Blastus the king's chamberlain their friend, sued for peace; because their country drew its nourishment from that of the king.
And on a day appointed, Herod, having arrayed himself in royal apparel, and taken his seat on the throne, made a speech to them.
And thereupon the people shouted, The voice of a god, and not of a man!
But immediately an angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God the glory, and he was eaten by worms, and expired.
But the word of God grew and was extended.
And Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem, having performed their service, taking with them also John, surnamed Mark.
Now there were at Antioch, in the church that was there, prophets and teachers; Barnabas, and Simeon who was called Niger, and Lucius the Cyrenaean, and Manaen, the foster-brother of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.
And while they were ministering to the Lord, and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, Set apart for me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them.
Then, after they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away.
They therefore being sent forth by the Holy Spirit, came down to Seleucia, and from thence sailed to Cyprus.
And having come to Salamis, they preached the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews; and they had also John as an assistant.
And when they had gone through the whole island as far as Paphos, they found a certain magian, a Jewish false prophet, whose name was Bar-jesus,
who was with the proconsul of the country, Sergius Paulus, an intelligent man. He, having called for Barnabas and Saul, desired to hear the word of God.
But Elymas the magian (for so is his name interpreted) withstood them, seeking so turn away the proconsul from the faith.
But Saul (who is also called Paul), filled with the Holy Spirit, fixed his eyes on him
and said, O full of all deceit, and of all mischief, son of the Devil, enemy of all righteousness, wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?
And now, behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thee, and thou wilt be blind, not seeing the sun for a season. And immediately there fell on him a mist and darkness; and going about he sought to find some who would lead him by the hand.
Then the proconsul, when he saw what had taken place, believed, being astonished at the doctrine of the Lord.
And Paul and his company, having put to sea from Paphos, came to Perga in Pamphylia. But John, departing from them, returned to Jerusalem.
And they, going on from Perga, came to Antioch in Pisidia; and they went into the synagogue on the sabbath-day, and sat down.
And after the reading of the Law and the Prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent to them, saying, Brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people, speak.
Then Paul stood up, and beckoned with his hand and said, Men of Israel, and ye that fear God, hearken.
The God of this people chose our fathers, and he exalted the people in their sojourn in the land of Egypt, and with a high arm he brought them out of it;
and for about forty years he nourished them in the wilderness.
And having destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, he gave them their land as a possession.
And after that, for about four hundred and fifty years, he gave judges, until Samuel the prophet.
And afterward they asked for a king; and God gave them Saul the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, for forty years;
and having removed him, he raised up to them David to be their king, to whom he gave testimony, saying, “I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after my own heart, who will do all my will.”
From the seed of this man hath God, according to his promise, brought to Israel a Saviour, Jesus;
before whose coming forward John had first preached a baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel.
And as John was finishing his course, he said, Who do ye think that I am? I am not He. But lo I there cometh after me one, the sandal of whose feet I am not worthy to loose.
Brethren, sons of the stock of Abraham, and those among you who fear God, to you was the word of this salvation sent forth.
For they that dwell at Jerusalem, and their rulers, not knowing him, nor the voices of the prophets which are read every sabbath, fulfilled them in condemning him.
And though they found nothing deserving death in him, they asked of Pilate that he should be slain.
And when they had accomplished all that was written of him, they took him down from the cross, and laid him in a tomb.
But God raised him from the dead,
and he was seen for many days by those who came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are now his witnesses to the people.
And we declare to you the glad tidings, that the promise which was made to the fathers
God hath fulfilled to us their children, in raising up Jesus [[from the dead]]; as it is also written in the first Psalm: “Thou art my Son; I have this day begotten thee.”
And that he raised him up from the dead, no more to return to corruption, he hath thus spoken: “I will give you the sure holy things promised to David.”
Wherefore also in another Psalm he saith, “Thou wilt not suffer thy holy one to see corruption:”
For David, after having in his own generation served the will of God, fell asleep, and was added to his fathers, and saw corruption;
but he whom God raised from the dead did not see corruption.
Be it therefore known to you, brethren, that through this man is announced to you the forgiveness of sins;
and by him every one that believeth is justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses.
Beware therefore, lest that come upon you which is spoken in the Prophets,
“Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish! for I work a work in your days, a work which ye will not believe, though one should plainly declare it to you.”
And as they were going out, they besought that these words might be spoken to them on the next sabbath.
And when the synagogue broke up, many of the Jews and proselyte worshippers followed Paul and Barnabas; who, speaking to them, exhorted them to continue in the grace of God.
And on the next sabbath almost the whole city came together to hear the word of the Lord.
But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with indignation, and spoke against what was spoken by Paul, contradicting and reviling.
Then Paul and Barnabas said boldly and plainly, It was necessary that the word of God should first be spoken to you; but seeing ye thrust it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of the everlasting life, lo! we turn to the gentiles.
For thus hath the Lord commanded us: “I have set thee to be a light of the gentiles, that thou mayst bring salvation even to the end of the earth.”
And when the gentiles heard this, they rejoiced, and glorified the word of the Lord; and as many as were ordained to everlasting life, believed.
And the word of the Lord was spread abroad throughout the whole country.
But the Jews stirred up the women of rank who worshipped God, and the chief men of the city, and raised a persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and drove them from their borders.
But they shook off the dust of their feet against them, and came to Iconium.
And the disciples were filled with joy and with the Holy Spirit.
And it came to pass in Iconium, that they went together into the synagogue of the Jews, and so spoke that a great multitude both of Jews and Greeks believed.
But the Jews that disbelieved stirred up and embittered the minds of the gentiles against the brethren.
They abode therefore a long time there, speaking boldly in reliance on the Lord, who gave testimony to the word of his grace, granting signs and wonders to be wrought by their a hands.
But the multitude of the city was divided; and some held with the Jews, and some with the apostles.
And when a movement was made both of the gentiles, and the Jews with their rulers, to abuse and stone them,
they became aware of it, and fled to the cities of Lycaonia, Lystra and Derbe, and the neighboring country;
and they were publishing the glad tidings there.
And at Lystra there sat a certain man who had not the use of his feet, a cripple from his birth, who never had walked.
This man heard Paul speaking; who looking steadily at him, and perceiving that he had faith to be healed,
said with a loud voice, Stand upright on thy feet. And he leaped up and walked.
And the multitudes, seeing what Paul had done, lifted up their voices, saying, in the language of Lycaonia, The gods have come down to us in the likeness of men.
And they called Barnabas, Jupiter; and Paul, Mercury, because he was the chief speaker.
Then the priest of Jupiter, that was in front of the city, brought oxen and garlands to the gates, and would have offered sacrifice with the multitudes.
But the apostles, Barnabas and Paul, when they heard of it, rent their garments, and rushed forth to the multitude, crying out
and saying, Men, why do ye these things? We also are men of like nature with you, bringing to you glad tidings, that ye may turn from these vanities to the living God, who made heaven and earth and sea, and all things that are therein;
who in the ages past suffered all the nations to walk in their own ways;
although he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, giving you rain from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling your hearts with food and gladness.
And with these words, they hardly restrained the multitudes from sacrificing to them.
But there came thither Jews from Antioch and Iconium; who, having persuaded the multitudes, and stoned Paul, dragged him out of the city, supposing him to be dead.
But the disciples having gathered around him, he rose up, and came into the city. And the next day he departed with Barnabas to Derbe.
And when they had published the glad tidings to that city, and had made many disciples, they went back to Lystra, and to Iconium, and to Antioch;
confirming the souls of the disciples, exhorting them to continue in the faith, and saying that it is through many afflictions that we mast enter into the kingdom of God.
And having appointed for them elders in every church, they prayed with fasting, and commended them to the Lord, in whom they believed.
And having gone through Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia;
and when they had spoken the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia,
and thence set sail for Antioch, whence they had been commended to the grace of God, for the work which they had accomplished.
And when they had arrived and had gathered the church together, they related what great things God had wrought with them, and that he had opened a door of faith to the gentiles.
And they abode no little time with the disciples.
And there came down certain men from Judaea, and taught the brethren, Unless ye are circumcised after the custom of Moses, ye cannot be saved.
But when Paul and Barnabas had had no small dissension and debate with them, they determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain others of them, should go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and elders about this question.
They therefore, having been sent forward by the church, passed through Phoenicia and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the gentiles; and they caused great joy to all the brethren.
And having come to Jerusalem, they were welcomed by the church, and by the apostles and elders, and they related what great things God had wrought with them.
But there rose up certain believers of the sect of the Pharisees, saying, It is necessary to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the law of Moses.
And the apostles and the elders came together to consider this matter.
And after much debate, Peter rose up and said to them, Brethren, ye know that a long time ago God made choice among you, that by my mouth the gentiles should hear the word of the glad tidings, and believe.
And God, who knoweth the heart, bore them witness, giving them the Holy Spirit, as he gave it to us;
and made no difference between us and them, having purified their hearts by faith.
Now therefore why do ye provoke the anger of God, by putting a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?
But we believe that we shall be saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus, in the same manner as they.
And all the multitude became silent, and listened to Barnabas and Paul, while they related what great signs and wonders God had wrought among the gentiles by them.
And after they had done speaking, James answered, saying, Brethren, hearken to me.
Simeon hath related how God first visited the gentiles, to take out of them a people for his name.
And with this agree the words of the Prophets, as it is written:
“After this I will return, and will rebuild the tabernacle of David which hath fallen; and I will rebuild its ruins, and will set it up;
that the rest of men may seek after the Lord, and all the gentiles, who have been called by my name, saith the Lord, who doeth these things,
which were known from the beginning.”
Wherefore my judgment is, that we should not trouble those who from among the gentiles are turning to God;
but that we should write to them by letter to abstain from pollutions of idols, and from fornication, and from that which hath been strangled, and from blood.
For Moses from the times of old hath had in every city those who preach him, being read in the synagogues every sabbath.
Then it was decided by the apostles and the elders, with the whole church, to choose men from among themselves, and send them to Antioch, with Paul and Barnabas, namely, Judas called Barsabbas, and Silas, leading men among the brethren.
And they wrote by them, “The apostles, and the elders, and the brethren, to the brethren who are from the gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia, greeting.
Whereas we have heard, that some who went out from us have troubled you with words, subverting your souls, to whom we gave no command;
it seemed good to us, having become of one mind, to choose men and send them to you, with our beloved Barnabas and Paul,
men who have hazarded their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
We have sent therefore Judas and Silas, who will themselves tell you the same things by word of mouth.
For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us, to lay upon you no further burden except these necessary things:
to abstain from meats offered to idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication; from which if ye keep yourselves, ye will do well. Farewell.”
They therefore being sent away came to Antioch; and when they had gathered the multitude together, they delivered the letter.
And when they had read it, they rejoiced over the encouragement.
And Judas and Silas, who were themselves prophets, exhorted the brethren with many words and confirmed them.
And when they had remained some time, they were dismissed with peace from the brethren to those who sent them.

But Paul and Barnabas continued in Antioch, teaching and publishing, with many others also, the glad tidings of the word of the Lord.
And some days after, Paul said to Barnabas, Let us go again and visit the brethren in every city where we have preached the word of the Lord, and see how they are.
And Barnabas determined to take with them John, called Mark.
But Paul did not think it proper to take with them a man who had left them in Pamphylia, and went not with them to the work.
And there arose a sharp contention, so that they parted from each other, and Barnabas took Mark and sailed to Cyprus.
And Paul chose Silas and went forth, having been commended by the brethren to the grace of the Lord.
And he went through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the churches.
And he came to Derbe and Lystra; and lo! a certain disciple was there, named Timothy, the son of a believing Jewess, but whose father was a Greek;
who was well a spoken of by the brethren in Lystra and Iconium.
Him Paul wished to go forth with him, and took and circumcised him on account of the Jews who were in those places; for they all knew that his father was a Greek.
And as they journeyed through the cities, they delivered to them for their observance the decrees which had been ordained by the apostles and elders that were at Jerusalem.
The churches therefore were established in the faith, and increased in number daily.
And having gone through Phrygia and the Galatian country, on being forbidden by the Holy Spirit to preach the word in Asia,
they came to Mysia, and were attempting to go into Bithynia; but the Spirit of Jesus did not permit them.
And passing by Mysia, they came to Troas.
And a vision appeared to Paul in the night. There stood a man of Macedonia beseeching him and saying, Come over into Macedonia and help us.
And when he had seen the vision, we immediately endeavored to go into Macedonia, concluding that the Lord had called us to publish the glad tidings to them.
And setting sail from Troas, we came with a straight course to Samothrace, and on the day following to Neapolis;
and thence to Philippi, which is a chief city of the province of Macedonia, a colony. And we remained in the city some days.
And on the sabbath-day we went forth out of the gate to a river-side, where was wont to be a place of prayer, and we sat down, and spoke to the women who had assembled.
And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, who worshipped God, was listening; whose heart the Lord opened to attend to the things which were spoken by Paul.
And when she had been baptized, and her household, she besought us, saying, If ye have judged me to be a believer in the Lord, come into my house, and abide. And she constrained us.
And it came to pass, as we were going to the place of prayer, that a certain bond-maid having a soothsaying spirit met us, who brought her masters much gain by soothsaying.
This woman followed Paul and us, and cried, saying, These men are the servants of the most high God, who announce to you the way of salvation.
And this she did for many days. But Paul, being much displeased, turned and said to the spirit, I command thee in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. And it came out immediately.
But her masters seeing that the hope of their gain was gone, laid hold of Paul and Silas, and dragged them into the market-place to the rulers;
and having brought them before the magistrates, said, These men are grievously disturbing our city, being Jews;
and they teach customs which it is not lawful for us Romans to receive or observe.
And the multitude rose up together against them, and the magistrates, tearing off their clothes, commanded to beat them with rods;
and when they had laid on them many stripes, they cast them into prison, charging the jailer to keep them safely;
who having received such a charge, thrust them into the inner prison, and made their feet fast in the stocks.
But at midnight Paul and Silas praying, were singing praises to God; and the prisoners were listening to them.
And suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken; and all the doors were immediately opened, and the bands of all were loosed.
And the jailer awakening out of sleep, and seeing the prison-doors open, drew his sword, and was about to kill himself, supposing that the prisoners had escaped.
But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, Do thyself no harm, for we are all here.
Then he called for a light, and sprang in, and fell down trembling before Paul and Silas;
and having brought them out, he said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved?
And they said, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou wilt be saved, and thy household.
And they spoke to him the word of the Lord, and to all that were in his house.
And he took them with him at that hour of the night, and washed their stripes; and he was immediately baptized, himself and all that belonged to him.
And when he had brought them up into his house, he set food before them, and rejoiced with all his house, having become a believer in God.
And when it was day, the magistrates sent the sergeants, saying, Release those men.
And the jailer reported these words to Paul: The magistrates have sent to release you; now therefore come out, and go in peace.
But Paul said to them, They have publicly beaten us uncondemned, although we are Romans, and have thrust us into prison; and now do they thrust us out secretly? No; but let them come themselves, and bring us out.
And the sergeants reported these words to the magistrates; and they were afraid when they heard that they were Romans.
And they came and besought them; and when they had brought them out, they entreated them to leave the city.
And when they had come out of the prison, they went into the house of Lydia; and when they saw the brethren, they exhorted them, and departed.
And when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where was the synagogue of the Jews.
And Paul, as his custom was, went in among them, and for three sabbaths discoursed to them out of the Scriptures,
explaining them, and setting forth that it was necessary for the Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead, and that “this is the Christ,—Jesus whom I am making known to you.”
And some of them were convinced, and joined themselves to Paul and Silas, and of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the women of high rank not a few.
But the unbelieving Jews, taking with them certain bad men of the idlers in the market-place, and gathering a crowd, set the city in an uproar; and having come to the house of Jason, they endeavored to bring them out to the people;
but not finding them, they dragged Jason and some of the brethren before the city magistrates, crying out, These men that have turned the world upside down have come hither also;
whom Jason hath entertained; and they are all acting in opposition to the decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another king, Jesus.
And they alarmed the multitude and the city magistrates when they heard these things.
And having taken security of Jason and of the others, they let them go.
And the brethren immediately sent away Paul and Silas by night to Berea; who, having come there, went into the synagogue of the Jews.
These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether these things were so.
Many of them therefore believed; and of the Grecian women of rank and men, not a few.
But when the Jews of Thessalonica knew that at Beroea, too, the word of God was preached by Paul, they came hither also, and stirred up the multitudes.
And then immediately the brethren sent away Paul to go to the sea; but Silas and Timothy remained there.
And they who conducted Paul brought him to Athens; and having received a commandment to Silas and Timothy to come to him as soon as possible, they departed.
Now while Paul was waiting for them at Athens, his spirit was stirred within him, when he saw the city full of idols.
Therefore he reasoned in the synagogue with the Jews and the devout [[Greeks]], and in the market daily with those that met him.
And some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers also conversed with him. And some said, What doth this babbler mean to say? and others, He seemeth to be a setter forth of foreign gods; because he brought the glad tidings of Jesus and the resurrection.
And they took him and brought him to Mars' hill, saying, May we know what this new doctrine is, of which thou speakest?
For thou bringest certain strange things to our ears. We would know therefore what these things mean.
Now all the Athenians, and the strangers residing among them, spent their leisure for nothing else but to tell or to hear something new.
Then Paul stood in the midst of Mars' hill, and said, Men of Athens, in all things I perceive that ye are very devout.
For while passing along and observing your objects of worship, I found also an altar with this inscription, “To an unknown God.” What therefore ye, without knowledge of it, worship, that do I make known to you.
The God who made the world and all things therein, he, being Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands;
nor doth he receive service at the hands of men, as though he needed anything, since it is he that giveth to all life and breath and all things.
And he made of one blood every nation of men to dwell on all the face of the earth, having fixed appointed times, and the bounds of their habitation;
that they should seek God, if haply they might feel after him, and find him, though he is not far from every one of us.
For in him we live, and move, and have our being; as also some of your own poets have said: “For we are also his offspring.”
Being then the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Deity is like to gold or silver or stone, graven by the art and device of man.
The times indeed of ignorance God overlooked; but now commandeth all men every where to repent;
inasmuch as he hath fixed a day, in which he will judge the world in righteousness by a man whom he hath appointed; having given assurance to all by raising him from the dead.
And when they heard of a resurrection of the dead, some mocked; but ethers said, We will hear thee again about this matter.
Thus Paul departed from among them.
But certain men joined themselves to him, and believed; among whom was Dionysius the Areopagite; and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.
After these things, Paul departed from Athens, and came to Corinth.
And having found a certain Jew named Aquila, born in Pontus, lately come from Italy, and Priscilla his wife, (because Claudius had commanded all the Jews to depart from Rome,) he came to them;
and because he was of the same trade, he abode with them, and worked; for they were tent-makers by trade.
And he discoursed in the synagogue every sabbath, and endeavored to persuade both Jews and Greeks.
And when both Silas and Timothy had come from Macedonia, Paul was wholly engaged in the word, testifying to the Jews, that Jesus was the Christ.
And when they set themselves against him, and reviled, he shook his garments, and said to them, Your blood be upon your own heads! I am clean; from this time I will go to the gentiles.
And he departed thence, and went to the house of a certain man, named Justus, a worshipper of God, whose house was very near the synagogue.
And Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, believed in the Lord with all his house; and many of the Corinthians upon hearing believed, and were baptized.
And the Lord said to Paul through a vision in the night, Be not afraid, but speak on, and be not silent;
for I am with thee, and no one shall lay hands on thee, to hurt thee; for I have much people in this city.
And he continued there a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.
And when Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews rose up with one accord against Paul, and brought him before the judgment-seat,
saying, This man persuadeth people to worship God contrary to the law.
And as Paul was about to open his mouth, Gallio said to the Jews, If it were some act of injustice or wicked misdeed, O Jews, with reason I should bear with you;
but if it be questions of doctrine, and names, and your law, look to it yourselves; I will not be a judge of these matters.
And he drove them from the judgment-seat.
But they all laid hold of Sosthenes, the ruler of the synagogue, and beat him before the judgment-seat; and Gallio cared for none of these things.
And Paul, having stayed many days longer, took leave of the brethren, and sailed thence to Syria, and with him Priscilla and Aquila, after he had shaved his head in Cenchreae, for he had a vow.
And they came to Ephesus, and he left them there; but he himself entered the synagogue, and reasoned with the Jews.
And when they asked him to stay longer, he consented not;
but having taken leave of them, saying, I will return to you, if God will, he set sail from Ephesus.
And having landed at Caesarea and gone up and saluted the church, he went down to Antioch.
And after he had spent some time there, he departed, going through the Galatian country and Phrygia in order, strengthening all the disciples.
And a certain Jew, named Apollos, a native of Alexandria, an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, came to Ephesus.
This man had been instructed in the way of the Lord; and being fervent in spirit, he spoke and taught correctly the things concerning Jesus, knowing only the baptism of John.
And he began to speak boldly in the synagogue. But Aquila and Priscilla having heard him, took him to them, and set forth to him the way [[of the Lord]] more fully.
And when he wished to go over into Achaia, the brethren wrote, exhorting the disciples to give him welcome; and when he was come, he gave much aid to those who had believed through grace.
For he publicly confuted the Jews, with power, showing by the Scriptures that Jesus is the Christ.
And it came to pass, while Apollos was at Corinth, that Paul, having passed through the upper districts, came to Ephesus. And finding certain disciples,
he said to them, Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye believed? And they said to him, No, we did not even hear whether there is a Holy Spirit.
And he said, Into what then were ye baptized? And they said, Into John's baptism.
Then said Paul, John indeed baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying to the people, that they should believe on him that was coming after him; that is, on Jesus.
And when they heard this, they were baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus.
And when Paul bad laid his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came upon them, and they spoke with tongues, and prophesied.
And the men were about twelve in all.
And he went into the synagogue, and spoke boldly for three months, discoursing and persuading concerning the kingdom of God.
But when some were hardened, and believed not, but spoke evil of the way [[of the Lord]] before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the disciples, discoursing daily in the school of Tyrannus.
And this continued for two years, so that all who dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks.
And God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul;
so that even handkerchiefs, or aprons, were carried from his body to the sick, and the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits went out.
Then some of the wandering Jewish exorcists undertook to name over those who had evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, I adjure you by that Jesus whom Paul preacheth.
And there were seven sons of Scevas, a Jewish chief priest, who did this.
And the evil spirit answering said, Jesus I knew, and Paul I well know; but who are ye?
And the man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on them, and overcame them both, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded.
And this became known to all, both Jews and Greeks, who dwelt at Ephesus; and fear fell on them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.
And many of the believers came, confessing and declaring their practices.
Many also of those who had practised magical arts brought their books together, and burned them before all men; and they counted the price of them, and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver.
So the word of the Lord grew and prevailed mightily.
And when these things were ended, Paul resolved to pass through Macedonia and Achaia, and to go to Jerusalem, saying, After I have been there, I must also see Rome.
And having sent into Macedonia two of those who ministered to him, Timothy and Erastus, he himself stayed in Asia for a season.
And about that time there arose no small tumult concerning the faith.
For a certain man named Demetrius, a silversmith, made silver shrines of Diana, and brought no small gain to the craftsmen.
And having called them together, with the workmen of like occupation, he said, Sirs, ye know that by this craft we have our wealth;
and ye see and hear, that this Paul hath persuaded and turned away much people, not only of Ephesus, but of almost all Asia, saying, that those are not gods, which are made with hands.
And there is not only danger that this branch of our business will come into disrepute, but also that the temple of the great goddess Diana will be despised, and her magnificence destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worship.
And hearing this they became full of wrath, and kept crying out, saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians!
And the city was filled with confusion; and they rushed with one accord into the theatre, having seized Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul's companions in travel.
And when Paul wished to go in to the people, the disciples would not suffer him.
And some also of the Asiarchs, who were his friends, sent to him, and entreated him not to venture into the theatre.
Some therefore were crying one thing, and some another; for the assembly was in confusion, and the greater part knew not wherefore they had come together.
And they brought forward Alexander out of the multitude, the Jews putting him forward; and Alexander beckoned with his hand, desiring to make his defence to the people.
But when they knew that he was a Jew, all with one voice for about two hours cried out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians!
But when the Recorder had quieted the multitude, he said, Men of Ephesus, who is there among men that doth not know that the city of the Ephesians is guardian of the great Diana, and of the image which fell down from Jupiter?
Since then these things cannot be denied, ye ought to be quiet, and do nothing rashly.
For ye have brought hither these men, who are neither robbers of temples, nor blasphemers of your goddess.
If then Demetrius and the craftsmen with him have a complaint against any one, the courts are open, and there are proconsuls; let them bring their charges against each other.
But if ye ask for any thing further, it shall be determined in the lawful assembly.
For we are in danger of being called to answer concerning this day's riot, there being no ground on which we shall be able to give an account of this concourse. And when he had thus spoken, he dismissed the assembly.
And after the tumult had ceased, Paul called to him the disciples, and having embraced them departed to go into Macedonia.
And when he had gone through those regions, and had given them much exhortation, he came into Greece.
And when he had stayed three months, a plot having been laid for him by the Jews as he was about to sail for Syria, he resolved to return through Macedonia.
And there accompanied him as far as Asia, Sopater, son of Pyrrhus, a Beroean; and of the Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus, and Gaius of Derbe, and Timothy; and of Asia, Tychicus and Trophimus.
These having gone forward waited for us at Troas.
But we set sail from Philippi, after the days of unleavened bread, and came to them at Troas in five days, where we abode seven days.
And on the first day of the week, when we had assembled to break bread, Paul discoursed to them, being about to depart on the morrow, and continued the discourse until midnight.
And there were many lamps in the upper room where we had assembled.
And there sat on the window a certain young man named Eutychus, having fallen into a deep sleep; and as Paul was discoursing at great length, he sank down with sleep, and fell from thee third story, and was taken up dead.
But Paul went down and fell on him, and having embraced him, said, Make no lamentations; for his life is in him.
And having gone up again, and broken the bread and eaten, he talked a long while even till break of day, and so departed.
And they brought the young man alive, and were not a little comforted.
We however, going forward to the ship, put to sea for Assos, intending to take in Paul from that place; for so he had appointed, intending himself to go on foot.
And when he met us at Assos, we took him on board, and came to Mitylene;
and sailing thence, we came the following day over against Chios. And the next day we arrived at Samos; and having tarried at Trogyllium, we came the next day to Miletus.
For Paul had determined to sail past Ephesus, that he might not be detained in Asia; for he was hastening, if it were possible for him, to be at Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost.
And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the elders of the church.
And when they had come to him, he said to them: Ye yourselves know, from the first day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with you the whole time,
serving the Lord with all humility, and with tears, and trials which befell me by the plots of the Jews;
how I kept back nothing that was profitable, but have made it known to you, and have taught you publicly, and from house to house;
testifying to both Jews and Greeks repentance toward God, and faith in our Lord Jesus.
And now behold, I go, bound in my spirit, to Jerusalem, not knowing the things that will befall me there;
save that the Holy Spirit witnesseth to me in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions await me.
But I count life of no value to me, so that I may finish my course, and the ministry which I received from the Lord Jesus, to testify the glad tidings of the grace of God.
And now, behold, I know that ye all, among whom I went about preaching the kingdom, will see my face no more.
Wherefore I testify to you this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men;
for I have not shunned to declare to you the whole counsel of God.
Take heed therefore to yourselves, and to all the flock over which the Holy Spirit made you overseers, to feed the church of the Lord, which he purchased with his own blood.
For I know this, that after my departure grievous wolves will enter in among you, not sparing the flock.
And from among yourselves will men arise speaking perverse things, to draw away the disciples after them.
Therefore be watchful, and remember that for the space of three years, night and day, I ceased not to warn every one with tears.
And now I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, who is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all the sanctified.
I have coveted no man's silver, or gold, or apparel.
Ye yourselves know, that these hands ministered to my necessities, and to those that were with me.
In all ways I showed you that so laboring ye ought to support the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, that he himself said, It is more blessed to give than to receive.
And having thus spoken, he kneeled down, and prayed with them all.
And they all wept sorely, and fell on Paul's neck, and kissed him;
sorrowing most of all for the word which he had spoken, that they were to see his face no more. And they accompanied him to the ship.
And it came to pass, after we had torn ourselves from them, and had put to sea, that we came with a straight course to Cos, and the day following to Rhodes, and from thence to Patara.
And finding a ship crossing over to Phenicia, we went aboard, and put to sea.
And having come in sight of Cyprus, we passed it on the left, and sailed to Syria, and landed at Tyre; for there the ship was to unlade her cargo.
And having found out the disciples, we remained there seven days; and they told Paul, through the Spirit, not to go up to Jerusalem.
And when we had completed the days, we departed, and went our way, they all accompanying us, with wives and children, till we were out of the city; and having kneeled down on the shore and prayed,
we took leave of each other, and went on board the ship; and they returned home.
But we, finishing our voyage, came down from Tyre to Ptolemais; and having embraced the brethren, remained with them one day.
And on the morrow we departed, and came to Caesarea; and entering the house of Philip the evangelist, who was one of the seven, we stayed with him.
And this man had four daughters, virgins, who prophesied.
And while we were staying some days longer, there came down from Judaea a certain prophet, named Agabus;
and coming to us, he took off Paul's girdle, and bound his own feet and hands, and said, Thus saith the Holy Spirit: So will the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that owneth this girdle, and will deliver him into the hands of the gentiles.
But when we heard this, both we, and they of that place, besought him not to go to Jerusalem.
Then answered Paul, What mean ye that ye weep, and break my heart? For I am ready not only to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.
And when he would not be persuaded, we ceased; saying, The Lord's will be done.
And after those days we got ready our baggage, and went up to Jerusalem.
There went with us also some of the disciples of Caesarea, bringing us to one Mnason, a Cyprian, an old disciple, with whom we should lodge.
And when we arrived at Jerusalem, the brethren received us gladly.
And the day following Paul went in with us to James; and all the elders were present.
And having embraced them, he recounted particularly what things God had wrought among the gentiles through his ministry.
And they on hearing it glorified God; and said to him, Thou seest, brother, how many thousands of believers there are among the Jews, and they are all zealots for the Law.
But they have been informed concerning thee, that thou teachest all the Jews who are among the gentiles to forsake Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children, nor to walk after the customs.
What then is to be done? The multitude will necessarily come together; for they will hear that thou hast come.
Do this therefore that we advise thee. We have four men who have a vow on them.
These take, and purify thyself with them, and pay the expenses for them, that they may shave their heads; and all will know that those things of which they have been informed concerning thee are nothing, but that thou thyself also walkest in observance of the Law.
But concerning the gentile believers, we have written to them and decided that they should observe no such thing, save only to abstain from things offered to idols, and from blood, and from what hath been strangled, and from fornication.
Then Paul took the men, and the next day having purified himself with them, entered the temple, announcing the completion of the days of the purification, until the offering was made for every one of them.
And when the seven days were almost ended, the Jews from Asia, having seen him in the temple, stirred up the whole multitude, and laid hands on him,
crying out, Men of Israel, help! This is the man that teacheth every one everywhere against the people, and the Law, and this place; and besides he even brought Greeks into the temple, and hath polluted this holy place.
For they had before seen with him in the city Trophimus, the Ephesian, whom they supposed that Paul had brought into the temple.
And the whole city was in motion, and the people ran together; and they laid hold of Paul and dragged him out of the temple; and forthwith the doors were shut.
And while they were endeavoring to kill him, tidings came up to the chief captain of the band, that all Jerusalem was in an uproar;
who immediately took soldiers and centurions, and ran down to them. And seeing the chief captain and the soldiers, they left off beating Paul.
Then the chief captain came near and laid hold of him, and commanded him to be bound with two chains; and inquired who he was, and what he had done.
And some cried one thing, and some another, among the multitude. And not being able to gain certain knowledge on account of the uproar, he ordered him to be carried into the castle.
And when he reached the stairs, he was obliged to be borne by the soldiers, on account of the violence of the crowd;
for the multitude of the people were following, crying out, Away with him!
And as he was about to be led into the castle, Paul saith to the chief captain, May I speak to thee? And he said, Canst thou speak Greek?
Art thou not then the Egyptian, who before these days made an insurrection, and led out into the wilderness those four thousand men of the assassins?
But Paul said, I am a Jew of Tarsus, a citizen of no mean city of Cilicia; and I beseech thee, suffer me to speak to the people.
And when he had given him leave, Paul stood on the stairs, and beckoned with his hand to the people, and there was a great silence; and he spoke to them in the Hebrew tongue, saying,
Brethren and fathers, hear my defence, which I now make to you.
And on hearing him speak to them in the Hebrew tongue, they kept the more silence. And he saith:
I am indeed a Jew, born in Tarsus of Cilicia, hut brought up in this city, taught at the feet of Gamaliel in the strictness of the Law of our fathers, being zealous for God, as ye all are this day.
And I persecuted this way [[of belief]] even to death, binding and putting into prisons both men and women,
as also the high-priest beareth me witness, and all the elderhood; from whom I received letters to the brethren, and was on my way to Damascus to bring those also that were there, bound, to Jerusalem, that they might be punished.
But it came to pass, as I was on my way, and approaching Damascus, that about noon there suddenly shone around me a great light from heaven;
and I fell to the ground, and heard a voice saying to me, Saul, Saul, why dost thou persecute me?
And I answered, Who art thou, Lord? And he said to me, I am Jesus the Nazarene, whom thou persecutest.
And they that were with me saw indeed the light, and were afraid; but the voice of him that spoke to me they did not hear.
And I said, What shall I do, Lord? And the Lord said to me, Arise, and go into Damascus; and there thou wilt be told of all which it hath been appointed thee to do.
And as I could not see by reason of the brightness of that light, I was led by the hand of those that were with me, and came into Damascus.
But one Ananias, a devout man according to the Law, well spoken of by all the Jews who dwelt there,
came to me, and standing over me said, Brother Saul, receive sight. And I immediately looked up upon him.
And he said, The God of our fathers chose thee to know his will, and to see the Righteous One, and to hear a voice from his mouth;
for thou shalt be a witness for him to all men of what thou hast seen and heard.
And now why dost thou delay? Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on his name.
And it came to pass after my return to Jerusalem, while I was praying in the temple, that I fell into a trance,
and saw him saying to me, Make haste, and go quickly out of Jerusalem; for they will not receive thy testimony concerning me.
And I said, Lord, they know that I imprisoned, and beat in every synagogue, those that believed in thee;
and when the blood of Stephen, thy witness, was shed, I myself was standing by and consenting, and keeping the garments of those who slew him.
And he said to me, Depart; for I will send thee far hence to the gentiles.
And they listened to him as far as this word, and then lifted up their voices, and said, Away with such a fellow from the earth! for it was not fit that he should live.
And as they were crying out, and shaking their garments, and throwing dust into the air,
the chief captain ordered him to be brought into the castle, and bade that he should be examined by scourging; that he might ascertain for what cause they were thus crying out against him.
But when they had stretched him out with the cords, Paul said to the centurion that stood by, Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman, and uncondemned?
When the centurion heard this, he went and told the chief captain, saying, What art thou about to do? For this man is a Roman.
Then the chief captain came and said to him, Tell me, art thou a Roman? He said, Yes.
The chief captain answered, For a great sum I obtained this citizenship. And Paul said, But I was born a Roman.
They therefore who were about to examine him left him immediately. And the chief captain also was alarmed when he knew that he was a Roman, and because he had bound him.
On the morrow, wishing to have certain knowledge why he was accused by the Jews, he released him, and ordered the chief priests and all the council to assemble; and bringing Paul down, he set him before them.
And Paul looking earnestly upon the council, said: Brethren! I have ordered my life in all good conscience before God to this day.
And the high-priest, Ananias, commanded those who stood by him to smite him on the mouth.
Then Paul said to him, God will smite thee, thou whited wall! Art thou then sitting to judge me according to the law, and dost thou command me to be smitten contrary to the law?
And they that stood by said, Dost thou revile God's high-priest?
Then said Paul, I knew not, brethren, that he was high-priest; for it is written, “Thou shalt not speak evil of a ruler of thy people.”
But Paul, perceiving one part to be Sadducees, and the other Pharisees, cried aloud in the council, Brethren! I am a Pharisee, the son of Pharisees; for the hope of the resurrection of the dead I am now tried.
And when he had said this, there arose a dissension between the Pharisees and the Sadducees; and the multitude was divided.
For the Sadducees say that there is no resurrection, and no angel or spirit; but the Pharisees affirm both.
And there arose a great clamor; and scribes of the party of the Pharisees arose, and contended, saying, We find nothing amiss in this man; but if a spirit hath spoken to him or an angel—
And a great dissension arising, the chief captain, fearing that Paul would be torn in pieces by them, ordered the soldiers to go down and take him by force from among them, and bring him into the castle.
And the night following, the Lord stood by him, and said, Be of good courage; for as thou hast borne witness concerning me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at Rome.
And when it was day, the Jews banded together, and bound themselves under a curse, saying that they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul.
And there were more than forty who took this oath together.
And they came to the chief priests and the elders, and said, We have bound ourselves under a great curse, to taste nothing until we have killed Paul.
Now therefore do ye with the council give notice to the chief captain, that he bring him down to you, as though ye were about to examine his case more thoroughly; and we are ready to kill him before he cometh near you.
But Paul's sister's son hearing of the plot went, and entering the castle, told Paul.
Then Paul called one of the centurions to him, and said, Take this young man to the chief captain; for he hath something to tell him.
So he took him and brought him to the chief captain, and said, Paul the prisoner called me to him, and asked me to bring this young man to thee, as he hath something to say to thee.
Then the chief captain took him by the hand and went aside privately, and asked him, What is it that thou hast to tell me?
And he said, The Jews have agreed to ask thee to bring down Paul tomorrow into the council, as though thou wert about to inquire more thoroughly concerning him.
But do not thou yield to them; for there lie in wait for him more than forty men of them, who have bound themselves with an oath neither to eat nor drink till they have killed him; and they are now ready, looking for the promise from thee.
The chief captain then dismissed the young man with the charge, Tell no one that thou hast disclosed these things to me.
And he called to him two of the centurions, saying, Make ready two hundred soldiers to go to Caesarea, and seventy horsemen, and two hundred spearmen, at the third hour of the night;
and provide beasts, whereon they may set Paul, and carry him safe to Felix the governor.
And he wrote a letter after this manner:
Claudius Lysias to the moss excellent governor Felix, greeting.
This man was taken by the Jews, and was about to be killed by them; but I came upon them with the soldiery, and rescued him, having learned that he was a Roman.
And wishing to know the crime of which they accused him, I brought him down to their council;
but I found him to be accused only on account of questions of their law, and to have nothing laid to his charge deserving death or bonds.
And having been informed of a plot against the man, I sent him at once to thee, and directed his accusers also to bring their charges against him before thee.
Then the soldiers, as was commanded them, took Paul, and brought him by night to Antipatris.
But on the morrow they left the horsemen to go on with him, and returned to the castle.
And they, when they had come to Caesarea, and delivered the letter to the governor, presented Paul also before him.
And having read the letter, he asked of what province he was; and when he understood that he was of Cilicia,
he said, I will hear thee fully, when thy accusers also have arrived. And he ordered him to be kept in Herod's palace.
And after five days Ananias, the high-priest, came down with the elders and a certain orator named Tertullus; and they brought a complaint before the governor against Paul.
And when he had been called, Tertullus began to accuse him, saying, Seeing that by thee we enjoy much peace, and that improvements are in every way and everywhere taking place in this nation through thy foresight,
we accept it, most noble Felix, with all thankfulness.
But not to detain thee too long, I pray thee to hear us, in thy clemency, a few words.
For we have found this man to be a pest, and a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes;
who also attempted to profane the temple, and we apprehended him;

and from him thou canst thyself ascertain by examination all these things of which we accuse him.
And the Jews also joined in the charges against him, affirming that these things were so.
Then Paul, after the governor had beckoned to him to speak, answered, Since I know that thou hast been for many years a judge for this nation, I answer for myself cheerfully;
for it is in thy power to ascertain that it is not more than twelve days since I went up to Jerusalem to worship.
And neither in the temple did they find me disputing with any one, or stirring up a tumult of the people, nor in the synagogues, nor in the city;
nor can they prove the things of which they now accuse me.
But this I acknowledge to thee, that according to the way [[of belief]] which they call a sect, so do I worship the God of my fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law and by the Prophets;
having a hope in God, which they themselves also entertain, that there will be a resurrection both of the righteous and the unrighteous.
On this ground do I also myself strive to have always a conscience void of offence toward God and toward men.
And after some years I came to bring alms to my nation, and to make offerings;
in doing which they found me purified in the temple, not with a crowd nor with tumult; but certain Jews from Asia [[caused it]],
who ought to be here before thee, and make their charge, if they had aught against me.
Or, let these men themselves say what wrongdoing they found in me when I stood before the council,
except in relation to this one expression, which I uttered aloud while standing among them: Concerning the resurrection of the dead I am tried before you this day.
But Felix, having an accurate knowledge of the matters relating to this way [[of belief]], put them off, and said, When Lysias the chief captain cometh down, I will thoroughly examine your case.
He also gave orders to the centurion to guard him, and let him have indulgence, and not to forbid any of his friends to do him service.
And after some days, Felix came with his wife Drusilla, who was a Jewess, and sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith in Christ.
And as he discoursed of righteousness, and temperance, and the judgment to come, Felix became alarmed, and answered, Go thy way for the present; and when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee.
He hoped also that money would be given him by Paul; on which account he sent for him the oftener, and conversed with him.
But after two years Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus; and Felix, wishing to gain favor with the Jews, left Paul bound.
Festus therefore having come into the province, after three days went up from Caesarea to Jerusalem.
And the chief priests and the leaders of the Jews brought a complaint before him against Paul, and besought him,
asking for themselves a favor against him, that he would send for him to Jerusalem, intending to place men in wait to kill him on the road.
But Festus answered that Paul was in custody at Caesarea, and that he himself was going thither shortly.
Let those therefore, said he, who have authority among you, go down with me and accuse this man, if he is guilty of anything.
And having tarried among them not more than eight or ten days, he went down to Caesarea; and on the morrow, sitting on the judgment-seat, ordered Paul to be brought.
And when he had come, the Jews who came down from Jerusalem stood around, bringing many and heavy charges which they could not prove;
while Paul said in his defence, Neither against the law of the Jews, nor against the temple, nor against Caesar have I committed any offence.
But Festus, wishing to gain favor with the Jews, answered Paul and said, Art thou willing to go up to Jerusalem, and there be tried on these charges before me?
But Paul said, I stand at the judgment-seat of Caesar, where I ought to be tried. To the Jews I have done no wrong, as thou also very well knowest.
If indeed I am an offender, and have done anything deserving death, I refuse not to die; but if there be nothing in the charges which they bring against me, no man can give me up to them. I appeal to Caesar.
Then Festus having conferred with the council, answered, Thou hast appealed to Caesar; to Caesar shalt thou go.
And after some days Agrippa the king and Bernice came to Caesarea to greet Festus.
And while they were making a stay of some days there, Festus laid the case of Paul before the king, saying, There is a certain man left in bonds by Felix,
against whom, when I was at Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews brought a complaint, asking for judgment against him.
To whom I answered, It is not the custom of the Romans to give up any man on a charge, before the accused hath the accusers face to face, and hath opportunity to answer for himself concerning the crime laid against him.
When therefore they had come together here, without any delay I sat on the judgment-seat on the day after, and ordered the man to be brought forward.
And his accusers standing around him brought no accusation of such things as I had conjectured,
but had against him certain questions of their own religion, and of one Jesus that was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive.
And I being at a loss about such questions, asked him if he was willing to go to Jerusalem and there be put on trial for these matters.
But Paul having appealed to be kept in custody for the judgment of Augustus, I ordered him to be kept till I should send him up to Caesar.
Then Agrippa said to Festus, I should like to hear the man myself. Tomorrow, said he, thou shalt hear him.
Accordingly on the morrow Agrippa and Bernice came with great pomp, and entered into the place of hearing, with the chief captains and principal men of the city, and at the order of Festus Paul was brought forward.
And Festus said: King Agrippa, and all men who are here present with us! Ye see this man about whom the whole multitude of the Jews applied to me both at Jerusalem and here, crying out that he ought no longer to live.
But having found that he had done nothing deserving death, and he himself having appealed to Augustus, I determined to send him;
and as I have nothing certain to write about him to the emperor, I have brought him forward before you, and specially before thee, king Agrippa, that when the examination hath been made, I may have something to write.
For it seemeth to me unreasonable to send a prisoner and not signify the charges against him;
And Agrippa said to Paul, Thou art permitted to speak for thyself. Then Paul stretched forth his hand and made his defence:
I think myself happy, king Agrippa, that I am to make my defence this day before thee concerning all things of which I am accused by the Jews;
especially as thou art acquainted with all the customs and questions among the Jews. Wherefore I beseech thee to hear me patiently.
My manner of life, then, from my youth, which was from the beginning among my own nation and at Jerusalem, all Jews know:
and they know, if they are willing to testify, that from the first, according to the strictest sect of our religion, I lived a Pharisee.
And now I stand on trial for the hope of the promise made by God to the fathers,
which our twelve tribes, earnestly serving God day and night, hope to obtain; concerning which hope, O king, I am accused by Jews.
Why is it judged incredible with you if God raiseth the dead?
I indeed thought with myself that I ought to do many things in opposition to the name of Jesus the Nazarene.
Which I also did in Jerusalem; and many of the saints did I myself shut up in prisons, having received authority from the chief priests; and when they were put to death, I gave my voice against them.
And I punished them often in all the synagogues, and compelled them to blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad against them, I pursued them even to foreign cities.
And as I was going to Damascus on this business, with authority and a commission from the chief priests,
at mid-day, on the road, O king, I saw a light from heaven above the brightness of the sun, shining around me and those who were journeying with me.
And when we had all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice speaking to me, and saying in the Hebrew tongue, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? It is hard for thee to kick against the goads.
And I said, Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest.
But arise and stand upon thy feet; for I have appeared to thee for this purpose, to prepare thee as a minister and a witness both of the things which thou sawest, and of those on account of which I will appear to thee;
delivering thee from the people, and from the gentiles, to whom I send thee,
to open their eyes that they may turn from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among the sanctified, by faith in me.
Wherefore, O king Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision;
but first to those in Damascus, and Jerusalem, and to all the country of Judaea, and then to the gentiles, I proclaimed that they should repent and turn to God, doing works worthy of repentance.
For these causes the Jews seized me in the temple, and attempted to kill me.
Having, however, obtained help from God, I continue to this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying nothing except those things which the Prophets and Moses said were to come to pass;
that the Christ should suffer, and that, as first of those raised from the dead, he was to proclaim light both to the people and to the gentiles.
And as he was thus speaking in his defence, Festus said with a loud voice, Paul, thou art beside thyself; much learning is making thee mad.
But he saith, I am not mad, most noble Festus, but utter words of truth and soberness.
For the king knoweth about these things well; to whom also I speak boldly; for I am persuaded that none of these things is hidden from him: for this was not done in a corner.
King Agrippa, believest thou the Prophets? I know that thou believest.
Then Agrippa said to Paul, With little effort thou thinkest to persuade me to become a Christian.
And Paul said, I would to God, that with little effort or with great, not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, might be made such as I am, except these bonds.
And the king rose up and the governor and Bernice, and those who sat with them;
and going aside they talked with each other, saying, This man is doing nothing deserving death, or bonds.
And Agrippa said to Festus, This man might have been set at liberty, if he had not appealed to Caesar.
And when it was determined that we should sail for Italy, they delivered Paul and certain other prisoners to a centurion named Julius, of the Augustan band.
And going on board a ship of Adramyttium, about to sail along the coasts of Asia, we put to sea; Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us.
And the next day we landed at Sidon; and Julius treated Paul kindly, and gave him leave to go to his friends, and receive their care.
And thence putting to sea, we sailed under Cyprus, because the winds were contrary.
And having sailed over the sea along Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra, a city of Lycia.
And there the centurion, finding a ship of Alexandria about to sail for Italy, put us on board of it.
And sailing slowly some days, and having with difficulty arrived over against Cnidus, the wind not permitting us to put in, we sailed under Crete, over against Salmone;
and coasting along it with difficulty we came to a place called Fair Havens, near which was the city Lasea.
And much time having been spent, and the voyage being now dangerous, because the Fast had already gone by, Paul advised them,
saying, Sirs, I perceive that this voyage will be with injury and much loss, not only of the lading and the ship, but also of our lives.
But the centurion believed the master and the owner of the ship more than what was spoken by Paul.
And as the harbor was not well situated for wintering, the greater part advised to sail thence also, if by any means they might reach Phoenix, a harbor of Crete, looking toward the southwest and northwest, and there winter.
And when a south wind blew gently, supposing that they had obtained their purpose, they weighed anchor, and coasted along close by Crete.
But not long after, there rushed against it a tempestuous wind, called Euroclydon.
And the ship being caught, and unable to face the wind, we gave up to it, and were driven along.
And running under a certain small island called Clauda, we were hardly able to get possession of the boat;
which when they had taken up, they used helps, undergirding the ship; and fearing lest they should run into the Syrtis, they lowered the sail and so were driven.
And as we were violently tempest-tossed, the next day they began to lighten the vessel;
and the third day we cast out with our own hands the movables of the ship.
And as neither sun nor stars had appeared for many days, and no small tempest lay on us, thenceforward all hope that we should be saved was taken away.
And after there had been much abstinence from food, Paul stood up in the midst of them and said, Sirs, ye should have hearkened to me, and not have put to sea from Crete, nod thus brought upon yourselves this injury and loss.
And now I exhort you to be of good cheer; for there will be no loss of life among you, but only of the ship.
For there stood by me this night an angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve,
saying, Fear not, Paul! Thou must stand before Caesar; and lo, God hath given thee all those that sail with thee.
Wherefore, sirs, be of good cheer; for I believe God, that it will be just as it hath been told me.
But we must be cast upon some island.
And when the fourteenth night had come on, as we were driven onward in the Adriatic sea, about midnight the sailors suspected that they were near some country;
and sounding, they found twenty fathoms; and having gone a little further and sounded again, they found fifteen fathoms;
then fearing lest we should fall upon rocks, they cast four anchors out of the stern, and wished for day.
And as the sailors were seeking means to escape from the ship, when they had lowered the boat into the sea, under the pretence that they were about to carry out anchors from the foreship,
Paul said to the centurion and to the soldiers, If these men do not stay in the ship, ye cannot be saved.
Then the soldiers cut off the ropes of the boat, and let it fall off.
And while the day was coming on, Paul exhorted them all to take food; saying, This is the fourteenth day that ye have waited, and continued fasting, having taken nothing.
Wherefore I exhort you to take food; for this is for your safety; for there shall not a hair be lost from the head of one of you.
And having thus spoken, he took bread, and gave thanks to God in presence of them all, and having broken it, he began to eat.
Then were they all of good cheer, and they also took food.
And there were of us in the ship in all two hundred and seventy-six souls.
And when they had eaten enough, they lightened the ship, casting out the grain into the sea.
And when it was day, they did not know the land; but they observed a certain creek having a beach, into which they determined, if possible, to run the ship.
And cutting away the anchors, they left them in the sea, and at the same time unfastening the rudder-bands, and hoisting the foresail to the wind, they made toward the beach.
And falling into a place having the sea on both sides, they ran the ship aground; and the prow stuck fast, and remained immovable, but the stern was breaking to pieces with the violence [[of the waves]].
And on the part of the soldiers there was a plan to kill the prisoners, lest any one should swim out and escape.
But the centurion, wishing to save Paul, kept them from their purpose, and ordered those who could swim to cast themselves first into the sea, and get to land,
and the rest, some on boards, and others on something from the ship. And in this way it came to pass, that they all escaped safe to land.
And having escaped, we learned that the island was called Melita.
And the barbarians showed us no little kindness; for they kindled a fire, and received us all, because of the rain which had come on, and because of the cold.
And when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks, and laid it on the fire, there came forth a viper by reason of the heat, and fastened on his hand.
And when the barbarians saw the animal hanging from his hand, they said to one another, No doubt this man is a murderer, whom though he hath escaped the sea, Justice hath not permitted to live.
He, however, shaking off the animal into the fire suffered no harm.
But they were looking for his becoming swollen, or suddenly falling down dead. But after looking a great while, and seeing no harm come to him they changed their minds, and said that he was a god.
And in the neighborhood of that place were lands be longing to the chief man of the island, whose name was Publius; who welcomed us, and entertained us kindly three days.
And it happened that the father of Publius was lying sick with a fever and dysentery; to whom Paul went in, and, when he had prayed, laid his hands on him, and healed him.
And when this was done, the others also who had diseases in the island came, and were healed;
who also honored us with many honors, and when we put to sea, loaded us with such things as were necessary.
And after three months we put to sea in a ship of Alexandria, which had wintered in the island, whose sign was Castor and Pollux.
And landing at Syracuse, we stayed there three days;
and from thence we made a circuit, and came to Rhegium; and after one day a south wind arose, and we came on the second day to Puteoli,
where we found brethren, and were entreated to remain with them seven days; and so we went toward Rome.
And from thence, the brethren having heard of us came to meet us as far as Appii Forum, and the Three Taverns; at the sight of whom Paul thanked God and took courage.
And when we had come to Rome, Paul was permitted to dwell by himself, with the soldier that guarded him.
And it came to pass that after three days he called together the chief men of the Jews, and when they had met he said to them, Brethren, I, though I had done nothing against the people, or the customs of our fathers, was delivered up a prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans;
who, when they had examined me, wished to release me, because I had done nothing deserving death.
But when the Jews spoke against it, I was constrained to appeal to Caesar; not that I had any charge to bring against my nation.
For this reason therefore I have called for you, to see you and speak to you; for it is on account of the hope of Israel that I am bound with this chain.
And they said to him, We neither received letters from Judea concerning thee, nor did any one of the brethren that came report or speak any evil of thee.
But we think it proper to hear from thee what thou thinkest; for with regard to this sect, we know that it is everywhere spoken against.
And when they had appointed him a day, many came to him at his lodging; to whom he expounded, and earnestly testified, the kingdom of God, endeavoring to persuade them concerning Jesus both from the Law of Moses, and from the Prophets, from morning till evening.
And some believed the things spoken, and some believed not.
So, disagreeing with one another, they took their departure, after Paul had spoken one word: Well did the Holy Spirit speak through Isaiah the prophet to your fathers,
saying, “Go to this people, and say, 'Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see and not perceive.
For the heart of this people hath become gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed; lest they should see with their eyes and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart and turn from their ways, and I should heal them.'”
Be it therefore known to you, that to the gentiles this salvation of God hath been sent; they, moreover, will hear.

And he abode two whole years in his own hired house and gladly received all that came in to him,
proclaiming the kingdom of God, and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence, without hindrance from any one.
Paul, a servant of Christ Jesus, a called apostle, set apart to preach the gospel of God,
which he had promised before by his prophets in the Holy Scriptures,
the gospel concerning his Son, who was born of the seed of David as to the flesh,
and shown with power to be the Son of God as to his spirit of holiness, by the resurrection of the dead, Jesus Christ our Lord;
through whom we received grace and the office of an apostle in behalf of his name, in order to produce obedience to the faith among all nations;
among whom are ye also, the called of Jesus Christ;
to all the beloved of God at Rome, called, holy: Grace be to you, and peace, from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.
In the first place, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, that your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world.
For God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the gospel of his Son, how constantly I make mention of you, always in my prayers
supplicating that, if it be possible, I may at last through the will of God be favored with an opportunity of coming to you.
For I long to see you, that I may impart to you some spiritual gift, which may be for your confirmation;
that is, that I may be edified among you, and you also, through each other's faith, both yours and mine.
But I would not have you ignorant, brethren, that I often purposed to come to you, though I have been hindered hitherto, that I might have some fruit of my labors among you also, as among the other gentiles.
I am debtor both to Greeks and barbarians, both to the wise and the unwise.
So, according to my ability, I am ready to preach the gospel to you also in Rome.
For I am not ashamed of the gospel; for to every believer, to the Jew first and also to the Greek, it is the power of God unto salvation.
For therein is revealed the righteousness which is of God from faith to faith; as it is written, “But the righteous shall live by faith.”
For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all impiety and unrighteousness of men, who keep down the truth in unrighteousness.
Because that which may be known of God is manifest within them; for God made it manifest to them.
For, ever since the creation of the world, his invisible attributes, even his eternal power and divinity, being perceived from his works, are clearly seen, so that they might be without excuse.
Because though they knew God, they did not glorify him as God, nor were they thankful to him; but became perverse in their reasonings, and their senseless minds were darkened;
professing to be wise, they became fools,
and for the glory of the incorruptible God they substituted images of corruptible man, and of birds and four-footed beasts and creeping things.
Wherefore God also gave them over in the lusts of their hearts to impurity, to debase their bodies with one another;
because they changed the true God for false gods, and adored and worshipped created things rather than the Creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen.
For this cause God gave them up to vile passions. For even their women indulged in unnatural lust,
and in like manner the men also, neglecting the natural use of the female, burned with lust for one another, men with men practising that which is shameful, and receiving in themselves the due recompense of their error.
And as they did not choose to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them up to a reprobate mind, to do things which are shameful;
being filled with all unrighteousness, malice, covetousness, wickedness; full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, malignity; backbiters,
slanderers, hated of God, insolent, proud, boasters, inventors of mischief, disobedient to parents,
senseless, faithless, without natural affection, without pity;
who, although knowing the ordinance of God, that they who practise such things deserve death, not only do them themselves, but approve of those who do them.
Wherefore thou art without excuse, O man that judgest, whoever thou art. For wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest doest the same things.
But we know that the judgment of God is according to truth against those who practise such things.
And dost thou suppose, O man, who art judging those who do such things, and art thyself doing the same, that thou wilt escape the judgment of God?
Or dost thou despise the riches of his goodness and forbearance and longsuffering, not knowing that the goodness of God is leading thee to repentance?
But according to thy hardness and impenitent heart, thou art treasuring up for thyself wrath against the day of wrath and of the manifestation of the righteous judgment of God,
who will render to every one according to his works;
everlasting life to those who by patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory, and honor, and incorruption;
but to those who are contentious, and disobedient to the truth; but obey unrighteousness, there will be wrath and indignation.
Tribulation and distress will be upon every soul of man whose works are evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Greek;
but glory, honor, and peace, to every one whoso works are good, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.
For there is no respect of persons with God.
For as many as have sinned without a law, will also perish without a law; and as many as have sinned under a law, will be judged by a law,
for it is not the hearers of a law who are righteous before God, but the doers of a law will be accounted righteous;—
for when the gentiles, who have no law, do by nature what is required by the Law, these, having no law, are a law to themselves;
since they show that what the Law requireth is written in their hearts, their conscience bearing witness, and their thoughts in turn accusing or defending them;—
in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to the gospel which I have preached.
But if thou art called a Jew, and restest on the Law, and makest thy boast of God,
and knowest his will, and approvest the things that are more excellent, being instructed out of the Law;
and art confident that thou thyself art a guide of the blind, a light to those who are in darkness,
an instructor of those who lack wisdom, a teacher of babes, having the form of knowledge and of the truth in the Law,—
dost thou then who teachest another, not teach thyself? Thou who proclaimest that others should not steal, dost thou steal?
Dost thou who forbiddest to commit adultery, thyself commit adultery? Thou that abhorrest idols, dost thou rob temples?
Dost thou who boastest of the Law, dishonor God by breaking the Law?
For, as it is written, “the name of God is on your account blasphemed among the gentiles.”
For circumcision is indeed a benefit to thee, if thou keep the Law; but if thou art a breaker of the Law, thy circumcision hath become uncircumcision.
If then he who is uncircumcised keep the precepts of the Law, shall not he though uncircumcised be regarded as circumcised?
Yea, those who are by nature uncircumcised, if they perform the law, will judge thee, who having a written Law and circumcision, art a breaker of the Law.
For he is not a Jew, who is one outwardly, nor is that circumcision, which is outward, in the flesh;
but he is a Jew who is one inwardly; and circumcision is of the heart, spiritual, not literal, whose praise is not of men, but of God.
What then is the advantage of the Jew? or what the benefit of circumcision?
Great, every way. In the first place, because they were entrusted with the oracles of God.
For what? If some were unfaithful, shall their unfaithfulness make God unfaithful?
Far be it! yea, let God be true, and every man a liar; as it is written, “That thou mayst be justified in thy words, and mayst overcome when thou art arraigned.”
But if our unrighteousness serve to display the righteousness of God, what shall we say? Is God unrighteous who inflicteth punishment? (I am speaking as men do.)
Far be it! For then how shall God judge the world?
For if, through my being false, the truth of God hath been more abundantly manifested to his glory, why am I still judged as a sinner?
And why do you not say, as some slanderously charge us with saying, Let us do evil, that good may come? The condemnation of such men is just.
What then? Are we better than others? By no means! For we have already brought a charge both against Jews and Greeks, that they are all under sin.
As it is written: “There is none righteous, no, not one;
there is none that hath understanding, there is none that diligently seeketh God;
they have all turned aside from the right way, they have become worthless together; there is none that doeth good, not even one.
Their throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongues they have practised deceit. The poison of asps is under their lips.
Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.
Swift are their feet to shed blood;
destruction and misery are in their ways;
and the way of peace they know not.
There is no fear of God before their eyes.”
Now we know that whatever the Law saith, it saith to those who are under the Law; that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world become subject to condemnation before God.
Because by works of the Law no flesh shall be accepted as righteous: for by the Law is the knowledge of sin.
But now, apart from the Law, the righteousness which is of God, to which the Law and the Prophets bear testimony,
even the righteousness which is of God through faith in Jesus Christ, hath been made manifest to all and for all believers. For there is no distinction.
For all have sinned, and fail of obtaining the glory which cometh from God;
being accepted as righteous freely, by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus,
whom, in his blood, through faith, God hath set forth as a propitiatory sacrifice, in order to manifest his righteousness, on account of his passing by, in his forbearance, the sins committed in former times;
in order to manifest his righteousness at the present time, so that he may be righteous, and accept as righteous him who hath faith.
Where then is the boasting? It is excluded. By what law? of works? Nay; but by the law of faith.
We conclude therefore, that a man is accepted as righteous through faith, without the works of the Law.
Or is God [[the God]] of Jews alone? Is he not also the God of gentiles? Yea, of gentiles also.
Seeing there is but one God, who will accept the circumcised as righteous by faith, and the uncircumcised through faith.
Do we then make void the Law through faith? Far be it! On the contrary, we establish the Law.
What advantage then shall we say that Abraham our father had as to the flesh?
For if Abraham was accepted as righteous through works, he hath ground of boasting. But he hath no ground of boasting before God.
For what saith the scripture? “Abraham had faith in God, and it was accounted unto him as righteousness.”
Now to him that performeth works, the reward is not accounted a matter of grace, but of debt;
but to him who without performing works hath faith in him who accepteth as righteous one that hath been ungodly, his faith is accounted as righteousness;
as David also speaketh of the blessedness of the man whom God accepteth as righteous without works:
“Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
Blessed is the man whom the Lord shall not charge with sin.”
Doth this blessedness belong to the circumcised alone, or to the uncircumcised also? For we are saying that Abraham's faith was accounted as righteousness.
How then was it so accounted? After his circumcision, or while he was uncircumcised? Not after he was circumcised, but while he was uncircumcised.
And he received the outward sign of circumcision as a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had while he was uncircumcised; that he might be the father of all the uncircumcised who have faith, so that righteousness might be put to their account also;
and that he might be the father of the circumcised, who are not circumcised merely, but who tread in the steps of that faith which our father Abraham had while yet uncircumcised.
For not through the Law was the promise made to Abraham or his offspring that he should be the heir of the world, but through the righteousness of faith.
For if they that are of the Law are heirs, then faith becometh a vain thing, and the promise is made of no effect.
For the Law is the cause of wrath; for where there is no law there is no transgression.
Therefore the inheritance was made to depend on faith, that it might be a matter of grace; that the promise might be sure to all the offspring, not to that only which is under the Law, but to that also which hath the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all
(as it is written, “I have made thee a father of many nations”) in the sight of that God whom he believed, who giveth life to the dead, and calleth the things that are not, as though they were.
For he had confident hope in that which was past hope, that he should become a father of many nations, according to that which was spoken, “Thus shall thy offspring be;”
and not being weak in faith, he regarded not his own body which had become dead, he being about a hundred years old, nor the deadness of Sarah's womb;
nor did he waver in respect to the promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory to God;
being fully convinced, that what he hath promised, he is able also to perform.
And therefore it was accounted to him for righteousness.
And that it was so accounted was not written for his sake alone,
but for our sakes also, to whom it will be so accounted through our faith in him who raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead,
who was delivered up on account of our trespasses, and raised from the dead that we might be accepted as righteous.
Therefore being accepted as righteous through faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ;
through whom also we have had admission into this grace in which we stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory which God will confer.
And not only so, but we rejoice in afflictions also, knowing that affliction produceth endurance,
and endurance proof [[of faith]], and proof [[of faith giveth]] hope;
and hope will not disappoint us; because the love of God hath been shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which hath been given to us.
For while we were yet without strength, in due season Christ died for the ungodly.
Now hardly for a righteous man will one die; perhaps, however, for a benefactor one might even dare to die.
But God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.
Much more then, being now accepted as righteous through his blood, we shall be saved through him from the [[coming]] wrath.
For if while enemies we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son, much more having been reconciled shall we be saved by his life;
and not this only, but also having joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received the reconciliation.
So then as through one man sin entered into the world, and through sin death, and thus [[death]] came through unto all men, because all sinned—
(for all the time before the Law sin was in the world; but sin is not set to one's account when there is no law.
Yet death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over those who had not sinned in the manner in which Adam transgressed; who is a type of him who was to come.—
But the free gift was not as the transgression. For if through the offence of the one the many died, much more hath the grace of God, and the gift which is by the grace of the one man Jesus Christ, abounded to the many.
And the free gift is not like what happened through one man who sinned. For sentence of condemnation followed one offence; but the free gift is a justification after many offences.
For if by one trespass death reigned through the one man, much more will they who receive the abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one man Jesus Christ.)—
As then through one trespass all men have come under condemnation, so through one act of righteousness all obtain the gift of righteousness unto life.
For as through the disobedience of the one man the many were made sinners, so through the obedience of the one man will the many be made righteous.
Moreover the law came in in addition, that the trespass might abound; but where sin abounded, grace abounded much more;
that as sin reigned in death, so grace might reign through righteousness to everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
What shall we say then? Let us continue in sin, that grace may abound still more?
God forbid! How shall we, who died to sin, live any longer in it?
Are ye ignorant, that all of us who were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death?
We then by this baptism into his death were buried with him; that as Christ was raised from the dead by the glorious power of the Father, so we also might walk in newness of life.
For if we have been made completely like him in his death, we shall be made like him in his resurrection also;
knowing this, that our old man was crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that we might no longer be in slavery to sin;
for he that hath died hath been set free from sin.
And if we died with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him;
since we know that Christ, having been raised from the dead, dieth no more; death hath dominion over him no longer.
For in that he died, he died to sin once for all; but in that he liveth, he liveth to God.
Thus do ye too consider yourselves as dead to sin, but alive to God, through Jesus Christ.
Let not then sin reign in your mortal body, bringing you into subjection to its lusts,
nor yield up your members to sin as instruments of unrighteousness; but yield up yourselves to God, as being alive from the dead, and your members to God as instruments of righteousness.
For sin shall not hold dominion over you; for ye are not under the Law, but under grace.
What then? Are we to sin, because we are not under the Law, but under grace? God forbid!
Know ye not, that whomever ye choose to obey as a master, his bondmen ye are, whether of sin whose fruit is death, or of obedience whose fruit is righteousness?
But thanks be to God that, though ye were the bondmen of sin, ye became obedient from the heart to that form of teaching which was delivered to you;
and being made free from sin, ye became the bondmen of righteousness.
I speak in a way common among men on account of the weakness of your flesh. For as ye once yielded your members as slaves to impurity and to iniquity, in order to commit iniquity, so now yield your members as bondmen to righteousness in order to become holy.
For when ye were the slaves of sin, ye were not the bondmen of righteousness.
What fruit then had ye at that time from those things of which ye are now ashamed? For the end of those things is death.
But now having been delivered from the slavery of sin, and having become the bondservants of God, ye have holiness as the fruit, and everlasting life as the end.
For the wages of sin is death; but the free gift of God is everlasting life, through Christ Jesus our Lord.
Know ye not, brethren, (for I am speaking to those who are acquainted with the Law,) that the Law hath dominion over a man only as long as he liveth?
For the married woman is bound by law to her husband while he liveth; but if the husband die, she is released from the law which bound her to him.
So then, if while her husband is living she connect herself with another man, she will be called an adulteress; but if her husband die, she is no longer bound by that law, so that she will not be an adulteress, though she connect herself with another man.
So then, my brethren, ye also were slain to the Law through the body of Christ, that ye might be connected with another, even with him who was raised from the dead, that we might bear fruit to God.
For when we were in the flesh, the affections of sins, which were through the Law, were working in our members to bear fruit unto death.
But now we are delivered from the Law, having died to that by which we were bound, that we might serve in the new life of the Spirit, and not in the old way of the letter.
What then shall we say? Is the Law sin? God forbid! But I should not have known sin, except by the Law; for I should not have known sinful desire, unless the Law had said, “Thou shalt not covet.”
But sin, seizing the opportunity, wrought in me by means of the commandment all manner of sinful desire; for without the Law sin is dead.
And I, apart from the Law, was once alive; but when the commandment came, sin came to life again, and I died;
and the very commandment whose design was life, I found to issue in death.
For sin, seizing the opportunity, deceived me through the commandment, and through it slew me.
So that the Law is holy, and the commandment holy, and right, and good.
Did then that which is good become death to me? Far be it! but sin; that it might become manifest as sin, causing death to me by means of that which is good; that sin by means of the commandment might become exceedingly sinful.
For we know that the Law is spiritual; but I am unspiritual, a slave sold to sin.
For I know not what I do. For I do not what I would, but I do what I hate.
But if I do what I would not, I assent to the Law that it is good.
Now, however, it is no longer I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.
For I know that there dwelleth not in me, that is, in my flesh, any good thing; for to desire is present with me, but not to perform that which is good.
For the good that I would, I do not; but the evil which I would not, that I do.
But if I do what I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.
I find then that there is a law to me, that when I would do good, evil is present with me.
For I delight in the Law of God, as to the inward man;
but I perceive another law in my members warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members.
Wretched man that I am! Who will deliver me from the body of this death?
Thanks be to God, [[who hath delivered me]] through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then, I, the same person, with the mind serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin.
There is then now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus.
For the law of the Spirit of life set me free in Christ Jesus from the law of sin and death.
For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God hath done, who on account of sin sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and passed sentence of condemnation on sin in the flesh;
so that what is required by the Law might be accomplished in us, who walk not according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit.
For they who are according to the flesh have their mind on the things of the flesh; but they who are according to the Spirit, on the things of the Spirit.
For the mind of the flesh is death; but the mind of the Spirit life and peace.
Because the mind of the flesh is enmity against God; for it doth not submit itself to the Law of God, neither indeed can it.
And they who are in the flesh cannot please God.
But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if indeed the Spirit of God dwelleth in you. But if any one hath to not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.
And if Christ is in you, the body indeed is dead because of sin; but the Spirit is life because of righteousness.
But if the Spirit of him who raised up Jesus from the dead dwelleth in you, he who raised up Christ from the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies, because of his Spirit that dwelleth in you.
So then, brethren, we are debtors not to the flesh, to live according to the flesh.
For if ye live according to the flesh, ye are sure to die; but if by the Spirit ye make an end of the deeds of the body, ye will live.
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are sons of God.
For ye did not receive the spirit of bondage so as to be again in fear; but ye received the spirit of adopted children, whereby we cry, Abba, Father!
The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are children of God;
and if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and fellow-heirs with Christ; if indeed we are suffering with him, that we may also be glorified with him.
For I esteem the sufferings of the present time as of no account, when compared with the glory which is about to be revealed to us.
For the earnest expectation of the creation is waiting for the manifestation of the sons of God.
For the creation was brought into subjection to vanity not of its own will, but by reason of him who put it into subjection,
in hope that even the creation itself will be set free from the bondage of corruption and brought into the freedom of the glory of the children of God.
For we know that the whole creation is together groaning and suffering the pains of labor, up to this time;
and not only so, but even we ourselves also, though having the first-fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption as sons, for the redemption of our body.
For we were saved only in hope. But hope which is seen is not hope; how can a man hope for that which he seeth?
But if we hope for that which we do not see, then do we with patience wait for it.
In like manner the Spirit also helpeth our weakness; for we know not what to pray for as we ought, but the Spirit itself intercedeth with groans which cannot be expressed in words.
But he that searcheth the hearts knoweth the mind of the Spirit, because it intercedeth for the holy according to the will of God.
We know moreover that all things work together for good to those who love God, to those who are called according to his purpose.
For he determined beforehand that those whom he foreknew should be conformed to the image of his Son, in order that he might be the first-born among many brethren.
And those whom he before appointed, he also called; and those whom he called, he also accepted as righteous; and those whom he accepted as righteous, he also glorified.
What shall we then say to these things? If God is for us, who can be against us?
He who spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not also with him freely give us all things?
Who shall bring any charge against the chosen of God? God is he who accepteth them as righteous.
Who is he that condemneth? Christ is he that died, yea rather, who rose again, who is also at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ for us? Shall affliction or distress or persecution or famine or nakedness or peril or sword?
As it is written, “For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we were accounted as sheep for slaughter.”
Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors, through him that loved us.
For I am persuaded, that neither death nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor things present nor things to come, nor powers,
nor height nor depth, nor any other created thing will be able to separate us from the love of God for us, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
I speak truth in Christ, I do not lie, my conscience bearing witness with me in the Holy Spirit, that
I have great grief and unceasing anguish in my heart.
For I could wish to be myself accursed and cast out from Christ in behalf of my brethren, my kinsmen as to the flesh;
who are Israelites; whom God adopted as sons, whose was the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of the sanctuary, and the promises;
whose are the fathers, and from whom, as to the flesh, was the Christ. He who is over all, God, be blessed for ever! Amen.
Not as though the word of God hath failed; for not all they that are of Israel are Israel;
nor because they are descendants of Abraham are they all children; but, “Thy offspring shall be reckoned from Isaac.”
That is, not the children by natural descent are children of God, but the children to whom the promise is made are accounted as the offspring.
For the word of promise is this: “At this time I will come, and Sarah shall have a son.”
And not only so, but also when Rebecca had conceived by one man, our father Isaac,
before the children were born, or had done any thing good or evil, to the end that God's purpose according to election might stand, not depending on works, but on the will of him that calleth,
it was said to her, “The elder shall serve the younger:”
as it is written, “Jacob I loved, but Esau I hated.”
What then shall we say? Is there injustice with God? Far be it!
For he saith to Moses, “On whom I have mercy, on him will I have mercy; and on whom I have compassion, on him will I have compassion.”
So then it dependeth not on him that willeth, nor on him that runneth, but on God who showeth mercy.
For the Scripture saith to Pharaoh, “For this very purpose did I raise thee up, that I might show forth my power in thee, and that my name might be made known in all the earth.”
So then he hath mercy on whom he will, and hardeneth whom he will.
Hence thou wilt say to me, Why then doth he still find fault? for who resisteth his will?
Nay but, O man, who art thou that makest answer to God? Shall the thing that is wrought say to the workman, Why hast thou made me thus?
Hath not the potter a right out of the same lump of clay to make one vessel for an honorable use, and another for a dishonorable?
What if God endured with much patience vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, purposing to manifest his wrath and to make known his power;
purposing also to make known the riches of his glory upon vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared for glory,
whom he also called, even us, not only from among the Jews, but also from among the gentiles?
as he also saith in Hosea, “I will call that my people, which was not my people; and her beloved, that was not beloved.
And it shall be, that in the place where it was said to them, Ye are not my people, there shall they be called sons of the living God.”
But Isaiah crieth out concerning Israel, “Though the number of the sons of Israel be as the sand of the sea, only the remnant will be saved.
For he is accomplishing his word and speedily fulfilling it in righteousness; for a speedily fulfilled word will the Lord execute upon the earth.”
And as Isaiah hath said before, “Unless the Lord of hosts had left us a seed, we should have become as Sodom, and been made like Gomorrah.”
What then shall we say? That the gentiles, who did not strive after righteousness, obtained righteousness, but a righteousness which is of faith;
while Israel, which strove after a law of righteousness, did not attain to a law of righteousness.
Why? Because they did not strive for it by faith, but as being by works. For they stumbled against the stone of stumbling;
as it is written, “Behold, I lay in Zion a stone of stumbling and rock of offence; and he that believeth in him shall not be put to shame.”
Brethren, the desire of my heart and my prayer to God for them is, that they may be saved.
For I bear them witness that they have a zeal for God, but not according to knowledge.
For being ignorant of the righteousness which is of God, and endeavoring to establish a righteousness of their own, they have not submitted themselves to the righteousness which is of God.
For Christ is the end of the Law, so that every one that believeth may obtain righteousness.
For Moses describeth the righteousness which is of the Law: “The man that hath done these things shall live by them.”
But the righteousness which is of faith speaketh thus: Say not in thy heart, “Who shall ascend into heaven?” that is, to bring Christ down.
Or, “Who shall descend into the abyss?” that is, to bring up Christ from the dead.
But what saith it? “The word is nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart;” that is, the word concerning faith, which we preach;
for if thou shalt acknowledge with thy mouth Jesus as Lord, and shalt believe in thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved.
For with the heart man believeth so as to obtain righteousness, and with the mouth professeth so as to obtain salvation.
For the Scripture saith, “Whoever believeth in him shall not be put to shame.”
For there is no difference between Jew and Greek; for one and the same is Lord over all, rich to all that call upon him.
For “every one who calleth upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.”
How then shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher?
and how shall men preach, unless they are sent forth? as it is written, “How beautiful are the feet of those who bring glad tidings of peace, who bring glad tidings of good things!”
But they did not all hearken to the glad tidings. For Isaiah saith, “Lord, who hath believed what he hath heard from us?”
Faith then cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.
But I say, Did they not hear? Yes truly, “Their voice went forth into all the earth, and their words to the ends of the world.”
But I say, Hath not Israel had knowledge? First, Moses saith, “I will move you to jealousy by that which is no nation, I will excite you to indignation by a foolish people.”
But Isaiah is very bold, and saith, “I was found by those who sought me not, I became known to those who inquired not for me.”
But concerning Israel he saith, “All the day long I have stretched out my hands to a disobedient and rebellious people.”
I say then, Hath God cast off his people? Far be it I For I myself am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.
God hath not cast off his people, which he foreknew. Do ye not know what the Scripture saith in the passage concerning Elijah? how he pleadeth to God against Israel:
“Lord, they have killed thy prophets, they have dug down thine altars; and I am left alone, and they are seeking my life.”
But what saith the answer of God to him? “I have reserved to myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to Baal.”
In the same way then at this present time also there is a remnant, according to the election of grace.
And if it is by grace, it is no longer on account of works; otherwise grace ceaseth to be grace; but if it is of works, there is then no grace; otherwise work ceaseth to be work. How is it then?
What Israel seeketh after, that Israel did not obtain; but the elect obtained it, and the rest were hardened;
as it is written: “God gave them a spirit of slumber, eyes that were not to see, and ears that were not to hear, unto this day.”
And David saith, “Let their table become a snare, and a trap, and a stumbling-block, and a recompense to them;
let their eyes be darkened, that they may not see; and bow down their back alway.”
I say then, Did they stumble in order to fall? God forbid! But by their offence salvation is come to the gentiles to excite them to emulation.
But if their offence is the riches of the world, and their loss the riches of the gentiles, how much more will their fullness be?
For I am speaking to you gentiles; inasmuch as I am the apostle of the gentiles, I magnify my office,
that I may, if possible, excite to emulation those who are my flesh, and may save some of them.
For if the rejection of them is the reconciliation of the world, what will the reception of them be, but life from the dead?
And if the first portion of the dough is holy, so also will be the lump; and if the root is holy, so will be the branches.
And if some of the branches have been broken off, and thou, a wild olive, hast been grafted in among them, and become a partaker with them of the root and fatness of the olive-tree,
boast not over the branches; for if thou boast, thou dost not bear the root, but the root thee.
Thou wilt say then, The branches were broken off, that I might be grafted in.
Be it so. It was for their unbelief that they were broken off, and thou standest through thy faith; be not high-minded, but fear.
For if God spared the natural branches, take care lest he spare not thee.
Behold then the goodness and the severity of God; toward those who fell, severity; but toward thee God's goodness, if thou continue in his goodness; otherwise thou also wilt be cut off.
And they also, if they do not continue in their unbelief, will be grafted in; for God is able to graft them in again.
For if thou hast been cut off from an olive-tree wild by nature, and hast against thy nature been ingrafted into a good olive-tree, how much more shall these, the natural branches, be ingrafted into their own olive-stock?
For I would not have you ignorant, brethren, of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own conceits, that blindness hath to some extent come upon Israel, until the fullness of the gentiles shall have come in.
And thus will all Israel be saved; as it is written, “There shall come out of Zion the Deliverer; he shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob.
And this will be my covenant with them, when I shall have taken away their sins.”
In regard to the gospel, they are enemies for your sakes; but in regard to God's choice, they are beloved for the fathers' sake.
For in respect to his gifts and his calling, there is no change of purpose with God.
For as ye in times past were disobedient to God, but have now obtained mercy through their disobedience,
so they too have now become disobedient, that they also may obtain mercy through the mercy shown to you.
For God delivered up all to disobedience, that he might have mercy upon all.
O the depth of the riches, and of the wisdom, and of the knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his purposes, and his ways past finding out!
For “who hath known the mind of the Lord? or who hath been made his counselor?”
or “who first gave to him, and shall receive a return?”
For from him, and through him, and to him are all things. To him be the glory for ever! Amen.
I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, well-pleasing to God, which is your spiritual worship;
and be not conformed to the fashion of this world, but be transformed by the renewal of your mind, that ye may learn by experience what is the will of God, what is good, and well-pleasing, and perfect.
For through the grace given to me I warn every one among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think, but to think soberly, according to the measure of faith which God hath imparted to each.
For as in one body we have many members, and the members have not all the same office,
so we, though many, form one body in Christ, and each of us is a member of it in common with the rest.
Having then gifts which dither according to the grace which hath been bestowed upon us, if we have prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of our faith;
or if service, let us attend to the service; he that teacheth, let him attend to teaching;
or he that exhorteth, to exhortation; he that giveth, let him do it with liberality; he that presideth over others, with diligence; he that doeth deeds of mercy, with cheerfulness.
Let your love be unfeigned. Abhor that which is evil, cleave to that which is good.
In brotherly love, be affectionate to one another; in honor, give each other the preference.
Be not backward in zeal; be fervent in spirit; serving the Lord.
Rejoice in hope; be patient in affliction; persevere in prayer.
Relieve the wants of the holy; be given to hospitality.
Bless those who persecute you; bless, and curse not.
Rejoice with those who rejoice; weep with those who weep.
Be of one mind among yourselves. Set not your minds on high things, but content yourselves with what is humble. Be not wise in your own conceits.
Render to no one evil for evil; have regard to what is honorable in the sight of all men.
If it be possible, as far as dependeth on you, be at peace with all men.
Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather make room for wrath; for it is written, “Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord.”
Therefore, “if thy enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink. For in so doing thou wilt heap coals of fire on his head.”
Be not overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good.
Let every one submit to the authorities that are over him; for there is no authority which is not from God: and the authorities which exist have been ordained by God.
He therefore that setteth himself against the authority resisteth what God hath ordained; and they a who resist will bring upon themselves judgment.
For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Wouldst thou then not be afraid of the government? Do that which is good, and thou wilt have praise from it;
for the ruler is God's servant to thee for good. But if thou doest evil, be afraid; for he beareth not the sword in vain; for he is God's servant, an avenger to inflict wrath upon him that doeth evil.
It is necessary therefore to submit, not only because of the wrath, but also for your conscience' sake.
For the same reason pay tribute also; for they are ministers of God, attending continually to this very business.
Render to all what is due to them; tribute, to whom tribute is due; custom, to whom custom; fear, to whom fear; honor, to whom honor.
Owe no one anything but brotherly love; for he that loveth others hath fulfilled the Law.
For these, “Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not covet,” and every other commandment, are summed up in this precept, “Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.”
Love worketh no ill to one's neighbor; therefore love is the fulfilling of the Law.
And this, since we know the time, that it is already high time for us to awake out of sleep; for now is our salvation nearer than when we became believers.
The night is far spent, the day is at hand; let us then throw off the works of darkness, and put on the armor of light.
Let us walk becomingly, as in the day; not in reveling and drunkenness, not in lewdness and wantonness, not in strife and envy;
but clothe yourselves with the Lord Jesus Christ, and think not about satisfying the lusts of the flesh.
Him that is weak in his faith receive with kindness, and not to pass judgment on his thoughts.
One man hath faith to eat every kind of food; another, who is weak, eateth herbs only.
Let not him who eateth, despise him that eateth not; and let not him who eateth not, judge him that eateth; for God hath received him.
Who art thou that judgest the servant of another? To his own lord he standeth or falleth; and he shall be made to stand; for the Lord is able to make him stand.
One man esteemeth one day above another; another esteemeth every day alike: let each one be fully persuaded in his own mind. He that regardeth the day, regardeth it to the Lord;
and he that regardeth not the day, to the Lord he doth not regard it. And he that eateth, eateth to the Lord, for he giveth thanks to God; and he that doth not eat, to the Lord he doth not eat, and giveth thanks to God.
For none of us liveth to himself, and no one dieth to himself.
For if we live, we live to the Lord; and if we die, we die to the Lord. Whether then we live or die, we are the Lord's.
For to this end Christ died and lived again, that he might be Lord both of the dead and the living.
But thou, why dost thou judge thy brother? And thou, too, why dost thou despise thy brother? For we shall all stand before the judgment-seat of God.
For it is written, “As I live, saith the Lord, to me every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall give praise to God.”
So then every one of us will give account of himself to God.
Let us then no longer judge one another; but let this rather be your judgment, not to put a stumbling-block, or an occasion to fall, in a brother's way.
I know, and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus, that nothing is unclean in itself; but to him that accounteth anything to be unclean, to him it is unclean.
For if on account of food thy brother is made to mourn, thou art no longer walking according to love. Do not with thy food destroy him for whom Christ died.
Let not then the blessing which ye enjoy be evil spoken of.
For the kingdom of God is not food and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit;
for he who in this matter serveth Christ is well-pleasing to God, and approved by men.
Let us then strive to promote peace, and the edification of each other.
Do not for the sake of food undo the work of God. All things indeed are clean; but that which is pure is evil for that man who eateth so as to be an occasion of sin.
It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor to do anything whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is put in danger of falling, or is made weak.
Thou hast faith; have it to thyself before God. Happy is he who doth not condemn himself in that which he alloweth.
But he that doubteth is condemned if he eat, because he doeth it not from faith; but every thing which is not from faith is sin.
We then who are strong ought to hear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves.
Let each one of us please his neighbor, to promote what is good, for edification.
For Christ did not seek his own pleasure, but, as it is written, “The reproaches of those who reproached thee fell on me.”
For whatever things were written aforetime, were written for our instruction; that we through the patience and the consolation of the Scriptures might have hope.
And may the God of patience and consolation grant that ye may be of the same mind one with another, according to Christ Jesus;
that with one accord ye may with one mouth glorify God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ received you to the glory of God.
For I say that Christ became a minister to the circumcised for the sake of God's truth, in order to make sure the promises given to the fathers;
and that the gentiles glorified God for his mercy, as it is written, “For this cause I will give praise to thee among the gentiles, and sing to thy name.”
And again he saith: “Rejoice, ye gentiles, with his people.”
And again: “Praise the Lord, all ye gentiles, and let every people praise him.”
And again Isaiah saith: “There shall be the shoot from Jesse, and he that riseth up to rule the gentiles; in him shall the gentiles hope.”
And may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the power of the Holy Spirit.
But I myself am persuaded of you, my brethren, that ye are even of yourselves full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish one another.
But I have written to you, brethren, in a manner somewhat bold on some subjects, as putting you in mind, on account of the grace given me by God
that I should be a minister of Christ Jesus to the gentiles, performing the office of a priest in respect to the gospel of God, that the oblation of the gentiles may be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Spirit.
I have then ground for glorying in Christ Jesus in regard to the things pertaining m God.
For I will not be bold to say anything hut of what Christ hath actually wrought by me to bring the gentiles to obedience by word and deed,
by the power of signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit; so that from Jerusalem, and in the country around even to Illyricum, I have fully made known the gospel of Christ;
but always earnestly desirous to preach it in this manner,—not where Christ had been named, that I might not build on another's foundation,
but, as it is written: “They, to whom no tidings concerning him came, shall see; and they that have not heard shall understand.”
For which cause also, for the most part, I have been hindered from coming to you.
But now having no more opportunity in these regions, and having had for many years a great desire to come to you,
when I go to Spain, I will come to you; for I hope to see you on my way, and to be helped forward thither by you, after I have in some degree satisfied myself with your company.
But now I am going to Jerusalem on a service of relief to the saints.
For Macedonia and Achaia have thought it good to make a contribution for the poor among the saints in Jerusalem.
They have thought it good, and they owed it to them. For if the gentiles have shared in their spiritual things, they ought in return to minister to them in temporal things.
When therefore I have completed this business, and secured to them this fruit, I shall set out to pass through you to Spain.
And I know that when I come to you, I shall come in the fullness of the blessing of Christ.
But I beseech you, by our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the love produced by the Spirit, that ye strive together with me in prayers to God for me;
that I may be delivered from the unbelievers in Judaea, and that my service for Jerusalem may prove acceptable to the saints;
so that, through the will of God, I may come to you in joy, and may with you be refreshed.
And may the God of peace be with you all. Amen.
I commend to you Phoebe our sister, who is a deaconess of the church at Cenchreae;
that ye may receive her in the Lord in a manner worthy of the holy, and assist her in whatever business she may need your aid; for she hath been a helper of many, and of myself also.
Salute Prisca and Aquila, my fellow-laborers in Christ Jesus;
who for my life laid down their own necks; to whom not I alone give thanks, but also all the churches of the gentiles;
salute also the church that is in their house. Salute Epaenetus, my beloved, who is the first fruit gathered from Asia for Christ.
Salute Mary, who labored much for us.
Salute Andronicus and Junias, my kinsmen, and my fellow-prisoners, who are of note among the apostles, who also were in Christ before me.
Salute Amplias, my beloved in the Lord.
Salute Urbanus, our fellow-laborer in Christ, and Stachys, my beloved.
Salute Apelles, the approved in Christ. Salute those who belong to the family of Aristobulus.
Salute Herodion, my kinsman. Salute those of the family of Narcissus, who are in the Lord.
Salute Tryphaena and Tryphosa, who labor in the Lord. Salute Persis, the beloved, who labored much in the Lord.
Salute Rufus, the chosen in the Lord, and his mother, who is mine also.
Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and the brethren that are with them.
Salute Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints who are with them.
Salute each other with a holy kiss. All the churches of Christ salute you.
But I exhort your brethren, to mark those who are causing divisions and offences, contrary to the doctrine which ye learned; and avoid them.
For such men are not servants of our Lord Christ, but of their own appetites; and by good words and fair speeches they deceive the hearts of the simple.
For your obedience hath become known to all. Over you, then, I rejoice; but I would have you wise as to that which is good, and simple as to that which is evil.
And the God of peace will soon beat down Satan under your feet. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
Timothy, my fellow-laborer, salutes you, and Lucius and Jason and Sosipater my kinsmen.
I Tertius, who wrote this letter, salute you in the Lord.
Gaius my host, and the host of the whole church, saluteth you. Erastus the treasurer of the city saluteth you, and Quartus, the brother.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
Now to him who is able to establish you according to my gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery which for eternal ages was unrevealed,
but is now made manifest, and through the writings of the prophets, by the command of the everlasting God, is made known to all the nations to bring them to obedience to the faith,—
to God, the only wise, through Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory for ever! Amen.
Paul, a called apostle of Christ Jesus, through the will of God, and Sosthenes the brother,
to the church of God which is at Corinth, the sanctified in Christ Jesus, called, holy, with all that in every place call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, their Lord and ours;
grace be to you, and peace, from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I ever thank my God for you, on account of the grace of God bestowed upon you in Christ Jesus;
that in him ye were enriched in everything, in all utterance, and all knowledge,
as the testimony of Christ was established among you;
so that ye come behind in no gift, while waiting for the manifestation of our Lord Jesus Christ;
who will also make you steadfast to the end, so that ye may be without blame in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
God is faithful, by whom ye were called into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
But I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly united in the same mind and in the same judgment.
For I have been informed concerning you, my brethren, by those of the family of Chloe, that there are dissensions among you.
What I mean is this, that each of you saith, I am of Paul; and I of Apollos; and I of Cephas; and I of Christ.
Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you? Or were ye baptized the name of Paul?
I thank God that I baptized none of you, but Crispus and Gaius;
that no one may say that ye were baptized into my name.
And I baptized also the household of Stephanas; I am not aware that I baptized any one besides.
For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel; not with wisdom of speech, lest the cross of Christ should be made of no effect.
For the preaching of the cross is to those who are perishing, foolishness, but to us who are being saved, it is the power of God.
For it is written: “I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nought the discernment of the discerning.”
Where is the wise man? Where the scribe? Where the disputer of this world? Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of the world?
For since, in the wisdom of God, the world by its wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save those who believe;
since even Jews ask for signs, and the Greeks seek for wisdom;
but we preach Christ crucified, to Jews a stumbling-block, and to gentiles foolishness,
but to those who are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God.
Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the weakness of God is stronger than men.
For consider, brethren, who ye are that have been called; not many wise men after the fashion of the world, not many mighty, not many noble;
but the foolish things of the world did God choose, to put to shame the wise; and the weak things of the world did God choose, to put to shame the things which are strong;
and the mean things of the world, and the things which are despised, did God choose, the things which are not, to bring to nought things that are;
that no flesh might glory before God.
But from him it is that ye are in Christ Jesus, who from God was made to us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption;
that, according as it is written, “He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord.”
And I, brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of speech, or of wisdom, declaring to you the testimony of God.
For I determined not to know anything while with you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified.
And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling;
and my speech and my preaching were not in persuasive words of wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit, and of power;
that your faith might not rest on the wisdom of men, but on the power of God.
But we do speak wisdom among the perfect; not, however, the wisdom of this world, nor of the rulers of this world, who are coming to nought;
but we speak God's wisdom in a mystery, the hidden wisdom, which God determined on before the world was, for our glory;
which none of the rulers of this world comprehended; for had they comprehended it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory;
but, as it is written: “The things which eye hath not seen, and ear hath not heard, and which have not entered into the heart of man, the great things which God hath prepared for those that love him.”
For God hath revealed them to us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searcheth all things, even the depths of God.
For who among men knoweth the things of a man, but the spirit of the man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no one but the Spirit of God.
But we did not receive the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is from God, that we might know the things that have been given to us by the grace of God;
which things we also speak, not in words taught by man's wisdom, but in those taught by the Spirit, connecting what is spiritual l with what is spiritual.
But the unspiritual man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness to him, and he cannot know them; because they are spiritually discerned.
But he that is spiritual judgeth of all things, yet he himself is judged by no one.
For “who hath known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him?” But we have the mind of Christ.
I also, brethren, was not able to speak to you as to spiritual men, but as those who are not spiritual, as to babes in Christ.
I fed you with milk, not with meat; for ye were not yet able to bear it. Nor indeed are ye able even now;
for ye are yet unspiritual. For while there is among you rivalry and strife, are ye not unspiritual, and walking after the manner of men?
For while one saith, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollos, are ye not [[like common]] men?
Who then is Apollos, and who is Paul, but ministers through whom ye believed, and that as the Lord gave to each?
I planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the growth.
So then, neither he that planteth nor he that watereth is anything, but God that giveth the growth.
And he that planteth and he that watereth are one; and each will receive his own reward, according to his own labor.
For we are God's fellow-laborers; ye are God's field, ye are God's building.
According to the grace of God bestowed on me, I, as a skilful master-builder, have laid the foundation; and another buildeth thereon; but let every one take heed, how he buildeth thereon.
For other foundation can no one lay than that which is laid, which is Christ Jesus.
But if any one build upon this foundation with gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble,
the work of every one will be made manifest; for the day will show it; because it is revealed in fire; and the fire itself will prove what every one's work is.
If the work which any one built thereon remaineth, he will receive reward;
if any one's work shall be burned up, he will lose the reward; but he will be saved himself, yet as one escaping through fire.
Know ye not, that ye are God's temple, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?
If any one defaceth the temple of God, God will deface him; for the temple of God is holy, and such are ye.
Let no one deceive himself; if any one thinketh himself wise among you in this world, let him become a fool, that he may become wise.
For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God; for it is written: “He that taketh the wise in their craftiness;”
and again: “The Lord knoweth the thoughts of the wise, that they are vain.”
So then let no one glory in men. For all things are yours;
whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come,—all are yours;
and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's.
Let a man so account us, as servants of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God.
Here moreover, it is required in stewards, that a man be found faithful.
But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged by you, or by a human tribunal; nay, I do not even judge myself;
for though I am conscious to myself of nothing wrong, yet not by this am I cleared of blame; but he that judgeth me is the Lord.
So then judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who will both bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the purposes of men's hearts; and then shall every one have his praise from God.
And these things, brethren, I have transferred in a figure to myself and Apollos for your sakes, that in us ye may learn not to go beyond what is written, that no one of you may pride himself in one against another.
For who maketh thee to differ from another? And what hast thou that thou didst not receive? But if thou didst receive it, why dost thou boast, as if thou hadst not received it?
Already ye are full; already ye are rich; without us ye have become kings; and I would indeed ye were kings, that we also might reign with you.
For I think that God hath set forth us the apostles as lowest, as men sentenced to death; for we have been made a spectacle to the world, to angels, and to men.
We are fools for Christ's sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are in honor, but we are despised.
Even to this very hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling-place,
and labor, working with our own hands; being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we endure it;
being slandered, we exhort; we have become as the filth of the world, the off-scouring of all things until now.
I write not these things to shame you, but I am warning you as my beloved children.
For though ye have ten thousand teachers in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers; for in Christ Jesus I begot you through the gospel.
I exhort you therefore, be ye imitators of me.
For this end I sent to you Timothy, who is my beloved child, and faithful in the Lord, who will put you in mind of my ways in Christ, according as I teach everywhere in every church.
Now some are puffed up, as though I were not coming to you.
But I shall come to you shortly, if it be the Lord's will, and will know, not the word of those who are puffed up, but the power;
for the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.
What will ye? Am I to come to you with a rod, or in love, and the spirit of mildness?
It is everywhere reported that there is fornication among you, and such fornication as is not even among the gentiles, that one should have his father's wife.
And ye are puffed up, and did not rather mourn, so that he that committed this deed might be separated from among you.
For I, for my part, though absent in the body, yet present in the spirit have already determined, as if I were present with you, respecting him who thus wrought this deed,
in the name of our Lord Jesus, when you and my spirit with you are assembled together, with the power of our Lord Jesus,
to deliver such a man over to Satan for the destruction of his flesh, that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord.
Your glorying is not good. Know ye not, that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump?
Cleanse out the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened; for our passover also hath been sacrificed, even Christ.
So then let us keep the feast, not with the old leaven, nor with the leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
I wrote to you in that letter, not to keep company with fornicators;
certainly not meaning the fornicators of this world, or the covetous and extortioners, or idolaters; for to do this ye must go out of the world.
But this is what I wrote you, not to keep company with any one called a brother, if he be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a reviler, or a drunkard, or an extortioner; with such a one not even to eat.
For what have I to do with judging those who are without? Do not ye judge those who are within?
But those who are without, God will judge. Do ye put away that bad man from among yourselves.
Doth any one of you, who hath a matter against another, dare to go to law before the unrighteous, and not before the holy?
Or do ye not know, that the holy will judge the world? And if the world is to be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge in causes of the least importance?
Know ye not, that we shall pass judgment upon angels? How much more, concerning affairs of this life?
If then ye have any causes relating to this life, set them to judge who are of no repute in the church.
I speak to your shame. Is it so, that there is not a wise man among you, not one that will be able to judge between his brethren?
Nay, brother goeth to law with brother, and that before unbelievers.
Now therefore it is altogether an evil among you, that ye have suits against each other. Why do ye not rather submit to wrong? Why do ye not rather allow yourselves to be defrauded?
But ye yourselves wrong, and defraud, and that too your brethren.
Know ye not, that wrongdoers shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived; neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor the effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind,
nor thieves, nor the covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.
And such were some of you; but ye were washed, but ye were made holy, but ye were accepted as righteous in the name of the Lord Jesus, and in the Spirit of our God.
All things are lawful for me, but all things are not profitable; all things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the power of anything.
Meats are for the stomach, and the stomach for meats; but God will make an end of both it and them. But the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body;
and God both raised up the Lord, and will also raise up us by his power.
Know ye not, that your bodies are members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them members of a harlot? God forbid!
Know ye not, that he who is connected with a harlot is one body with her? “For the two,” saith he, “shall become one flesh;”
but he that is connected with the Lord is one spirit with him.
Flee fornication. Every other sin which a man may commit, is apart from the body; but he that committeth fornication, sinneth against his own body.
Know ye not, that your bodies are temples of the Holy Spirit which is in you, which ye have from God, and that ye are not your own?
For ye were bought with a price. Therefore glorify God in your body.
Now as to the matters about which ye wrote, it is good for a man not to touch a woman;
but on account of the commonness of fornication, let every man have his own wife, and every woman her own husband.
Let the husband render to his wife her due; and so also the wife to her husband.
The wife hath not the disposal of her own body, but her husband; and so also the husband hath not the disposal of his own body, but his wife.
Defraud not one another, except by agreement for a time, that ye may have a season for prayer; and be together again, that Satan may not tempt you through your incontinence.
But I say this by way of permission, not command.
I would that all men were as I myself; but every one hath his own gift from God, one man this, and another that.
I say also to the unmarried and the widows, it is good for them to remain as I am;
but if they cannot control themselves, let them marry; for it is better to marry than to burn.
But to those who are married it is my command, yet not mine, but the Lord's: Let not the wife separate herself from her husband,
and if she have separated herself let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband; and let not the husband put away his wife.
But to the rest say I, not the Lord: If any brother hath an unbelieving wife, and she be satisfied to dwell with him, let him not put her away;
and if a wife hath an unbelieving husband, and he be satisfied to dwell with her, let her not put her husband away.
For the unbelieving husband hath been made holy by his wife, and the unbelieving wife hath been made holy by the brother; otherwise were your children unclean, but, as it is, they are holy.
But if the unbelieving separateth himself, let him separate himself; a brother or a sister is not under bondage in such cases. But God hath called you to be in peace.
For how dost thou know, O wife, but that thou mayst save thy husband? or how dost thou know, O husband, but that thou mayst save thy wife?
But let every one continue to walk in the lot which the Lord appointed him, in the condition in which God called him. And this direction I give in all the churches.
Was any one called being circumcised, let him not become as if uncircumcised; hath any one been called in uncircumcision, let him not become circumcised.
Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God.
Let every one remain in the same calling in which he was called.
Wast thou called being a slave, care not for it; but even if thou canst be made free, use it rather.
For he that was called in the Lord, being a slave, is the Lord's freeman. In like manner the freeman, who is called, is Christ's slave.
Ye were bought with a price; become not the slaves of men.
In that state, brethren, in which he was called, let every one remain with God.
Now concerning virgins, I have no commandment of the Lord; but I give my judgment, as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful.
I think, then, that it is well, on account of the impending distress, for a man to remain as he is.
Art thou bound to a wife, seek not to be loosed from her; art thou loosed from a wife, do not seek for one.
But if thou hast married, thou hast committed no sin; and if a virgin hath married, she hath committed no sin. Such, however, will have trouble in the flesh, which I desire to spare you.
But this I say, brethren, the time that remaineth is short; that both they that have wives may be as though they had none;
and they that weep, as though they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they possessed not;
and they that use this world as not abusing it; for the outward condition of this world is passing away;
and I would have you free from anxious cares. He that is unmarried careth about the things of the Lord, how he may please the Lord;
but he that is married careth about the things of the world, how to please his wife.
There is a difference also between a wife and a virgin; the unmarried woman careth about the things of the Lord, to be holy, both in body and in spirit; but she that is married careth about the things of the world, how to please her husband.
And this I say for your own profit; not to cast a noose over you, but with a view to what is becoming, and that ye may attend upon the Lord without distraction.
But if any one thinketh that he behaveth improperly in respect to his virgin [[daughter]], if she pass the flower of her age [[without being married]], and if it must be so, let him do what he will, he committeth no sin; let them marry.
But if any one is settled in his purpose, and is under no necessity, but is free to act as he will, and hath determined in his heart to keep his own virgin daughter [[unmarried]], he doeth well.
So then he that giveth her in marriage doeth well; and he that doth not give her in marriage doeth better.
The wife is bound to her husband as long as he liveth; but if her husband die, she is free to marry whom she will, only in the Lord.
But she is happier if she remain as she is, in my opinion; and I too think that I have the Spirit of God.
Now concerning the things offered in sacrifice to idols, we know that we all have knowledge. Knowledge puffeth up, but love edifieth;
if any one think that he knoweth anything, he knoweth nothing yet, as he ought to know;
but if any one love God, the same is known by Him.
Concerning the eating of the things offered in sacrifice to idols, then, we know that an idol is nothing in the world, and that there is no other God but one.
For though there are those that are called gods, whether in heaven or on earth; as there are gods many, and lords many;
yet to us there is but one God, the Father, from whom are all things, and we to him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, through whom are all things, and we through him.
But there is not in all men this knowledge; for some, with a conscience directed toward the idol even now, eat of it as a thing offered in sacrifice to an idol, and their conscience, being weak, is defiled.
But food will not recommend us to God; if we do not eat, we are not the worse; nor if we do eat, are we the better.
But take heed, lest this liberty of yours become a stumbling-block to the weak.
For if any one see thee, who hast knowledge, at table in an idol's temple, will not the conscience of him that is weak be emboldened to eat the things offered to idols?
For through thy knowledge he that is weak perisheth,—the brother for whom Christ died!
But when ye so sin against the brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ.
Wherefore, if food cause my brother to fall, I will eat no flesh for ever, lest I cause my brother to fall. Am I not free?
Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our Lord? Are not ye my work in the Lord?
If I am not an apostle to others, yet surely I am to you; for the seal of my apostleship are ye in the Lord.
This is my answer to those who question my authority.
Have we not a right to eat and drink?
Have we not a right to carry about with us a sister as a wife, as well as the other apostles, and the brothers of the Lord, and Cephas?
Or am I alone and Barnabas bound to labor with our own hands?
Who ever serveth as a soldier at his own charges? Who planteth a vineyard without eating its fruit? Or who tendeth a flock and doth not eat of the milk of the flock?
Is it on man's authority that I am saying these things, or doth not the Law too say the same?
For it is written in the law of Moses: “Thou shalt not muzzle an ox while treading out grain.” Is it for oxen that God careth?
Or doth he say it altogether on our account? On our account, no doubt, it was written, that he who plougheth ought to plough in hope, and that he who thrasheth should do it in the hope of partaking.
If we have sown to you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap from you things for the body?
If others possess this right in relation to you, do not we still more? But we have not used this right; but we submit to all things, that we may occasion no hindrance to the gospel of Christ.
Do ye not know, that they who minister in the offerings of the temple live from the temple? that they who serve at the altar share with the altar?
In like manner also did the Lord ordain that they who preach the gospel should live from the gospel.
But I have used no right of this kind; nor have I written thus that anything of this kind should be done for me; for it were better for me to die, than that any one should take from me what I glory in.
For in preaching the gospel, I have nothing to glory in; for I am under a necessity to do so; yea, woe is to me, if I preach not the gospel!
For if I do this willingly, I have a reward; but if unwillingly, still I have been intrusted with a stewardship.
What then is my reward? It is that, when I preach the gospel, I may make the gospel free of charge, that I use not to the full my right as a preacher of the gospel.
For being free from all men, yet I made myself a servant to all, that I might gain the more;
and to the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain Jews; to those under the Law, as under the Law, not being myself under the Law, that I might gain those under the Law;
to those without the Law, as without the Law, being not without a law before God, but under the law of Christ, that I might gain those without the Law;
to the weak I became weak, that I might gain the weak; I have become all things to all, that I might by all means save some.
And I do all for the sake of the gospel, that I may with others partake of it.
Know ye not, that of those who run in the race-course all run, but one receiveth the prize? Thus run, that ye may obtain.
And every one who contendeth in the games is temperate in all things; they, however, to obtain a perishable crown, but we, an imperishable.
I therefore so run, not as one uncertain; I so fight, not as one striking the air;
but I beat down my body, and bring it into subjection, lest perhaps, when I have been a herald to others, I should myself be rejected as unworthy.
For I would not have you ignorant, brethren, that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea,
and were all baptized to Moses in the cloud and in the sea,
and all ate the same spiritual food,
and all drank the same spiritual drink; for they drank of the spiritual rock that accompanied them; and the rock was Christ;
but with most of them God was not well pleased; for they were laid low in the wilderness.
Now these things were warnings for us, in order that we should not lust after evil things, as they lusted.
And do not ye become idolaters, as some of them did; as it is written: “The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to sport.”
Nor let us commit fornication, as some of them did, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand.
Nor let us tempt Christ, as some of them tempted, and were destroyed by the serpents.
And do not ye murmur, as some of them murmured, and perished by the Destroyer.
Now these things happened to them as warnings, and were recorded for our admonition, to whom the ends of the ages have come.
Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall.
No temptation hath come upon you, but such as is common to man; but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted beyond what ye are able to endure, but will with the temptation furnish also the way to escape, that ye may be able to endure it.
Wherefore, my beloved, flee from idolatry.
I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say.
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not a partaking of the blood of Christ? the loaf which we break, is it not a partaking of the body of Christ?
For we, the many, are one loaf, one body; for we all share in that one loaf.
Look at Israel by natural descent. Have not those who eat of the sacrifices, communion with the altar?
What do I say then? That what is offered in sacrifice to idols is anything? Or that an idol is anything?
Nay, but that what they sacrifice, they sacrifice to demons, and not to God; and I would not that ye should have communion with demons.
Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of demons; ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's table, and the table of demons.
Shall we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than he?
All things are lawful, but all things are not profitable; all things are lawful, but all things are not edifying.
Let no one seek his own pleasure, but the good of others.
Whatever is sold in the market that eat, without asking questions for the sake of conscience;
for “the earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof.”
And if one who is an unbeliever inviteth you to a feast, and ye choose to go, eat whatever is set before you, without asking any questions for the sake of conscience.
But if any one say to you, This hath been offered in sacrifice to an idol, do not eat of it, on account of him that showed you this, and from a regard to conscience;
conscience I mean, not thine own, but that of the other. For why is my liberty to be judged by another conscience [[than my own]]?
If I partake with thankfulness, why am I to be evil spoken of in a matter for which I give thanks?
Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God.
Give no occasion of stumbling either to Jews or Greeks, or to the church of God;
as I also strive to please all in all things, not seeking my own advantage, but that of the many; that they may be saved.
Follow my example, as I do that of Christ.
Now I praise you, brethren, that in all things ye remember me, and hold fast the instructions, as I delivered them to you.
But I would have you know, that the head of every man is Christ; and the head of the woman is the man; and the head of Christ is God.
Every man that prayeth or prophesieth having his head covered, dishonoreth his head.
But every woman that prayeth or prophesieth with her head uncovered dishonoreth her head; for it is one and the same thing as if her head were shaved.
For if a woman is not veiled, let her also be shorn; but if it be a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven, let her be veiled.
For a man indeed ought not to cover his head, since he is the image and glory of God; but the woman is the glory of the man;
for the man is not from the woman, but the woman from the man;
and the man was not created for the woman, but the woman for the man.
For this cause the woman ought to have a sign of authority on her head, because of the angels.
But neither is the woman without the man, nor the man without the woman, in the Lord.
For as the woman is from the man, so also is the man by the woman; but all things from God.
Judge in your own selves; is it comely that a woman pray to God uncovered?
Doth not even nature itself teach you, that if a man have long hair, it is a shame to him,
but that if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her? for her hair is given for a covering.
But if any one seemeth to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the churches of God.
But I give you this charge, not praising you, because ye come together not for the better, but for the worse.
For in the first place, when ye come together in assembly of the church, I hear that there are divisions among you; and I partly believe it;
for there must be also parties among you, that they who are approved may also become manifest among you.
When ye come together then in the same place, there is no eating of the Lord's supper.
For, when ye eat, every one taketh before any distribution his own supper, and one is hungry, and another is drunken.
What! have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? Or despise ye the church of God, and shame those who have nothing? What am I to say to you? Shall I praise you? In this I do not praise you.
For I received of the Lord, what I also delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took a loaf,
and when he had given thanks, he broke it, and said, This is my body, which is for you; this do in remembrance of me.
In like manner also the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the new covenant, in my blood; this do, as oft as ye drink, in remembrance of me.
For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye show forth the Lord's death, till he come.
So that whoever eateth the bread or drinketh the cup of the Lord in an unworthy manner will be guilty with respect to the body and the blood of the Lord.
But let a man examine himself, and thus let him eat of the bread, and drink of the cup;
for he that eateth and drinketh eateth and drinketh judgment to himself, if he do not discern the body.
For this cause many among you are weak and sickly, and some are falling asleep.
But if we judged ourselves, we should not be judged;
but when we are judged, we are chastened by the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world.
Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come together to eat, wait for one another.
If any one hunger, let him eat at home; that ye may not come together to condemnation. And the rest I will set in order when I come.
Now concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not have you ignorant.
Ye know, that when ye were gentiles, ye were carried away to dumb idols, as ye happened to be led;
wherefore I give you to understand that no one speaking by the Spirit of God saith, Accursed be Jesus; and that no one can say, Jesus is Lord, but by the Holy Spirit.
Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit;
and there are diversities of services, but the same Lord;
and there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God who worketh all things in all.
But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to each one for the good of others.
For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge, according to the same Spirit;
to another faith, by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing, by the one Spirit;
to another the working of miracles, to another prophecy, to another discerning of spirits, to another divers kinds of tongues, to another the interpretation of tongues.
But all these worketh the one and self-same Spirit, allotting to each one severally as it will.
For as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members of the body, being many, are one body, so it is with Christ.
For by one Spirit we were all baptized into one body, whether Jews or Greeks, whether slaves or freemen; and were all made to drink one Spirit.
For the body also is not one member, but many.
If the foot say, Because I am not a hand, I am not of the body, is it for this reason not of the body?
And if the ear say, Because I am not an eye, I am not of the body, is it for this reason not of the body?
If the whole body were an eye, where would be the hearing? If the whole were hearing, where would be the smelling?
But as it is, God set the members every one of them in the body, as it pleased him.
And if they were all one member, where would be the body?
But now there are, indeed, many members, but one body.
And the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee; nor, again, the head to the feet, I have no need of you.
Nay, still more, those members of the body which seem to be weak, are necessary;
and what we think to be less honorable parts of the body, upon these we bestow more abundant honor; and our unseemly parts have more abundant seemliness;
while our seemly parts have no need. But God so put the body together, as to give special honor to that part which lacked,
that there might be no schism in the body, but that the members should have the same care one for another.
And so if one member suffereth, all the members suffer with it; or if one member is honored, all the members rejoice with it.
Now ye are the body of Christ, and members individually. And
God appointed some in the church to be, in the first place, apostles, in the second place, prophets, in the third place, teachers, then miracles, then gifts of healing, those of helping and of governing, divers kinds of tongues. Are all apostles?
Are all prophets? Are all teachers? Are all workers of miracles?
Have all the gifts of healing? Do all speak with tongues? Do all interpret?
But desire earnestly the greater gifts. And furthermore I show you by far the most excellent way.
Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not love, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.
And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries and all knowledge, and though I have all faith, so as to remove mountains, and have not love, I am nothing.
And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give up my body that I may be burned, and have not love, it profiteth me nothing.
Love suffereth long, is kind; love envieth not; love vaunteth not herself, is not puffed up,
doth not behave herself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, maketh no account of an injury,
rejoiceth not at iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth,
beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things.
Love never faileth; but whether there are prophesyings, they will come to an end; whether tongues, they will cease; whether knowledge, it will be done away.
For we know in part, and we prophesy in part;
but when that which is perfect is come, that which is in part will be done away.
When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I had the feelings of a child, I thought as a child; since I have become a man, I have put away the things of the child.
For now we see in a mirror, obscurely; but then face to face; now I know in part, but then I shall fully know even as I also am fully known.
And now there abide faith, hope, love, these three; but the greatest of these is love.
Strive to possess love; and desire earnestly the spiritual gifts, but especially that of prophesying.
For he that speaketh in an [[unknown]] tongue speaketh not to men, but to God; for no one heareth; but in the Spirit he speaketh mysteries;
but he that prophesieth speaketh to men edification, and exhortation, and comfort.
He that speaketh in an [[unknown]] tongue edifieth himself; but he that prophesieth edifieth the church.
I would that ye all spoke with tongues, but rather that ye prophesied; for greater is he that prophesieth than he that speaketh with tongues, unless he interpret, that the church may receive edification.
But now, brethren, if I come to you speaking with tongues, what shall I profit you, unless I speak to you either by revelation, or by knowledge, or by prophesying, or by teaching?
And even things without life that give sound, whether pipe or harp, if they make no distinction in the sounds, how shall that be known which is piped or harped?
For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who will prepare himself for the battle?
So also ye, unless ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall that be known which is spoken? For ye will be speaking into the air.
There are, it may be, so many kinds of languages in the world, and not one is without meaning.
If then I know not the meaning of the language, I shall be to him that speaketh a foreigner, and he that speaketh a foreigner to me.
So also ye, since ye are eager to possess spiritual gifts, be earnest to abound in them to the edification of the church.
Wherefore let him that speaketh in an [[unknown]] tongue pray that he may interpret.
For if I pray in an [[unknown]] tongue, my spirit prayeth, but my understanding is unfruitful.
How stands it then? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also; I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also.
Else, if thou bless with the spirit, how shall he that occupieth the place of the unlearned say the Amen at thy giving of thanks, since he understandeth not what thou art saying?
For thou indeed givest thanks well; but the other is not edified.
I thank God, I speak in an [[unknown]] tongue more than ye all;
yet in the church I would rather speak five words with my understanding, that I might also instruct others, than ten thousand words in an [[unknown]] tongue.
Brethren, do not become children in understanding; yet in malice be children, but in understanding be men.
In the Law it is written: “With men of other tongues and with other lips will I speak to this people,
and yet for all that will they not hear me, saith the Lord.” Wherefore the tongues are for a sign, not to believers, but to unbelievers; but prophesying is not for unbelievers, but for believers.
If therefore the whole church be assembled in one place, and all be speaking with tongues, and there come in those who are unlearned, or unbelievers, will they not say that ye are mad?
But if all prophesy, and there come in one that is an unbeliever, or unlearned, he is convinced by all, he is searched through by all,
the secrets of his heart become manifest; and so falling down on his face, he will worship God, and report that God is indeed within you.
How is it then, brethren? When ye come together, every one of you hath a psalm, hath a lesson of instruction, hath a revelation, hath a tongue, hath an interpretation; let all things be done for edification.
If any one speak in an [[unknown]] tongue, let it be by two, or, at the most, by three, and in turn; and let one interpret.
But if there be no interpreter, let him keep silence in the church; and let him speak to himself, and to God.
And of the prophets let two or three speak, and let the others judge;
if anything be revealed to another that sitteth by, let the first speaker be silent.
For one by one ye can all prophesy, that all may learn, and all may be exhorted.
And spirits of prophets are subject to prophets;
for God is not a God of confusion, but of peace. As in all the churches of the saints,
let your women keep silence in the churches; for it is not permitted them to speak, but they are to be in subjection, as also saith the Law.
And if they desire to learn anything, let them ask their own husbands at home; for it is a shame for a woman to speak in the church.
What! Did the word of God come forth from you? Or did it come to you alone?
If any one thinketh himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him know surely that the directions I am writing to you are the Lord's;
but if any one be ignorant, let him be ignorant!
Wherefore, brethren, desire earnestly to prophesy, and forbid not to speak with tongues;
but let all things be done becomingly, and in order.
Moreover, brethren, I declare anew to you the gospel which I preached to you, which also ye received, and wherein ye stand,
by which also ye are saved, if ye hold fast the same word which I preached to you, unless ye believed in vain.
For I delivered to you first of all what I also received, that Christ died for our sins, according to the Scriptures;
and that he was buried, and that he hath risen on the third day, according to the Scriptures;
and that he appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve.
After that, he appeared to more than five hundred brethren at once, of whom the greater part remain until now, but some have fallen asleep.
After that, he appeared to James; then to all the apostles.
And last of all, as to one born out of due time, he appeared also to me.
For I am the least of the apostles, one not worthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God.
But by the grace of God I am what I am; and his grace which was bestowed upon me was not in vain, but I labored more abundantly than they all; yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me.
Whether, then, it were I or they, thus we preach, and thus ye believed.
But if Christ be preached that he hath risen from the dead, how is it that some among you say, that there is no resurrection of the dead?
But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then Christ hath not risen;
and if Christ hath not risen, then is our preaching vain, and vain also is your faith.
And we are also found false witnesses concerning God; because we testified concerning God that he raised up Christ, whom he did not raise up, if so be that the dead rise not.
For if the dead rise not, then Christ hath not risen;
and if Christ hath not risen, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your sins;
then also they that have fallen asleep in Christ have perished.
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable.
But now hath Christ risen from the dead, the first-fruits of them that have fallen asleep.
For since through man came death, through man came also the resurrection of the dead.
For as in Adam all die, so also in Christ will all be made alive.
But every one in his own order; Christ the first-fruits, afterward they that are Christ's, at his coming.
Then will be the end, when he delivereth up the kingdom to God, the Father, when he shall have destroyed all dominion, and all authority, and power.
For he must reign, “till he hath put all enemies under his feet.”
The last enemy, death, will be destroyed;
for “he put all things under his feet.” But when it is said that all things have been put under him, it is manifest that he who put all things under him is excepted.
And when all things have been put under him, then will also the Son himself become subject to him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all.
If it be not so, what are they doing, who are baptized for the dead? If the dead rise not at all, why are they then baptized for them?
Why also do we stand in peril every hour?
I protest, brethren, by my glorying in you which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, that I die daily.
If with the views of men I fought with wild beasts at Ephesus, what advantage is it to me? If the dead rise not, “let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die.”
Be not deceived; “evil communications corrupt good manners.”
Awake, as is your duty, and sin not; for some have not the knowledge of God; I say it to your shame.
But some one will say, How are the dead to rise? and with what body do they come?
Fool! that which thou sowest is not brought to life unless it die;
and what thou sowest, not the body that shall be dost thou sow, but a bare grain, of wheat perhaps, or of some of the other grains;
but God giveth it a body, as he willed, and to every seed its own body.
All flesh is not the same flesh; but there is one flesh of men, another of beasts, another of birds, another of fishes.
There are also heavenly bodies, and earthly bodies; but the glory of the heavenly is one, and the glory of the earthly is another.
There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for one star differeth from another star in glory.
So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption;
it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power;
it is sown an animal body, it is raised a spiritual body. If there is an animal body, there is also a spiritual body.
Thus is it also written: “The first man Adam became a living soul;” the last Adam a life-giving spirit.
But the spiritual is not first, but the animal; and afterward the spiritual.
The first man is from the earth, earthy; the second man is from heaven.
As was the earthy, such are they also that are earthy; and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly;
and as we bore the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly.
And this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, nor doth corruption inherit incorruption.
Behold, I tell you a mystery. We shall not all sleep; but we shall all be changed,
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump. For the trumpet will sound, and the dead will be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed.
For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality.
So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then will be brought to pass that which is written: “Death is swallowed up in victory.”
“Where, O death, is thy sting? Where, O death, is thy victory?”
The sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the Law.
But thanks be to God, who giveth us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore, my beloved brethren, be steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, since ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.
Now concerning the collection for the saints, according to the directions which I gave to the churches of Galatia, so also do ye.
Every first day of the week let each of you lay by him something in store, according as he hath prospered; that the collections may not have to be made when I come.
And when I am with you, I will send with letters whomever you may approve to carry your bounty to Jerusalem;
and if it be worth while for me to go also, they shall go with me.
Now I will come to you, when I have passed through Macedonia; for I am about to pass through Macedonia;
and perhaps I may remain, or even spend the winter with you, that ye may set me forward on my journey whithersoever I may be going.
For I am unwilling to see you now in passing; for I hope to stay some time with you if the Lord permit.
But I shall remain at Ephesus until the Pentecost;
for a door hath been opened to me great and effective, and there are many adversaries.
Now if Timothy come, see that he be with you without fear; for he is laboring in the work of the Lord, as I am;
let no one therefore despise him. But conduct him on in peace, that he may come to me; for I am waiting for him with the brethren.
As regards Apollos, the brother, I urged him much to come to you with the brethren; and it was not at all his will to come at this time; but he will come when he hath a convenient opportunity.
Watch, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong;
let all your doings be in love.
And I exhort you, brethren,—ye know the family of Stephanas, that they are the first-fruits of Achaia, and that they have devoted themselves to the service of the holy,—
that ye submit yourselves to such as they are, and to every one that worketh with us, and laboreth.
I am glad of the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus; for what was lacking on your part, they supplied;
for they refreshed my spirit and yours. Pay regard then to those that are such.
The churches of Asia salute you. Aquila and Prisca, with the church that is in their house, send you many salutations in the Lord.
All the brethren salute you. Salute one another with a holy kiss.
The salutation of me, Paul, with my own hand.
If any one loveth not the Lord, let him be accursed! The Lord is at hand.
The grace of the Lord Jesus be with you.
My love is with you all in Christ Jesus.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy the brother, to the church of God which is in Corinth, with all the holy who are in all Achaia:
Grace be to you, and peace, from God our Fathers and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and God of all comfort,
who comforteth us in all our distress, that we may be able to comfort those who are in any distress by the comfort wherewith we are ourselves comforted by God;
for as the sufferings of Christ overflow to us, so through Christ doth our comfort also overflow.
And whether we are distressed, it is for your comfort and salvation, which showeth its power in enabling you to bear patiently the same sufferings which we also endure; and our hope is steadfast in your behalf; or whether we are comforted, it is for your comfort and salvation,
knowing that as ye are sharers in the sufferings, so also ye will be sharers in the comfort.
For we would not, brethren, have you ignorant of our distress which came upon us in Asia, that it was exceedingly heavy upon us beyond our strength, so that we despaired even of life;
yea, we ourselves had within ourselves the sentence of death, that we might not trust in ourselves, but in God who raiseth the dead;
who delivered us from such peril of death, and is delivering; in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us,
you also unitedly helping us by prayer, so that for this blessing bestowed on us by means of many, thanks may be given by many on your behalf.
For our glorying is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and the sincerity which is of God, not in fleshly wisdom, but in the grace of God, we have conducted ourselves in the world, and especially toward you.
For we write no other things to you, than what ye read or even acknowledge. And I trust ye will acknowledge even to the end,
as also ye have acknowledged us in part, that we are your glorying, as ye also are ours in the day of the Lord Jesus.
And in this confidence it was my purpose to come to you before, that ye might receive a second benefit;
and to go by way of you into Macedonia, and from Macedonia to come again to you, and by you to be forwarded on my way to Judaea.
Having, then, this purpose, did I act with levity? Or in my purposes do I resolve according to the flesh, that with me there should be now yea, yea, and now nay, nay?
But as God is faithful, our word to you is not yea and nay.
For the Son of God, Christ Jesus, who was preached among you by us, by me and Silvanus and Timothy, was not found yea and nay, but in him hath been found yea.
For as to all the promises of God, in him is yea, and in him amen, to the glory of God through us.
Now he who maketh us with you steadfast in Christ, and anointed us, is God;
he who also sealed us, and gave the Spirit as a pledge in our hearts.
But I call upon God as a witness against my soul, that it was to spare you that I came no more to Corinth;
not that we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy. For in respect to faith ye stand firm.
But I determined this with myself, that my next visit to you should not be in sorrow.
For if I make you sorrowful, who is there to make me glad but he that is made sorrowful by me?
And I wrote about this very matter, that I might not on my coming have sorrow from those who ought to gladden me, having confidence in all of you, that my joy is the joy of you all.
For out of much distress and anguish of heart I wrote to you with many tears, not that ye should be made sorrowful, but that ye might know the exceeding love which I have for you.
But if any one hath caused grief, he hath caused it not to me alone, but in a measure, not to be too severe on him, to all of you.
Sufficient for such a one is this punishment, which was inflicted by the many;
so that on the contrary ye ought rather to forgive, and console him, lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow.
Wherefore I beseech you to confirm your love toward him.
For to this end also I wrote, that I might know by putting it to the proof, whether ye are obedient in all things.
But to whom ye forgive anything, I forgive also; for what I have forgiven, if I have forgiven anything, for your sakes I forgave it in the person of Christ,
that Satan might not gain an advantage over us; for we are not ignorant of his devices.
Now when I came to Troas to preach the gospel of Christ, and a door had been opened to me by the Lord,
I had no rest in my spirit, because I found not Titus my brother; but taking my leave of them, I went forth into Macedonia.
But thanks be to God, who always exhibiteth us in triumph in Christ, and manifesteth through us the odor of the knowledge of him in every place.
For we are to God a sweet odor of Christ among those who are being saved, and those who are perishing;
to the latter we are the odor of death, producing death; and to the former the odor of life, producing life. And who is sufficient for these things?
For we are not as the many, who adulterate the word of God; but as from sincerity, but as from God, in the sight of God we speak in Christ.
Are we beginning again to recommend ourselves? Or do we need, like some others, letters of recommendation to you, or letters of recommendation from you?
Ye are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read by all men;
since ye are manifestly shown to be a letter of Christ by means of our service, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not on tablets of stone, but on fleshly tablets of the heart.
And such confidence as this have we through Christ toward God;
not that we are able of ourselves to think anything, as from ourselves; but our ability is from God;
who also gave us ability to be ministers of a new covenant, not of the letter, but of the Spirit; for the letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life.
But if the ministration of death, engraven in letters on stones, was so glorious, that the children of Israel could not look steadfastly on the face of Moses by reason of the glory of his countenance, which glory was to be done away,
shall not the ministration of the Spirit be much more glorious?
For if the ministration of condemnation had glory, much greater is the glory of the ministration of righteousness.
For even that which was made glorious hath ceased to be glorious in this respect, by reason of the glory by which it is exceeded.
For if that which was to be done away was glorious, much more glorious is that which endureth.
Having therefore such hope, we use great plainness of speech;
and do not as Moses did, who put a veil over his face, that the children of Israel might not steadfastly look on the end of that which was to be done away.
But their understandings were blinded; for until this day, when the old covenant is read, the same veil remaineth, since it is not unveiled to them that it is done away in Christ;
but even till this day, when Moses is read, there lieth a veil upon their heart;
but whenever it turneth to the Lord, the veil is taken away.
Now the Lord is the Spirit; and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.
But we all with unveiled face beholding in a mirror the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, as by the Lord, the Spirit.
Therefore, having this ministry through the mercy we received, we are not faint-hearted;
but have renounced the hidden things of shame, not walking in craftiness, nor adulterating the word of God, but by the manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.
But if our gospel is veiled, it is veiled to them that perish,
in whom the God of this world blinded the understandings of the unbelieving, so that they cannot behold the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God.
For we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus as Lord, and ourselves your bond-servants for Jesus' sake.
For it is God, who commanded light to shine out of darkness, that shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ.
But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the exceeding greatness of the power may be of God, and not of us;
being troubled on every side, yet not distressed; perplexed, but not in despair;
persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed;
always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our body.
For we who live are continually delivered up to death for Jesus' sake, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our mortal flesh.
So then death worketh in us, but life in you.
But having the same spirit of faith, according to that which is written, “I believed, and therefore I spoke,” we also believe, and therefore speak;
knowing that he who raised up the Lord Jesus will raise up us also with Jesus, and will present us with you.
For all things are for your sakes, that the grace abounding by means of the greater number may cause thanksgiving to abound to the glory of God.
For which cause we are not faint-hearted; but though our outward man is perishing, yet the inward man is renewed day by day.
For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh out for us, in a higher and still higher degree, an everlasting weight of glory;
while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the things which are seen are but for a time; but the things which are not seen are ever lasting.
For we know that, if our earthly tent-habitation be destroyed, we have a building provided by God, a house not made with hands, everlasting, in the heavens.
For while in this we groan, longing to be clothed upon with our habitation which is from heaven;
since, indeed, when we have put off our present garment, we shall not be found naked.
For we who are in this tent groan, being burdened; inasmuch as we do not desire to be unclothed, but to be clothed upon, that mortality may be swallowed up by life.
Now he that hath prepared us for this very thing is God; who also gave to us the Spirit as the pledge.
We have courage, therefore, always, and know that while we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord;
for we walk by faith, not by sight; but we have courage,
and are well pleased rather to be absent from the body, and to be at home with the Lord.
Wherefore we also strive that, whether at home or absent, we may be approved by him.
For we must all be made manifest before the judgment-seat of Christ, that each one may receive the things done in his body, according to what he did, whether good or bad.
Knowing therefore the fear of the Lord, we persuade men; but to God we have been made manifest, and I hope have been made manifest in your consciences also.
For we are not again commending ourselves to you, but giving you occasion to glory on our behalf; that ye may have somewhat to answer those who glory in outward appearance, and not in heart.
For whether we were beside ourselves, it was for God; or whether we are in our sound mind, it is for you.
For the love of Christ constraineth us, because we thus judged, that if one died for all, then all died;
and he died for all, that they who live should no longer live to themselves, but to him who died for their sakes, and rose again.
So that we henceforth know no one according to the flesh; and if we have even known Christ according to the flesh, yet now we no longer know him.
Therefore, if any one is in Christ, he is a new creation; the old things have passed away; behold, all things have become new.
And all things are from God, who reconciled us to himself by Christ, and gave to us the ministry of reconciliation;
seeing that in Christ God was reconciling the world to himself, not reckoning to them their trespasses, and having committed to us the word of reconciliation.
We then are ambassadors for Christ; as though God were exhorting you by us, in behalf of Christ we entreat you, Be reconciled to God.
Him, who knew not sin, he made sin for us, that we might become God's righteousness in him.
As fellow-workers, then, with him, we also exhort you that ye receive not the grace of God in vain;
(for he saith: “In an accepted time I heard thee, and in the day of salvation I helped thee;” Behold, now is the accepted time, behold, now is the day of salvation;)
giving no occasion for stumbling in anything, that the ministry may not be blamed;
but as God's ministers recommending ourselves in all things, in much endurance, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses,
in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings, in fastings;
in pureness, in knowledge, in long-suffering, in kindness, in the Holy Spirit, in love unfeigned,
in the word of truth, in the power of God, by the weapons of righteousness on the right hand and on the left,
through honor and dishonor, through evil report and good report; as deceivers, and true;
as unknown, and well known; as dying, and behold, we live; as chastened, and not killed;
as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and possessing all things.
Our mouth is open to you, O Corinthians, our heart is enlarged.
Ye have not a narrow place in my heart, but ye have a narrow place for me in yours.
So then in return, I speak to you as children, let your hearts be enlarged.
Be not strangely yoked with unbelievers; for what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? Or what communion hath light with darkness?
And what concord hath Christ with Beliar? Or what part hath a believer with an unbeliever?
And what agreement hath the temple of God with idols? For ye are the temple of the living God; as God said: “I will dwell among them, and walk among them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.”
“Wherefore come out from the midst of them, and be separated, saith the Lord, and touch not anything unclean;” “and I will receive you,
and will be to you a father, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.”
Having then these promises, beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all pollution of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
Receive us into your hearts; we have wronged no one, we have corrupted no one, we have defrauded no one.
I am not saying this to condemn you; for I have said before, that ye are in our hearts to die with you and to live with you.
Great is my confidence toward you, great is my glorying on your account; I am filled with comfort, I overflow with joy in all our trouble.
For indeed when we had come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but we were troubled on every side; without were fightings, within were fears.
But God, that comforteth those who are brought low, comforted us by the coming of Titus;
and not by his coming only, but by the comfort with which he was comforted in regard to you, when he told us of your earnest desire, your mourning, your zeal in my behalf; so that I rejoiced the more.
For though I caused you sorrow with the letter, I do not regret it, though I did regret it; for I perceive that that letter caused you sorrow, though it was but for a short time.
Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorrowful, but that your sorrow produced repentance. For the sorrow which ye felt had respect to God, that ye might in nothing receive injury from me.
For sorrow before God worketh repentance to salvation never to be regretted; but the sorrow of the world worketh death.
For behold this very thing, that your sorrow had respect to God; what earnestness it wrought in you; yea, what clearing of yourselves, yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what longing desire, yea, what zeal, yea, what readiness to punish! In every thing ye showed yourselves to be pure in the matter.
Although, then, I wrote to you, it was not on account of him that did the wrong, nor of him who suffered wrong; but that your earnestness for us might be made manifest to you in the sight of God.
Therefore we have been comforted; but in our comfort we rejoiced still more on account of the joy of Titus, because his spirit has been refreshed by you all;
for if in anything I have boasted to him of you, I am not put to shame; but as we spoke all things to you in truth, so also our boasting, which we made before Titus, was found to be truth;
and his affection is more abundant toward you, while he remembers the obedience of you all, how with fear and trembling ye received him.
I rejoice that in every thing I have confidence in you.
Moreover, brethren, we make known to you the grace of God which hath been bestowed in the churches of Macedonia;
that under a great trial of distress the abundance of their joy and their deep poverty increased the riches of their liberality;
for according to their power, I bear witness, and beyond their power, they gave of their own accord,
begging of us with much entreaty the favor of sharing in the ministration to the saints;
and this, not as we expected, but they gave themselves first to the Lord and to us by the will of God;
so that we urged Titus, that, as he had already made a beginning, so he would also finish among you this bounty also.
But as ye abound in every thing, in faith, and utterance, and knowledge, and all earnestness, and in your love to us, see that ye abound in this exercise of liberality also.
I speak not by way of command, but by reason of the earnestness of others, and to prove the genuineness of your love.
For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich.
And I only give an opinion in this matter. For this is expedient for you, who began before others, not only to do, but also to be willing, a year ago.
Now therefore perform the doing of it, that as there was a readiness to will, so there may be a performance also out of that which ye have.
For if there be first the willing mind, it is accepted according to what a man hath, not according to what he hath not.
For it is not that others may be eased, and you burdened,
but to make an equality; at the present season your abundance meeting their deficiency, that their abundance may at another time meet your deficiency; that there may be equality;
as it is written: “He that gathered much, had nothing over; and he that gathered little, had no lack.”
But thanks be to God, who put the same earnest care for you into the heart of Titus;
for he accepted indeed the exhortation; but being very earnest, he went of his own accord to you.
And we have sent with him the brother, whose praise in the gospel is throughout all the churches;
and not that only, but who was also appointed by the churches as our fellow-traveler in the matter of this bounty, which is administered by us to the honor of the Lord himself, and of our ready mind;
since we are careful of this, that no one should blame us in our management of this abundant liberality;
for we take forethought for what is honorable, not only in the sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of men.
And we have sent with them our brother, whom we have often in many things proved to be zealous, but now much more zealous through the great confidence which he hath in you.
As to Titus, he is my partner and fellow-laborer for you; as to our brethren, they are messengers of the churches, the glory of Christ.
Display to them, therefore, before the churches, the proof of your love, and of what we have boasted on your behalf.
For concerning the ministering to the saints, it is superfluous for me to write to you.
For I know your readiness of mind, of which I boast in behalf of you to the Macedonians, that Achaia was prepared a year ago; and your zeal stirred up the greater part of them.
But I sent the brethren, that our boasting of you should not prove unfounded in this respect; that, as I said, ye may be prepared;
lest, should the Macedonians come with me, and find you unprepared, we (not to say ye) should be put to shame in respect to this confidence.
I thought it necessary therefore to exhort the brethren to go before to you, and make up beforehand your bounty, which was already announced, that the same might be ready, as a matter of bounty, and not of covetousness.
But this there is to say: He that soweth sparingly, shall reap also sparingly; and he that soweth bountifully, shall reap also bountifully.
Each one, as he purposeth in his heart, so let him give; not grudgingly, or of necessity; for God loveth a cheerful giver.
And God is able to make every blessing abound toward you, that ye, always having all sufficiency in everything, may abound to every good work;
as it is written: “He dispersed abroad, he gave to the poor; his righteousness remaineth for ever.”
Now, he that ministereth seed to the sower, and bread for food, will supply and multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your righteousness;
while ye are enriched in everything to all liberality, which worketh out through us thanksgiving to God;
for the ministration of this service not only supplieth the wants of the saints, but also overfloweth through many thanksgivings to God;
while by the proof afforded by this ministration they glorify God for your obedience to your profession in regard to the gospel of Christ, and for the liberality of your contribution in regard to them and in regard to all;
while with supplication for you they long after you on account of the exceeding grace of God to you.
Thanks be to God for his unspeakable gift.
Now I Paul myself beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ, I, who present indeed am lowly among you, but am bold toward you when absent;
but I entreat you, that I may not when I am present be bold with that confidence wherewith I think of being bold towards some, who think of us as walking according to the flesh.
For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war according to the flesh,
(for the weapons of our warfare are not fleshly, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds,)
casting down reasonings, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing every purpose into captivity to the obedience of Christ,
and being in readiness to punish every disobedience, when the measure of your obedience shall be full.
Ye look at the outward appearance. If any one trusteth to himself that he belongeth to Christ, let him of himself consider this again, that as he belongeth to Christ, so also do we.
For even if I should boast still more highly of our authority, which the Lord gave us for building you up, and not pulling you down, I should not be put to shame;
that I may not seem as if I would terrify you by my letters.
For his letters, saith one, are weighty and strong; but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech contemptible.
Let such a one count upon this, that such as we are in word by letters when absent, such will we be also in deed when present.
For we do not venture to reckon ourselves among, or compare ourselves with, some of those who commend themselves; but they, measuring themselves among themselves, and comparing themselves with themselves, are not wise.
But we will not boast of things that are without our measure, but according to the measure of the line which God allotted us,—a measure to reach even to you.
For we do not stretch ourselves beyond our measure, as though we reached not to you; (for as far as even to you did we come, in the gospel of Christ;)
not boasting of things that are without measure, in other men's labors, but having hope, when your faith is increased, that our line will through you be still further extended,
so that we may preach the gospel in the regions beyond you; not boasting, in another's line, of things made ready to our hand.
But “he that boasteth, let him boast in the Lord.”
For not he that commendeth himself is approved, but he whom the Lord commendeth.
Would that ye could bear with me in a little folly! and indeed ye do bear with me.
For I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy; for I espoused you to one husband, to present you as a pure virgin to Christ;
but I fear, lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve by his subtlety, so your minds should be corrupted from single-heartedness toward Christ.
For if he that cometh preacheth another Jesus, whom we did not preach, or if ye receive another spirit, which ye did not receive, or another gospel, which ye did not accept, well might ye bear with it.
For I suppose that I am in no respect behind the very foremost apostles.
And though I am rude in speech, yet I am not in knowledge; but this did we in every respect manifest to you in all things.
Did I commit an offence in abasing myself that ye might be exalted, because I preached to you the gospel of God without charge?
I robbed other churches, taking wages of them, in order to do you service;
and when I was present with you, and in want, I was a charge to no one; (for the brethren, when they came from Macedonia, supplied my wants;) and in every thing I kept myself and will keep myself from being burdensome to you.
As the truth of Christ is in me, this boasting shall not be stopped in regard to me in the regions of Achaia.
Wherefore? Because I love you not? God knoweth!
But what I do, that I will continue to do, that I may cut off occasion from those who wish for an occasion, in order that in the matter of which they boast they may be found even as we.
For such are false apostles, deceitful workmen, transforming themselves into apostles of Christ.
And no wonder; for even Satan transformeth himself into an angel of light.
It is no great thing, then, if his ministers also transform themselves as ministers of righteousness; whose end shall be according to their works.
I say again, let no one suppose me a fool; if otherwise, yet even as a fool receive me, that I too may boast myself a little.
What I speak, I speak not after the Lord, but as it were in folly, in this confidence of boasting.
Seeing that many boast after the flesh, I will boast also.
For ye bear with fools gladly, seeing ye yourselves are wise;
for ye bear with it, if one brings you into bondage, if one devours you, if one takes from you, if one exalts himself, if one smites you on the face.
I say it to my reproach, that we were weak; but in whatever any one is bold, (I speak in folly,) I am bold also.
Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they Israelites? So am I. Are they Abram's offspring? So am I.
Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak as beside myself,) I am more; in labors more abundantly, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequently, in deaths often;
of the Jews five times I received forty stripes save one;
thrice I was beaten with rods, once I was stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have spent in the deep;
by journeyings often; by perils of rivers, by perils of robbers, by perils from my countrymen, by perils from the heathen, by perils in the city, by perils in the wilderness, by perils in the sea, by perils among false brethren;
by weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness.
Besides the other troubles, there is that which presseth upon me daily, the anxiety for all the churches.
Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is in danger of stumbling, and I do not burn?
If I must boast, I will boast of the things which belong to my weakness.
The God and Father of the Lord Jesus, who is blessed for evermore, knoweth that I am not lying.
In Damascus the governor under Aretas the king kept guard over the city of the Damascenes, in order to apprehend me;
and through a window I was let down in a basket by the wall, and escaped his hands.
It is indeed not expedient for me to boast; I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord.
I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago,—whether in the body, I know not, or whether out of the body, I know not; God knoweth,—such a one caught up even to the third heaven.
And I know such a man, whether in the body, or without the body, I know not; God knoweth,—
that he was caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter.
Of such a one I will boast; but of myself I will not boast, except in my infirmities.
For if I should desire to boast, I should not be a fool; for I should say the truth; but I forbear, lest any one should think of me above what he seeth me to be, or what he heareth from me.
And that I might not be too much lifted up by the abundance of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan, to buffet me, that I might not be too much lifted up.
In respect to this I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me;
and he said to me, My grace is sufficient for thee; for my strength is made perfect in weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather boast in my weaknesses, that the strength of Christ may abide upon me.
Therefore I take pleasure in weaknesses, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses in behalf of Christ; for when I am weak, then am I strong.
I have become a fool; it is ye that compelled me. For I ought to have been commended by you; for in nothing was I behind the very foremost apostles, though I am nothing.
Truly the signs of an apostle were wrought among you with all endurance, by signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds.
For what is there in which ye were at disadvantage when compared with other churches, except that I myself was not a charge to you? Forgive me this wrong.
Behold, I am ready to come to you this third time, and I will not be a charge to you; for I seek not yours, but you. For the children ought not to lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children.
And I will very gladly spend and be spent for your souls; though the more I love you, the less I am loved.
But be it so; I at least was not a charge to you; but yet, being crafty, I caught you with guile.
Did I make gain of you by any of those whom I have sent to you?
I urged Titus to go to you, and with him I sent the brother. Did Titus make a gain of you? Did we not walk in the same spirit? Did we not walk in the same steps?
Have ye been thinking this long time that we are defending ourselves to you? It is before God in Christ that we are speaking; but all things, beloved, for your edification.
For I fear, lest, when I come, I shall not find you such as I would, and lest I too shall be found by you such as ye would not; lest there be wranglings, envying, wraths, rivalries, backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults;
and lest, when I come again, my God will humble me among you, and that I shall bewail many of those who have sinned already, and did not repent of the uncleanness, and fornication, and lasciviousness, which they committed.
This is the third time I am coming to you. In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established.
I said before, and now say beforehand, as when present the second time, so also absent now, to those who have sinned before, and to all the others, that if I come again, I will not spare;
since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me, who towards you is not weak, but is mighty among you.
For though he was crucified through weakness, yet he liveth through the power of God; for we also are weak in him, but we shall live together with him by the power of God toward you.
Try yourselves, whether ye are in the faith; prove your own selves. Know ye not your own selves, that Christ Jesus is in you, unless ye are unapproved?
But I trust that ye shall know, that we are not unapproved.
Now we pray to God that ye do no evil; not in order that we may appear approved, but that ye may do what is good, though we be as unapproved.
For we have no power against the truth, but for the truth.
For we are glad, when we are weak, and ye are strong; this also we pray for, even your perfection.
For this cause I write these things while absent, that when present I may not use sharpness, according to the power which the Lord gave me for edification, and not for destruction.
Finally, brethren, farewell! Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you.
Salute one another with a holy kiss.
All the saints salute you.
Paul, an apostle, not from men, nor through man, but through Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised him from the dead,—
and all the brethren that are with me, to the churches of Galatia:
Grace be to you and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ,
who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from the present evil world, according to the will of God our Father;
to whom be the glory for ever and ever! Amen.
I marvel that ye are so soon turning from him that called you in the grace of Christ, to a different gospel;
which is not another; only there are certain persons who are troubling you, and seeking to change entirely the gospel of Christ.
But even if we or an angel from heaven should preach a gospel to you contrary to that which we preached to you, let him be accursed!
As we have said before, so I now say again, If any one preach a gospel to you contrary to that which ye received, let him be accursed!
For do I now seek the favor of men, or of God? Or am I endeavoring to please men? If I were still pleasing men, I should not be the servant of Christ.
But I assure you, brethren, that the gospel which was preached by me is not after man;
for I did not receive it from man nor was I taught it by any man, but it was revealed to me by Jesus Christ.
For ye have heard of my conduct formerly in Judaism; that beyond measure I persecuted the church of God, and was destroying it,
and made progress in Judaism beyond many of the same age with me in my nation, being more exceedingly zealous for the traditions of my fathers.
But when it pleased him who set me apart from my very birth, and called me through his grace,
to reveal his Son within me, that I might publish the glad tidings of him among the gentiles, immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood,
neither did I go up to Jerusalem to those who were apostles before me, but I went away into Arabia, and returned again to Damascus.
Then, after three years, I went up to Jerusalem to become acquainted with Cephas, and stayed with him fifteen days;
but no other of the apostles did I see, save James the brother of the Lord.
Now as to what I am writing to you, behold, before God, I do not lie.
Afterwards I came into the regions of Syria and Cilicia;
and I was unknown by face to the churches of Judaea which were in Christ;
but they were only hearing that “He who was once our persecutor is now preaching the faith which he was once destroying”;
and they glorified God in me.
Then, fourteen years after, I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, and took Titus also with me.
And I went up by revelation, and communicated to them that gospel which I preach among the gentiles; but privately to those who were of reputation, lest by any means I should run, or had run, in vain.
But not even Titus, who was with me, though he was a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised;
and that because of the false brethren stealthily brought in, who crept in to spy out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring into bondage;
to whom not even for an hour did we yield by the required subjection, that the truth of the gospel might still remain with you.
But from those who were reputed to be somewhat—whatever they were, it matters not to me, (God accepteth no man's person,) for to me those in reputation communicated nothing new.
But on the contrary, when they saw that I was intrusted with the gospel to the uncircumcised, as Peter was with that to the circumcised,
(for he who wrought for Peter in behalf of the apostleship to the circumcised, wrought also for me in behalf of the gentiles,)
and when they knew the grace that was given to me, James and Cephas and John, who were reputed to be pillars, gave to me and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship, that we should go to the gentiles, and they to the circumcised;
only they wished us to remember the poor; which very thing I also was earnest to do.
But when Cephas came to Antioch, I withstood him to the face; for he was condemned.
For before certain persons came from James, he used to eat with the gentiles; but when they came, he withdrew, and separated himself, fearing those who were of the circumcision.
And the other Jews also dissembled with him; so that even Barnabas was carried away with their dissimulation.
But when I saw that they were not walking uprightly according to the truth of the gospel, I said to Cephas in the presence of all, If thou, being a Jew, livest after the manner of gentiles, and not that of the Jews, how is it that thou compellest the gentiles to keep the customs of the Jews?
We are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the gentiles;
but knowing that a man is not accepted as righteous by the works of the Law, but by faith in Christ Jesus, we also have believed in Christ Jesus, that we might be accepted as righteous by faith in Christ, and not by the works of the Law; for by the works of the Law shall no flesh be accepted as righteous.
But while seeking to be accepted as righteous in Christ, we ourselves also are found sinners, is Christ therefore a minister of sin? Far be it!
For if I again build up what I pulled down, I make myself a transgressor.
For I through the Law died to the Law, that I might live to God.
I have been crucified with Christ, and no longer do I live, but Christ liveth in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh I live in faith in the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.
I do not set aside the grace of God; for if righteousness come through the Law, then did Christ die for nought.
O foolish Galatians, who bewitched you? before whose eyes Jesus Christ was plainly set forth among you crucified.
This only I desire to learn from you: Was it from the works of the Law that ye received the Spirit, or by the preaching of faith?
Are ye so foolish? Having begun with the Spirit, do ye now end with the flesh?
Have ye suffered so much in vain? if indeed it be really in vain.
Doth he then who is supplying to you the Spirit, and working miracles among you, do it by the works of the Law, or by the preaching of faith?
Even as Abraham “believed God, and it was accounted to him as righteousness.”
Know then that they who have faith, these are the sons of Abraham.
Moreover the Scripture, foreseeing that God was to accept the gentiles as righteous by faith, proclaimed beforehand the glad tidings to Abraham, saying, “In thee shall all nations be blessed.”
So then they who have faith are blessed with believing Abraham.
For as many as rely on the works of the Law are under a curse; for it is written, “Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the Law, to do them.”
But further, that through the observance of the Law no one is accepted as righteous with God is evident; for “the righteous shall live by faith.”
And the Law hath nothing to do with faith; but [[its language is]], “He that hath done them shall live in them.”
Christ redeemed us from the curse of the Law, having become a curse for us; for it is written, “Cursed is every one that is hanged on a beam of wood,”—
to the end that in Christ Jesus the blessing promised to Abraham might come to the gentiles, that we through faith might receive the Spirit which was promised.
Brethren, I speak according to what is practised among men; no one sets aside even a human covenant, or makes additions to it, after it has been ratified.
But the promises were made to Abraham and “to his offspring.” He doth not say, “and to offsprings,” as speaking of many, but, as speaking of one, “and to thy offspring,” which is Christ.
And what I mean is this; that a covenant that was before ratified by God, the Law, which came four hundred and thirty years after, cannot annul, so as to make void the promise;
for if the inheritance cometh from the Law, it ceaseth to be the consequence of the promise; but to Abraham God gave it by promise.
To what end then was the Law? It was added because of transgressions, till the offspring should come to whom the promise belongeth, having been ordained through angels by the hand of a mediator.
Now no mediator is a mediator of one; but God is one.
Is then the Law against the promises of God? Far be it! For if a law had been given which was able to give life, righteousness would indeed have been by the Law;
but the Scripture shut up all under sin, that the blessing promised through faith in Jesus Christ might be given to those who believe.
But before faith came, we were kept in ward under the Law, shut up unto the faith which was to be revealed.
So then the Law hath been our schoolmaster, to lead us to Christ, that we might be accepted as righteous through faith;
but faith having come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster.
For ye are all sons of God through faith in Christ Jesus;
for as many of you as were baptized into Christ, did put on Christ.
There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is no male and female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus;
and if ye belong to Christ, then are ye Abraham's offspring, heirs according to the promise.
Now I say, that the heir, as long as he is a child, differeth in no respect from a bond-servant, though he is lord of all;
but is under guardians and stewards, until the time appointed by the father.
So also we, when we were children, were in bondage under the rudiments of the world;
but when the fullness of the time came, God sent forth his Son, born of a woman, born under the Law,
to redeem those under the Law, that we might be adopted as sons.
And to show that ye are sons, God sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father!
So then thou art no longer a bond-servant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir through God.
But at that time, indeed, when ye knew not God, ye were in slavery to those who in their nature are not gods;
but now, after having known God, or rather having been known by God, how is it that ye are turning back to the weak and beggarly rudiments to which ye wish to be again in bondage?
Do ye observe days, and months, and times, and years?
I fear for you, lest I may have bestowed upon you labor in vain.
Brethren, I beseech you, become as I am, for I also have become as ye are; ye injured me in nothing.
Nay, ye know that it was on account of an infirmity of the flesh that I preached the gospel to you the former time,
and my trial which was in my flesh ye did not despise nor spurn; but received me as an angel of God, yea, as Christ Jesus.
How great then was your boasting of happiness! for I bear you witness, that if possible, ye would have plucked out your eyes, and have given them to me.
So then, have I become your enemy because I tell you the truth?
They show a zeal for you, but not in honesty; yea, they wish to exclude you, that ye may be zealous for them.
But it is good to be an object of zeal in what is good always, and not only when I am present with you.
My children, with whom I am again in travail until Christ be formed in you,—
I could wish indeed to be present with you now, and to change my tone, for I am in perplexity about you.
Tell me, ye that desire to be under the Law, do ye not hear the Law?
For it is written, that Abraham had two sons; the one by the bondwoman, the other by the freewoman.
But the one by the bondwoman was born after the flesh; while the one by the freewoman was through the promise.
Which things are written allegorically; for these women are two covenants; the one from Mount Sinai, who beareth children into bondage, which is Hagar;
for the word Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia; and she corresponds to the Jerusalem now existing, for she is in bondage with her children;
but the Jerusalem that is above is free, and she is our mother.
For it is written: “Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not; break forth and cry, thou that travailest not; for many are the children of the desolate one, rather than of her who hath the husband.”
But ye, brethren, as Isaac was, are children of a promise.
But as at that time he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born through the Spirit, so it is now.
But what saith the scripture? “Cast out the bondwoman and her son; for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the freewoman.”
So then, brethren, we are not children of a bondwoman, but of the freewoman.
Stand firm in the liberty with which Christ made us free, and be not again bound fast to the yoke of bondage.
Behold, I Paul say to you, that if ye are circumcised, Christ will profit you nothing;
yea, I testify again to every one who becometh circumcised, that he is bound to keep the whole Law.
Ye are entirely separated from Christ, who seek to obtain righteousness through the Law; ye have fallen away from grace.
For we through the Spirit by faith steadfastly wait for the hope of righteousness.
For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision; but faith working by love.
Ye were running well; who hindered you, that ye should not obey the truth?
This persuasion came not from him that called you.
A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.
I indeed have confidence in regard to you in the Lord, that ye will be no otherwise minded; but he that troubleth you shall bear his judgment, whoever he may be.
But as for me, brethren, if I still preach circumcision, why do I still suffer persecution? Then hath the cross ceased to be a stumbling-block.
Would that they who unsettle you would quite cut themselves off!
For ye, brethren, were called to liberty; only use not your liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by your love serve one another.
For the whole Law is fulfilled in one commandment, even in this “Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.”
But if ye bite and devour one another, beware lest ye be consumed by one another.
But I say, Walk by the Spirit, and ye will not fulfill the desires of the flesh.
For the flesh hath desires against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; and these oppose one another, that ye may not do the things that ye would.
But if ye are led by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law.
Now the works of the flesh are manifest; such as fornication, uncleanness, wantonness,
idolatry, sorcery, hatreds, strife, rivalry, outbursts of wrath, cabals, divisions, factions,
envyings, drunkenness, revelings, and things like these; of which I tell you beforehand, as I also told you in time past, that they who practise such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God.
But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, faithfulness,
meekness, temperance; against such things as these there is no law.
And they who belong to Christ Jesus crucified the flesh with the passions and lusts.
If we live by the Spirit, let us also walk by the Spirit.
Let us not become vain-glorious, provoking one another, envying one another.
Brethren, even if a man be detected in a fault, do ye who are spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted.
Bear ye one another's burdens, and thus fulfill the law of Christ.
For if a man thinketh himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceiveth himself.
But let each one prove his own work, and then will he have his ground for boasting in himself alone, and not in comparison with another;
for every one must bear his own load.
Let him that is taught in the word share with the teacher in all good things.
Be not deceived; God is not mocked; for whatever a man soweth, that shall he also reap;
for he that soweth to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.
And let us not be faint-hearted in well-doing; for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.
So then, as we have opportunity, let us do good to all, especially to those who are of the household of faith.
See in what large letters I have written to you with my own hand.
As many as desire to make a fair show in the flesh, these are constraining you to be circumcised, only that they may not suffer persecution for the cross of Christ.
For not even do they who become circumcised themselves keep the Law; but they desire to have you circumcised, that they may glory in your flesh.
But God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; through whom the world is crucified to me, and I to the world.
For neither is circumcision anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new creation.
And as many as walk by this rule, peace be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.
Henceforth let no one trouble me; for I bear the marks of Jesus on my body.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brethren. Amen.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, to the saints who are [[in Ephesus]], and believers in Christ Jesus:
Grace be to you, and peace, from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly regions in Christ;
according as he chose us in him, before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and blameless before him;
having in love predestinated us for himself to be adopted as sons through Jesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of his will,
to the praise of the glory of his grace, which he freely bestowed on us in the Beloved;
in whom we have the redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his grace,
which he made to abound toward us, in all wisdom and understanding;
having made known to us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he purposed in himself
in reference to the dispensation of the fullness of the times, to gather for himself into one all things in Christ, the things which are in the heavens, and the things on the earth; even in him,
in whom we also obtained the inheritance, being predestinated according to the purpose of him who worketh all things after the counsel of his own will,
that we should be to the praise of his glory, we who have before placed our hope in the Messiah;
in whom ye also, after having heard the word of truth, the glad tidings of your salvation, in whom, I say, having also believed, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit that was promised,
which is a pledge of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased possession, to the praise of his glory.
For this cause I also, having heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and of your love to all the saints,
do not cease to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers;
that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, would give to you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of him;
the eyes of your mind being enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope belonging to his call of you, and what the riches of the glory of the inheritance which he hath given among the saints,
and what the exceeding greatness of his power toward us who believe, according to the working of his mighty power,
which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead; and seated him at his own right hand in the heavenly regions,
far above all rule, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come;
and put all things in subjection under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the church,
which is his body, the fullness of him who filleth all with all;
and you also [[he raised up]], who were dead through your trespasses and sins,
in which ye once walked according to the course of this world, according to the prince of the powers of the air, the spirit that is now working in the sons of disobedience;
among whom even we all had our way of life in times past in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the thoughts, and were by nature children of wrath, even as others;
but God, who is rich in mercy, on account of his great love wherewith he loved us, gave to us,
even when dead through our trespasses, life with Christ,—by grace have ye been saved,—
and raised us up with him, and caused us to sit with him in the heavenly regions in Christ Jesus,
that he might show in the ages to come the exceeding riches of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus.
For by grace ye have been saved, through faith; and this is not of yourselves; it is the gift of God;
not of works, lest any one should boast.
For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God before prepared that we should walk in them.
Wherefore remember, that in time past ye, the gentiles in the flesh, who are called uncircumcised by those who are called circumcised, having the circumcision of the flesh, performed by hand,—
that ye were at that time without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the covenants of the promise, having no hope, and without God, in the world;
but now, in Christ Jesus, ye, who formerly were afar off, have been brought nigh by the blood of Christ.
For it is he who is our peace, who made both one, and broke down the middle wall of partition between us, that is, the enmity;
having abolished in his flesh the law of commandments contained in ordinances; that he might create of the two one new man in himself, thus making peace,
and might reconcile both to God in one body by the cross, having slain on it the enmity.
And he came and brought the glad tidings of peace to you who were afar off, and of peace to those that were near;
for through him we both have our access in one Spirit to the Father.
So then ye are no longer strangers and foreigners, but are fellow-citizens with the saints, and members of the household of God,
and are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the chief corner-stone;
in whom all the building, fitly framed together, is growing into a holy temple in the Lord;
in whom ye also are built together into a dwelling-place of God in the Spirit.
For this cause [[I bend my knees]], I Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus for you gentiles;
if, indeed, ye heard of the dispensation of the grace of God which was given me toward you,
that by revelation the mystery was made known to me, as I wrote before in few words,
whereby, when ye read, ye may perceive my insight into the mystery of Christ;
which in other generations was not made known to the sons of men, as it hath now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit;
that the gentiles are fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and partakers with us of the promise in Christ Jesus through the gospel;
of which I became a minister according to the gift of the grace of God, given to me according to the effectual working of his power.
To me, who am less than the least of all saints, was this grace given, to make known among the gentiles the glad tidings of the unsearchable riches of Christ,
to make all men see what is the dispensation of the mystery, which hath been hidden for ages in God, who created all things;
to the intent that now to the principalities and powers in the heavenly regions might be known through the church the manifold wisdom of God,
according to his purpose for ages, which he accomplished in Christ Jesus our Lord;
in whom we have our boldness and our access in confidence, through faith in him.
Wherefore I entreat you not to be disheartened by the troubles I am suffering for you, since they are your glory.
For this cause I bend my knees to the Father,
from whom every family in heaven and on earth receiveth its name,
that he would grant you, according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man;
that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, ye having been rooted and grounded in love,
that ye may be able to comprehend, with all the saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height,
and to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, that ye may be filled unto all the fullness of God.
Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power that worketh in us,
to him be the glory in the church in Christ Jesus throughout all generations, for ever and ever. Amen.
I exhort you, therefore, I the prisoner in the Lord, to walk worthily of the calling with which ye were called,
with all humility and meekness, with long-suffering; bearing with one another in love,
endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye were called in one hope of your calling;
one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in all.
But to each one of us was given the grace [[which he hath]] according to the measure of the gift of Christ.
Wherefore he saith: “When he ascended on high, he led captive a train of captives, and gave gifts to men.”
Now what is implied in his ascending, but that he also descended into the lower parts of the earth?
He who descended is the same as he who ascended far above all the heavens, that he might fill all things.
And he gave some to be apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers;
for the perfecting of the saints for the work of ministration, for the building up of the body of Christ;
till we all attain to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a full-grown man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ;
that we may no longer be children, tossed to and fro and borne about by every wind of teaching, through the dishonest tricks of men, and their cunning in the wily arts of error;
but cleaving to truth in love, may grow up in all things unto him who is the head, even Christ;
from whom the whole body, well put together and compacted by means of every supplying joint, is, according to the working of each part in its proportion, building itself up in love.
This therefore I say, and charge you in the Lord, that ye no longer walk as the rest of the gentiles walk in the vanity of their mind,
having their understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God on account of the ignorance that is in them, on account of the hardness of their hearts;
who, being past feeling, have given themselves up to wantonness, to work all uncleanness in greediness.
But not so did ye learn Christ,
if indeed ye heard him, and were taught in him, as the truth is in Jesus;
that as to your former way of life ye should put off the old man, who perisheth according to the lusts of deceit,
and be renewed in the spirit of your mind,
and that ye put on the new man, who was created according to God in righteousness and holiness of the truth.
Wherefore having put away falsehood, speak truth every one with his neighbor; for we are members one of another.
“Be angry, and sin not;” let not the sun go down upon your wrath;
and do not give place to the Devil.
Let him that stealeth steal no more, but rather let him labor, working with his hands at that which is good, that he may have to give to him that is in need.
Let no foul language proceed out of your mouth, but whatever is good for edification, as the need may be, that it may benefit the hearers;
and grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye were sealed unto the day of redemption.
Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil-speaking, be put away from you, with all malice;
and be kind to one another, tender-hearted, forgiving one another, even as God in Christ forgave you.
Be therefore imitators of God, as beloved children;
and walk in love, as Christ also loved you, and gave himself for you an offering and a sacrifice to God, of a sweet odor.
But fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not even be named among you, as becometh saints,
neither obscenity, nor foolish talking, nor indecent jesting, which are not becoming; but rather giving of thanks.
For of this ye are sure, since ye know that no whore-monger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater, hath an inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and God.
Let no one deceive you with vain words; for because of these things the wrath of God cometh upon the sons of disobedience.
Be not therefore partakers with them.
For ye were once darkness, but now ye are light in the Lord. Walk as children of light,
—for the fruit of the light is in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth,—
proving what is acceptable to the Lord;
and have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather even reprove them.
For the things done in secret by them it is a shame even to speak of.
But all things, when reproved, are made manifest by the light; for whatever maketh manifest is light.
Wherefore he saith, “Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ will give thee light.”
See then that ye walk circumspectly; not as unwise men, but as wise;
buying up for yourselves opportunities, because the days are evil.
Wherefore be not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is.
And be not drunk with wine, in which is dissoluteness, but be filled with the Spirit,
speaking to one another in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord;
giving thanks always for all things to God, the Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
submitting yourselves one to another in the fear of Christ.
Wives, submit yourselves to your own husbands, as to the Lord;
for the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the church,—he, who is the Saviour of the body.
But as the church is subject to Christ, so let wives be to their husbands in everything.
Husbands, love your wives, as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself up for it,
that he might sanctify it, having cleansed it by the bath of the water in the word;
that he himself might present to himself the church, glorious, having no spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish.
In like manner husbands ought to love their own wives as their own bodies. He that loveth his own wife loveth himself;
for no one ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as Christ doth the church;
for we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones.
“For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh.”
This mystery is a great one; but I am speaking of Christ and of the church.
However, do ye also severally love each one his own wife as himself; and let the wife see that she reverence her husband.
Children, obey your parents in the Lord; for this is right.
“Honor thy father and mother;” which is the first commandment with a promise;
“that it may be well with thee, and thou mayst live long on the earth.”
And, ye fathers, stir not up the anger of your children, but bring them up in the discipline and instruction of the Lord.
Bond-servants, obey your masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as serving Christ;
not with eye-service as men-pleasers, but as bond-servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart;
doing service with good will, as to the Lord, and not to men;
knowing that whatever good each one shall have done, that shall he receive from the Lord, whether he be bondman or free.
And, ye masters, do the same things to them, forbearing threatening; knowing that both they and you have a Master in heaven, and that there is no respect of persons with him.
Finally, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might.
Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil;
for our wrestling is not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the world-rulers of this darkness, against the spiritual hosts of evil in the heavenly regions.
Wherefore take up the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand.
Stand therefore, having girded your loins with truth, and having put on the breast-plate of righteousness,
and having shod your feet with the preparation of the gospel of peace;
taking up, in addition to all, the shield of faith, by which ye will be able to quench all the fiery darts of the Evil One;
and receive the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God;
praying with all prayer and entreaty at all times in the Spirit; and watching to this end with all perseverance and entreaty for all the saints,
and for me, that utterance may be given me in the opening of my mouth, to make known with boldness the mystery of the gospel,
in behalf of which I am an ambassador in chains; that I may proclaim it boldly, as I ought to speak.
But that ye also may know about me, how I am faring, Tychicus, the beloved brother and faithful servant in the Lord, will inform you of everything;
whom I have sent to you for this very purpose, that ye may know about us, and that he may comfort your hearts.
Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Grace be with all those who love our Lord Jesus Christ with an incorruptible love.
Paul and Timothy, servants of Christ Jesus, to all the saints in Christ Jesus who are at Philippi, together with the bishops and deacons:
Grace be to you, and peace, from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I thank my God in all my remembrance of you,
always in every prayer of mine for you all making my prayer with joy
on account of your fellowship in the cause of the gospel from the first day until now;
being confident of this very thing, that he who began in you a good work, will perfect it until the day of Christ Jesus;
even as it is right for me to think this of you all, because I have you in my heart both in my bonds, and in the defence and confirmation of the gospel, all of you being sharers of the grace bestowed on me.
For God is my witness how much I long for you all in the tender affection of Christ Jesus.
And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in all discernment;
so that ye may approve the things that are most excellent, in order that ye may be pure and without offence against the day of Christ,
being filled with the fruit of righteousness which is through Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God.
But I wish you to know, brethren, that things with me have resulted in the furtherance of the gospel;
so that my bonds have become known in connection with Christ in the whole camp of the imperial guards, and to all the rest;
and that the great part of the brethren, made confident in the Lord by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the word without fear.
Some indeed preach Christ even from envy and strife, and some also from good will.
(1:17) but they who are of a factious spirit preach Christ with no pure intent, thinking to stir up affliction to my bonds.
(1:16) They who are of love, knowing that I am set for the defence of the gospel;
What then? Notwithstanding, in every way, whether in pretence or in truth, Christ is preached; and therein do I rejoice, yea, and shall rejoice.
For I know that this will turn out to my salvation through your prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ,
according to my earnest expectation and hope, that in nothing I shall be put to shame, but that with all boldness, as always, so also now, Christ will be magnified in my body, whether by life, or by death.
For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.
But if to live in the flesh, if this is to me the fruit of my labor, then what I should choose, I cannot say;
but I am held in a strait by the two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ; for it is far better;
but to abide in the flesh is more needful for your sake.
And being persuaded of this, I know that I shall abide and continue with you all for your advancement and joy in your faith,
that your glorying in me, in the cause of Christ Jesus, may be more abundant by my coming to you again.
Only conduct yourselves in a manner worthy of the gospel of Christ, that whether I come and see you, or remain absent, I may hear of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one soul striving together for the faith of the gospel,
and in nothing terrified by your adversaries; which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation; and that from God;
for to you it was given in behalf of Christ, not only to believe in him, but in his behalf to suffer also;
as ye have the same conflict which ye saw in me, and now hear of in me.
If then there is any exhortation in Christ, if any encouragement from love, if any partaking of the Spirit, if any tenderness and compassion,
make my joy full, that ye be of the same mind, having the same love, with union of soul cherishing one mind;
doing nothing in the spirit of faction, or in the spirit of vain-glory, but in humility esteeming others as better than yourselves;
looking each of you not to his own interest, but each to the interest of others also.
Yea, let this mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus,
who, being in the form of God, did not regard it as a thing to be grasped at to be on an equality with God,
but made himself of no consideration, taking the form of a servant, and becoming like men;
and in what appertained to him appearing as a man, he humbled himself, and was obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.
Wherefore God also highly exalted him, and gave him a name which is above every name;
that in the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of those who are in heaven, and those on earth, and those under the earth,
and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God, the Father.
So then, my beloved, as ye always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling;
for it is God who worketh in you both to will and to work for his good pleasure.
Do all things without murmurings and doubts;
that ye may be blameless and pure, children of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation; among whom ye shine as luminaries in the world,
holding forth the word of life, that I may have whereof to boast against the day of Christ, that I did not run in vain, or labor in vain.
But if I am even poured out on the sacrifice and ministration of your faith, I rejoice, and rejoice with you all.
For the same reason, do ye also rejoice, and rejoice with me.
But I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you soon, that I also may be cheered when I know your state.
For I have no one like-minded, who will have a true concern for your state;
for all of them are seeking their own things, not those of Christ Jesus.
But ye know the proof of him, that, as a son serves a father, he served with me for the gospel.
Him therefore I hope to send forthwith, as soon as I see how it will go with me;
but I trust in the Lord that I also myself shall come soon.
Yet I thought it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother, and companion in labor, and fellow-soldier, but your messenger, and minister to my wants;
for he was longing after you all, and was much troubled, because ye heard that he was sick.
For indeed he was sick near to death; but God had mercy on him; and not on him only, but on me also, lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow.
I send him therefore the more speedily, that when ye see him ye may again rejoice, and that I may be the less sorrowful.
Receive him therefore in the Lord with all gladness, and hold such in honor;
because he was near to death on account of the work, hazarding his life to supply what was wanting on your part in the ministration to me.
Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord; to write the same things to you, to me is not burdensome, and for you it is safe.
Beware of the dogs, beware of the evil workmen, beware of the concision.
For we are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God, and glory in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh;
though I myself have reason for confidence even in the flesh. If any other man thinketh that he hath reason for confidence in the flesh, I more;
circumcised the eighth day, of the race of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of the Hebrews; as to the Law, a Pharisee;
as to zeal, persecuting the church; as to the righteousness which is in the Law, blameless.
But whatever things were gain to me, those for the sake of Christ I have counted but loss.
Nay more, I count all things to be loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and count them as refuse, that I may gain Christ,
and be found in him, not having my own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness which is from God upon faith;
that I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, while becoming like him in his death,
if by any means I may attain to the resurrection from the dead.
Not that I have already obtained, or have been already perfected; but I press on, if I may also lay hold of that for which I was laid hold of by Christ.
Brethren, I do not reckon myself to have laid hold of it; but one thing I do, forgetting the things that are behind, and stretching forth to the things that are before,
I press toward the mark for the prize of the heavenly calling of God in Christ Jesus.
Let us, therefore, as many as are perfect, be of this mind; and if ye have a different mind in anything, even this will God reveal to you.
Nevertheless, whereto we have reached, in that let us walk.
Brethren, be ye followers together of me, and mark those who walk as ye have us for an example.
For many walk, of whom I told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ;
whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, whose mind is on earthly things.
For the country of which we are citizens is heaven, whence also we wait for a Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ,
who will transform the body of our humiliation so that it shall be conformed to the body of his glory, according to the working of the power with which he is able to subdue all things to himself.
Therefore, my brethren, beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, so stand fast in the Lord, beloved.
I exhort Euodia, and I exhort Syntyche, that they be of the same mind in the Lord;
yea, I entreat thee also, true yoke-fellow, give them aid; since they labored with me in the gospel, with Clement also, and the rest of my fellow-laborers, whose names are in the book of life.
Rejoice in the Lord always; again I will say it, rejoice.
Let your moderation be known to all men. The Lord is at hand.
Be anxious about nothing, but in everything by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known to God;
and the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, will keep your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus.
Finally, brethren, whatever things are true, whatever things are honorable, whatever things are right, whatever things are pure, whatever things are lovely, whatever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.
The things which ye learned, and received, and heard, and saw in me, these do; and the God of peace will be with you.
But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that now at length ye have revived again in your care for my welfare; for which indeed ye cared before, but lacked opportunity.
Not that I speak on account of want; for I have learned, in whatever state I am, therewith to be content.
I know how to be abased, and I know also how to abound; in every thing and in all things I have been well taught, both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to be in want;
I can do all things in him who strengtheneth me.
Notwithstanding, ye did well in sharing with me in my distress.
And ye yourselves also know, Philippians, that in the beginning of the gospel, when I went forth from Macedonia, no church communicated with me in an account of giving and receiving, but ye only;
for even in Thessalonica ye sent once and again to my necessity.
Not that I seek for such a gift, but I do seek for fruit that may abound to your account.
But I have all, and abound; I am full, having received from Epaphroditus what was sent from you, a sweet odor, a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God.
But my God will supply all your need according to his riches in glory, in Christ Jesus.
Now to God, our Father, be glory for ever. Amen.
Salute every saint in Christ Jesus. The brethren who are with me salute you.
All the saints salute you, but especially they who are of Caesar's household.
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy the brother,
to the saints and faithful brethren in Christ at Colossae: Grace be to you, and peace, from God our Father.
We give thanks to God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying always for you,
since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love which ye have to all the saints,
on account of the hope which is laid up for you in the heavens, of which ye heard before in the word of the truth of the gospel,
which is come to you, as it is in all the world, and is bearing fruit and growing, as it doth also in you, from the day ye heard it, and knew the grace of God in truth;
even as ye learned from Epaphras our beloved fellow-servant, who is a faithful minister of Christ on your behalf;
who also brought to our knowledge your love in the Spirit.
On this account we also, from the day we heard of it, cease not to pray for you, and to ask that ye may be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding;
that ye may walk worthily of the Lord so as to please him in all things, bearing fruit in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God;
endued with all power according to the might of his glory unto all patience and long-suffering with joy;
giving thanks to the Father, who enabled us to share in the inheritance of the saints in the light;
who rescued us from the empire of darkness, and transferred us into the kingdom of his beloved Son;
in whom we have our redemption, the forgiveness of our sins;—
who is the image of the invisible God, the first-born of the whole creation;
for in him were created all things, those in the heavens, and those on the earth, the visible and the invisible, whether thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers, all things have been created through him and for him;
and he is before all things, and in him all things subsist.
And he is the head of the body, the church; since he is the beginning, the first-born from the dead, that he may be in all things pre-eminent;
for God was pleased that in him all the fullness should dwell, and by him to reconcile all things to himself,
having made peace through the blood of his cross, by him, I say, whether the things on earth, or those in the heavens.
And you, that were once alienated, and enemies in your mind in wicked works, yet now hath he reconciled
in the body of his flesh through his death, to present you holy and blameless and irreproachable in his sight;
if ye indeed continue in the faith grounded and settled, and not moved away from the hope of the gospel, which ye heard, which hath been preached in the whole creation under heaven; of which I Paul became a minister.
Now I rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up instead that which is wanting of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh on behalf of his body, which is the church;
of which I became a minister, according to the stewardship which God entrusted to me, for you, to fulfill the word of God,
the mystery which hath been hidden for ages and generations, but hath been now revealed to his saints;
to whom it was the will of God to make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory;
whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ;
to which end I also am laboring, striving earnestly through his working, which worketh within me mightily.
For I would have you know what a great struggle I have for you, and for those in Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh;
that their hearts may be encouraged, they being knit together in love, and that they may attain to all the riches of a full assurance of the understanding, to the full knowledge of the mystery of God;
in which are stored up all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
And this I say, that no one may impose on you by specious discourses.
For though I am absent in the flesh, yet in the spirit I am with you, rejoicing and beholding your order, and the steadfastness of your faith in Christ.
As therefore ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, walk in him,
rooted and built up in him, and established in the faith, as ye have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving.
Beware lest there be some one who shall make a prey of you through philosophy and vain deceit, according to the tradition of men, according to the rudiments of the world, and not according to Christ.
For in him dwelleth all the fullness of the Godhead bodily,
and ye are made full in him, who is the head of all principality and power;
in whom also ye have been circumcised with a circumcision not performed by hand, in putting off the body of the flesh in the circumcision of Christ,
having been buried with him in your baptism; in which also ye were raised to life with him through faith in the working of God, who raised him from the dead;
and to you also who were dead in your trespasses and the uncircumcision of your flesh, hath he given life together with him, having forgiven us all our trespasses;
blotting out the handwriting in ordinances that was against us, which was opposed to us, he hath taken it out of the way, nailing it to the cross;
and having disarmed principalities and powers, he made a public show of them, and led them captive in triumph in him.
Let no one then call you to account about food or drink, or a feast-day, or a new moon, or sabbaths;
which are a shadow of the things to come, but the body is Christ's.
Let no one defraud you of the prize, desiring to do it in humiliation and worshipping of the angels, intruding into those things which he hath not seen, puffed up without reason by the mind of his own flesh,
and not holding fast the Head, from which the whole body, supported and compacted by means of the joints and ligaments, groweth with an increase wrought by God.
If ye died with Christ to the rudiments of the world, why, as though living in the world, do ye subject yourselves to ordinances, such as,
Handle not, Taste not, Touch not,
(which all are to perish with the using,) after the commandments and teachings of men;
which things have indeed a show of wisdom in will-worship and humiliation and severity to the body, not in any honor for the satisfying of the flesh.
If then ye were raised together with Christ, seek the things that are above, where Christ is sitting on the right hand of God.
Set your mind on the things above, not on things on the earth.
For ye died, and your life is hidden with Christ in God;
when Christ, our life, shall be manifested, then will ye also be manifested with him in glory.
Make dead therefore your members which are upon the earth, fornication, uncleanness, lust, evil desire, and covetousness, which is idolatry;
on account of which things cometh the wrath of God.
In which things ye also once walked, when ye lived in them;
but now put ye away all these, anger, wrath, malice, evil-speaking, filthy language out of your mouth.
Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with his deeds,
and have put on the new man, who is renewed unto knowledge after the image of him that created him;
where there is no Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bondman, freeman; but Christ is all, and in all.
Clothe yourselves, therefore, as the chosen of God, holy and beloved, with compassionate affections, kindness, lowliness of mind, meekness, long-suffering;
bearing with each other, and forgiving each other, if any one have a complaint against another; even as Christ freely forgave you, do ye also freely forgive;
and over all these things put on the robe of love, which is the bond of perfectness;
and let the peace of Christ, to which ye were called in one body, rule in your hearts; and be ye thankful.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly; in all wisdom teaching and admonishing one another with psalms, hymns, spiritual songs, in grace singing in your hearts to God;
and whatever ye do, in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God, the Father, through him.
Wives, submit yourselves to your husbands, as it is fit in the Lord.
Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter against them.
Children, obey your parents in all things; for this is well-pleasing in the Lord.
Fathers, provoke not your children, lest they be discouraged.
Bond-servants, obey in all things your masters according to the flesh, not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing the Lord.
Whatever ye do, do it from the heart, as to the Lord, and not to men,
knowing that from the Lord ye will receive the recompense of the inheritance; serve Christ as your Lord.
For he that doeth wrong, shall receive back the wrong which he hath done; and there is no respect of persons.
Masters, deal out to your bond-servants justice and equity, knowing that ye also have a master in heaven.
Persevere in prayer, being watchful therein with thanksgiving;
praying at the same time for us also, that God may open to us a door for the word, to speak the mystery of Christ, for the sake of which I am also in bonds;
that I may make it manifest, as I ought to speak.
Walk in wisdom toward them that are without, buying up opportunities.
Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer every one.
Of all my affairs Tychicus will inform you, the beloved brother and faithful minister and fellow-servant in the Lord;
whom I have sent to you for this very purpose, that he may know your condition, and comfort your hearts;
together with Onesimus, the faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you. They will inform you of every thing here.
Aristarchus, my fellow-prisoner, saluteth you, and Mark, the cousin of Barnabas, concerning whom ye received directions (if he come to you, receive him),
and Jesus, who is called Justus; who are of the circumcision; these only are my fellow-workers for the kingdom of God, who have been an encouragement unto me.
Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ Jesus, saluteth you, always striving for you in his prayers, that ye may stand perfect and fully assured in all the will of God.
For I bear him witness, that he hath much labor for you, and those that are in Laodicea, and those in Hierapolis.
Luke, the beloved physician, and Demas, salute you.
Salute the brethren which are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the church in his house.
And when the letter hath been read among you, cause that it be read also in the church of the Laodiceans, and that ye likewise read the letter from Laodicea.
And say to Archippus, Take heed to the ministry which thou hast received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.
The salutation by the hand of me, Paul. Remember my bonds. Grace be with you.
Paul, and Silvanus, and Timothy, to the church of the Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace be to you, and peace.
We give thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you in our prayers,
remembering without ceasing your work of faith, and labor of love, and perseverance in the hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, before God our Father;
since we know, brethren beloved of God, that he hath chosen you;
because the gospel preached by us came not to you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Spirit, and in much assurance; as ye well know what sort of persons we became among you for your sake.
And ye became imitators of us and of the Lord, having received the word in much affliction with joy from the Holy Spirit;
so that ye became an example to all that believe in Macedonia and in Achaia.
For from you the word of the Lord hath sounded forth not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but in every place your faith toward God hath become known; so that we need not say anything [[about you]].
For they themselves are reporting concerning us what kind of reception we had among you, and how ye turned to God from idols, to serve the living and true God,
and to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, even Jesus, who delivereth us from the coming wrath.
For ye yourselves know, brethren, that our coming among you hath not been in vain;
but after we had suffered before and had been shamefully treated, as ye know, at Philippi, we were bold in our God to speak to you the gospel of God in much conflict.
For our teaching is not from error, nor from impurity, nor in guile;
but as we have been regarded by God as worthy to be intrusted with the gospel, so we speak, not as pleasing men, but God, who trieth our hearts.
For neither at any time did we use flattering words, as ye know, nor a cloak of covetousness, God is witness;
nor from men sought we glory, either from you, or from others; though we might have used authority as apostles of Christ.
But we were gentle in the midst of you, even as a nurse cherisheth her own children;
so having a strong affection for you, we were willing to impart to you, not only the gospel of God, but also our own souls, because ye became dear to us.
For ye remember, brethren, our labor and toil, how laboring night and day, that we might not be burdensome to any of you, we preached to you the gospel of God.
Ye are witnesses, and so is God, how holily, and righteously, and unblamably we conducted ourselves toward you that believe;
as ye know how we exhorted, and encouraged, and charged every one of you, as a father doth his children,
that ye should walk in a manner worthy of God, who is calling you to his own kingdom and glory.
And for this cause we also thank God without ceasing, that, when ye received the word of God which ye heard from us, ye received it not as the word of men, but, as it is in truth, the word of God, which also is powerfully working in you that believe.
For ye, brethren, became imitators of the churches of God which are in Judaea in Christ Jesus; for ye also suffered the same things from your own countrymen, as they have from the Jews;
who both killed the Lord Jesus, and the prophets, and drove us out, and please not God, and set themselves against all men,
hindering us from speaking to the gentiles that they may be saved,—to fill up their sins always! But the wrath is come upon them to the end.
But we, brethren, having been bereaved of you for a short time, separated in body, not in heart, used the greater endeavors with much earnestness to see your face.
Wherefore we purposed to come to you, that is, I Paul, once and again; but Satan hindered us.
For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of glorying? Is it not even ye, in the presence of our Lord Jesus at his coming?
For ye are our glory and joy.
Wherefore, when we could no longer forbear, we chose to be left at Athens alone,
and sent Timothy, our brother and a fellow-laborer with God in the gospel of Christ, to establish you, and to encourage you in your faith,
so that no one should be shaken by these afflictions; for yourselves know that to this we are appointed;
for even when we were with you, we told you before that we are to suffer affliction, just as it came to pass, and ye know.
For this cause, when I too could no longer forbear, I sent in order to know your faith, lest by some means the tempter might have tempted you, and our labor should prove in vain.
But when Timothy just now came to us from you, and brought us good tidings of your faith and love, and that ye have good remembrance of us always, desiring greatly to see us, as we also to see you;
for this cause, brethren, we were comforted over you in all our distress and affliction by your faith;
for now we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord.
For what thanks can we render to God for you, for all the joy wherewith we rejoice for your sakes before our God;
night and day praying exceedingly that we may see your face, and may supply that which is lacking in your faith?
Now God himself, our Father, and our Lord Jesus direct our way to you;
and the Lord make you to increase and abound in love toward one another and toward all, even as we do in love toward you;
in order that he may establish your hearts unblamable in holiness before God, our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his holy ones.
Furthermore then, brethren, we beseech you, and exhort you in the Lord Jesus, that, as ye received from us how ye ought to walk and to please God, even as ye are walking, ye would abound still more;
for ye know what commands we gave you through the Lord Jesus.
For this is the will of God, your sanctification, that ye should abstain from fornication;
that every one of you should know how to procure for himself his own vessel in purity and honor,
not in the passion of lust, even as the gentiles who know not God;
that no one should go beyond and overreach his brother in the matter; because the Lord is the avenger in respect to all these things, as we also told you before and solemnly testified.
For God did not call us to live in uncleanness, but in purity.
He therefore that rejecteth, rejecteth not man, but God, who also gave to you his Holy Spirit.
But concerning brotherly love there is no need of writing to you; for ye yourselves are taught of God to love one another;
for indeed ye do it toward all the brethren who are in all Macedonia. But we exhort you, brethren, to abound in love still more;
and to study to be quiet, and to do your own business, and to work with your own hands, as we commanded you;
that ye may walk becomingly toward those without, and may have need of nothing.
But we would not have you ignorant, brethren, concerning those who are sleeping, that ye may not sorrow, as others do, who have no hope.
For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, then also will God, through Jesus, bring again with him those who have fallen asleep.
For this we say to you in the word of the Lord, that we who are living, we who are left till the coming of the Lord, shall not anticipate those who have fallen asleep.
For the Lord himself will descend from heaven with a loud summons, with the voice of an archangel, and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ will rise first;
then we who are living, we who are left, shall be caught up together with them in clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we be ever with the Lord.
So then comfort one another with these words.
But concerning the times and the seasons, brethren, there is no need of writing to you;
for ye yourselves know full well, that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night.
When they are saying, Peace and safety; then doth sudden destruction come upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape.
But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that the day should overtake you as a thief;
for ye all are sons of light, and sons of the day; we are not of the night, nor of darkness.
Let us not sleep, then, as others, but let us watch and be sober.
For they that sleep, sleep in the night; and they that are drunken, are drunken in the night;
but let us, as we are of the day, be sober, putting on the breast-plate of faith and love, and as a helmet, the hope of salvation;
for God did not appoint us to wrath, but to obtain salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ,
who died for us, that, whether we wake or sleep, we should together live with him.
Wherefore, encourage one another, and edify one another, as indeed ye are doing.
And we beseech you, brethren, to know those who labor among you, and preside over you in the Lord, and admonish you,
and to esteem them very highly in love for their work's sake. Be at peace among yourselves.
Moreover we exhort you, brethren, admonish the unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, be forbearing to all.
See that none render evil for evil to any one; but ever follow that which is good, both toward one another and toward all.
Be always joyful.
Pray without ceasing;
in everything give thanks; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus in regard to you.
Quench not the Spirit;
despise not prophesyings,
but prove all things; hold fast that which is good;
abstain from every form of evil.
And may the God of peace himself sanctify you wholly; and may your spirit, and soul, and body, be preserved whole, without blame at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Faithful is he who calleth you, who also will do it.
Brethren, pray for us.
Salute all the brethren with a holy kiss.
I adjure you by the Lord, that this letter be read to all the holy brethren.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
Paul, and Silvanus, and Timothy, to the church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:
Grace be to you, and peace, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
We ought to thank God always for you, brethren, as is fit, because your faith increaseth exceedingly, and the love of every one of you all toward each ether aboundeth;
so that we ourselves glory in you among the churches of God, for your constancy and faith in all your persecutions and the afflictions which ye endure;
an indication of the righteous judgment of God, by which ye will be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye are also suffering;
since it will be just with God to repay distress to them that distress you,
and to you the distressed rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be manifested from heaven, with the angels of his might,
in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus;
who will be punished with everlasting destruction proceeding from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his power,
when he shall come in that day to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all who believed; for our testimony to you was believed.
For which end we also pray always for you, that our God may count you worthy of your calling, and perfect [[in you]] all pleasure in goodness, and the work of faith, with power;
that the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye in him, according to the grace of our God and of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Now we beseech you, brethren, concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our being assembled together unto him,
that ye be not easily shaken in mind, nor troubled, either by spirit, or by word, or by letter as from us, as if the day of the Lord were close at hand.
Let no one deceive you in any manner; for [[that day will not come]] unless the apostasy shall have come first and the man of sin have been revealed, the son of perdition;
he that opposeth and exalteth himself above every one that is called God, or worthy of worship, so that he sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself to be God.
Do ye not remember, that, when I was yet with you, I told you these things?
And now ye know what restraineth, in order that he may be revealed in his own time.
For the mystery of lawlessness is already working; only there is one who now restraineth, until he be taken out of the way;
and then will the lawless one be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus will consume with the breath of his mouth, and destroy with the manifestation of his coming;
[[he,]] whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power, and signs, and wonders of falsehood,
and in all deceit of unrighteousness for those who are perishing; because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.
And for this cause God sendeth them a working of delusion, that they may believe the falsehood;
that they may all be judged, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.
But we are bound to give thanks always to God for you, brethren beloved of the Lord, that God chose you from the beginning to salvation in sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth;
whereunto he called you by our gospel, to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
So then, brethren, stand firm, and hold fast the traditions which ye were taught by us, whether by word, or by our letter.
Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God, our Father, who loved us, and gave us everlasting consolation and good hope through grace,
encourage your hearts, and establish you in every good work and word.
Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may run and be glorified, as with you,
and that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men; for it is not all that have faith.
But faithful is the Lord, who will establish you, and guard you from evil.
And we have confidence in the Lord concerning you, that ye both do and will do the things which we command you.
And the Lord direct your hearts to the love of God, and to perseverance in the cause of Christ.
Now we charge you, brethren, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that walketh disorderly, and not after the tradition which they received of us.
For ye yourselves know how ye ought to imitate us; for we behaved not ourselves disorderly among you,
neither did we eat any man's bread for nought, but were working with labor and travail night and day, that we might not be burdensome to any of you.
Not because we have not authority, but to make ourselves an example to you, that ye should imitate us.
For also when we were with you, this we commanded you: If any one will not work, neither let him eat.
For we hear of some who walk among you disorderly, working not at all, but are busybodies.
Now such we charge and exhort in the Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work, and eat their own bread.
But ye, brethren, be not weary in well-doing.
And if any one obey not our word by this epistle, mark that man; and keep no company with him, that he may be shamed;
yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.
Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace always in every way; the Lord be with you all.
The salutation by the hand of me, Paul; which is the token in every letter; so I write.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus, through the command of God, our Saviour, and Christ Jesus, our hope,
to Timothy, my true child in the faith: Grace, mercy, peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
As I besought thee, when I set out for Macedonia, to remain still in Ephesus, that thou mightst charge certain persons not to teach other doctrine,
nor to give heed to fables and endless genealogies, which occasion disputes rather than promote God's dispensation which is in faith, [[so I do now.]]
Now the end of the commandment is love, out of a pure heart and a good conscience and faith unfeigned;
from which some swerving turned aside to vain babbling,
desiring to be teachers of the Law, understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm.
But we know that the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully,
knowing this, that the Law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and unruly, for the ungodly and sinful, for the unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, for man-slayers,
for whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for men-stealers, for liars, for perjured persons, and if there be any other thing that is contrary to the sound teaching,
according to the glorious gospel of the blessed God which was committed to my trust.
And I thank him who gave me strength, Christ Jesus our Lord, that he accounted me faithful, putting me into the ministry, t
though formerly I was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and a doer of outrage; but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly, in unbelief;
and the grace of our Lord was exceedingly abundant with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.
True is the saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief.
But for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me especially Christ Jesus might show forth all his long-suffering, as an example to those who should hereafter believe in him to life everlasting.
Now to the King eternal, the imperishable, invisible, only God, be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.
This charge I commit to thee, my child Timothy, in accordance with the directions of the prophets before given to thee, that thou mayst in them war the good warfare,
having faith, and a good conscience, which some thrusting away made shipwreck concerning the faith;
of whom is Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I delivered to Satan, that they might be taught not to blaspheme.
I exhort then, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men;
for kings, and all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet and tranquil life in all godliness and propriety.
For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour,
whose will is that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth.
For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus,
who gave himself a ransom for all; to which the testimony was to be borne in its own due times,
whereunto I was appointed a herald and an apostle, (I speak the truth, I lie not,) a teacher of the gentiles in faith and truth.
I desire, then, that the men pray in every place, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting.
In like manner also, that women, in seemly attire, adorn themselves with modesty and sobriety, not with braided hair, and gold, or pearls, or costly apparel;
but, as becometh women professing godliness, with good works.
Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection.
But I suffer not the woman to teach, nor to have authority over the man, but to be in silence.
For Adam was first formed, then Eve.
And Adam was not deceived; but the woman being deceived fell into transgression.
But she will be saved through child-bearing, if they continue in faith, and love, and holiness, with sobriety.
True is the saying: If a man desire the office of a bishop, he desireth a good work.
A bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife, sober, discreet, orderly, hospitable, apt in teaching;
not given to wine, not a striker, but forbearing, not quarrelsome, not a lover of money;
presiding well over his own house, having his children in subjection with all propriety;—
for if a man knoweth not how to preside over his own house, how shall he take care of the church of God—
not a new convert, lest being puffed up with pride he fall into the condemnation of the Devil;
moreover he must also have a good report from them that are without, lest he fall into reproach and the snare of the Devil.
Deacons in like manner must be grave, not double-tongued, not given to much wine, not greedy of base gain,
holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience.
And let these also first be proved; then let them serve as deacons, if they are without reproach.
The women in like manner must be grave, not slanderers, sober, faithful in all things.
Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife, ruling their children and their own houses well.
For they that have served well as deacons, gain for themselves a good standing, and great boldness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.
These things write I to thee, hoping to come to thee shortly;
but if I should tarry long, that thou mayst know how thou oughtest to conduct thyself in the house of God, which is the church of the living God, the pillar and foundation of the truth.
And confessedly great is the mystery of godliness, in him who was manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen by angels, preached among the gentiles, believed on in the world, received up in glory.
Now the Spirit saith expressly, that in the latter times some will depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and teachings of demons,
through the hypocrisy of speakers of lies, who bear a brand on their own conscience,
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from food which God created to be received with thanksgiving, for those who believe and know the truth.
For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving;
for it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer.
If thou lay these things before the brethren, thou wilt be a good minister of Christ Jesus, nourished in the words of the faith, and of the good teaching, with which thou art well acquainted.
But avoid the profane and old wives' fables; and exercise thyself unto godliness.
For bodily exercise is profitable for little; but godliness is profitable for all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.
True is the saying, and worthy of all acceptance.
For to this end we both labor and suffer reproach, because we have placed our hope in the living God, who is the Saviour of all men, especially of believers.
These things command and teach.
Let no one despise thy youth, but become an example to the believers, in word, in behavior, in love, in faith, in purity.
Till I come, give attention to reading, to exhortation, to teaching.
Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery.
Meditate on these things, give thyself wholly to them; that thy progress may be manifest to all.
Give heed to thyself, and to thy teaching; continue in them; for in doing this thou wilt save both thyself and them that hear thee.
Do not sharply rebuke an aged man, but exhort him as a father; the younger men, as brethren;
the elder women, as mothers; the younger, as sisters, with all purity.
Honor as widows those that are widows indeed.
But if any widow have children or grandchildren, let them learn first to show piety to their own family, and to requite their parents; for this is acceptable before God.
Now she that is a widow indeed, and left alone, hath set her hope on God, and continueth in supplications and prayers night and day;
but she that giveth herself up to pleasure is dead while she liveth.
These things also enjoin, that they may be blameless.
But if any one provideth not for his own, and especially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an unbeliever.
Let a widow be put on the list when not less than sixty years old, having been the wife of one husband,
well reported of for good works; if she have brought up children, if she have lodged strangers, if she have washed the saints' feet, if she have relieved the afflicted, if she have diligently followed every good work.
But younger widows refuse; for when they become wanton against Christ, they desire to marry;
falling into condemnation, because they have cast off their first faith;
and withal they learn to be idle, going about from house to house; and not only idle, but tattlers also, and busybodies, speaking things which they ought not.
I desire therefore that the younger widows marry, bear children, guide the house, give no occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully.
For some have already turned aside after Satan.
If any man or woman that is a believer have widows, let them relieve them, and let not the church be burdened, that it may relieve those that are widows indeed.
Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor; especially they who labor in the word and in teaching.
For the Scripture saith, “Thou shalt not muzzle the ox while he is treading out the grain”; and, “The laborer is worthy of his wages.”
Against an elder receive not an accusation without two or three witnesses.
Those that sin rebuke before all, that the rest also may fear.
I charge thee before God and Christ Jesus and the elect angels, that thou observe these things without prejudging, doing nothing with partiality.
Lay hands hastily on no one, neither share in other men's sins. Keep thyself pure.
No longer drink water only, but use a little wine for thy stomach's sake, and thy frequent infirmities.
Some men's sins are openly manifest, going before them to judgment; and some men they follow after.
In like manner also the good works of some are openly manifest; and those that are otherwise cannot be hid.
Let all who are under the yoke as bond-servants count their own masters worthy of all honor, that the name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed.
And they that have believing masters, let them not despise them because they are brethren; but rather do them service, because they who receive the benefit are faithful and beloved. These things teach and exhort.
If any one teacheth other doctrine, and assenteth not to sound words, the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness,
he is puffed up with pride, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words, from which cometh envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings,
incessant disputings of men corrupted in their minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that godliness is gain.
But godliness with contentment is great gain.
For we brought nothing into the world; and it is certain we can carry nothing out.
If we have, then, food and raiment, we will be therewith content.
But they who desire to be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition.
For the love of money is a root of all evils; which some coveting have strayed away from the faith, and have pierced themselves through with many pangs.
But do thou, O man of God, flee these things; and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness.
Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on everlasting life, to which thou wast called, and didst profess the good profession before many witnesses.
I charge thee before God, who giveth life to all things, and before Christ Jesus, who under Pontius Pilate testified the good profession,
that thou keep the commandment without spot, without reproach, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which in his own times he shall show, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords,
who only hath immortality, dwelling in light unapproachable, whom no man hath seen, or can see; to whom be honor and power everlasting. Amen.
Charge those who are rich in this world that they be not high-minded, nor place their hope in uncertain riches, but in God, who giveth us richly all things to enjoy; that they do good,
that they be rich in good works, liberal in imparting, willing to communicate,
laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on the true life.
O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding the profane babblings, and oppositions of the falsely-called knowledge;
which some professing, have erred concerning the faith. Grace be with thee.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, according to the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus,
to Timothy, my beloved child: Grace, mercy, peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
I thank God, whom I serve from my forefathers with pure conscience, as without ceasing I have remembrance of thee in my prayers night and day,
longing to see thee, being mindful of thy tears, that I may be filled with joy;
when I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that it dwelleth in thee also.
For which cause I remind thee to stir up the gift of God, which is in thee by the laying on of my hands;
for God gave us not the spirit of cowardice, but of power, and of love, and of admonition.
Be not then ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner; but endure hardship with me for the gospel through the power of God,
who saved us, and called us with a holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and the grace which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began,
but is now made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour Christ Jesus, who abolished death, and brought life and incorruption to light through the gospel,
for which I was appointed a herald, and an apostle, and a teacher of the gentiles.
For which cause I suffer also these things. But I am not ashamed; for I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which he hath committed to me unto that day.
Hold the pattern of sound words, which thou heardest from me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus;
the good trust committed to thee keep through the Holy Spirit which dwelleth in us.
Thou knowest this, that all those in Asia turned away from me, of whom are Phygelus and Hermogenes.
The Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, because he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain; but on the contrary,
when he arrived at Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found me.
The Lord grant to him that he may find mercy from the Lord in that day: and what services he rendered me at Ephesus, thou knowest very well.
Thou therefore, my child, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus;
and the things which thou didst hear from me before many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, such as will be able to teach others also.
Endure hardship with me as a good soldier of Christ Jesus.
No one serving as a soldier entangleth himself with the affairs of life, that he may please him who chose him to be a soldier.
And if a man contendeth in the games, he is not crowned, unless he contendeth lawfully.
The husbandman that laboreth must be the first partaker of the fruits.
Understand what I say; for the Lord will give thee apprehension in all things.
Bear in mind Jesus Christ of the seed of David, as raised from the dead, according to my gospel;
in which I suffer hardship even unto bonds as an evil-doer; but the word of God is not bound.
For this cause I endure all things for the sake of the elect, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with everlasting glory.
True is the saying: for if we died with him, we shall also live with him;
if we endure, we shall also reign with him; if we deny him, he also will deny us;
if we are faithless, he remaineth faithful; for he cannot deny himself.
Of these things put them in remembrance, charging them before the Lord not to carry on a strife of words, to no useful purpose, but rather to the subverting of the hearers.
Study to present thyself approved unto God, a workman not ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.
But shun the profane babblings; for they will go on to a higher degree of ungodliness;
and their word will eat as doth a canker; of whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus,
who have erred concerning the truth, saying that the resurrection hath already taken place, and overthrow the faith of some.
Nevertheless God's firm foundation standeth, having this seal, “The Lord knoweth them that are his;” and, “Let every one that nameth the name of the Lord depart from iniquity.”
But in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also wooden and earthen ones; and some for honor, and some for dishonor.
If then any one shall purge himself from these, he will be a vessel for honor, hallowed, useful for the householder, prepared for every good work.
But flee youthful lusts, and follow righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart.
But the foolish and ignorant questionings avoid, knowing that they gender quarrels;
and a servant of the Lord must not quarrel, but be gentle to all, apt in teaching, patient of wrong,
in meekness admonishing those that oppose themselves; if haply God may give them repentance to attain the full knowledge of the truth,
and they may awake to their senses out of the snare of the Devil, by whom they have been taken captive to do his will.
But know this, that in the last days grievous times will come.
For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without
natural affection, implacable, slanderers, incontinent, fierce, without love for what is good,
betrayers, headstrong, puffed up, lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God;
having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof. And from these turn away.
For of these are they who creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away by divers lusts,
ever learning, and never able to come to the full knowledge of the truth.
Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so also do these withstand the truth; men corrupted in their minds, reprobate concerning the faith.
But they will proceed no further; for their folly will be clearly manifest to all, as that of those men was.
But thou art well acquainted with my teaching, manner of life, purpose, faith, long-suffering, love, patience,
persecutions, sufferings; what things came upon me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; what persecutions I endured, and out of them all the Lord delivered me.
Yea, and all that desire to live godly in Christ Jesus will suffer persecution.
But evil men and impostors will wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.
But do thou continue in the things which thou didst learn and wast assured of, knowing from what teachers thou didst learn them,
and that from a child thou hast known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus.
All Scripture is inspired by God, and is profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, for discipline in righteousness;
that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work.
I charge thee before God, and Christ Jesus, who is to judge the living and the dead, and by his appearing and his kingdom;
preach the word, be urgent in season, out of season, confute, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and teaching.
For the time will come, when they will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own desires will they heap to themselves teachers; because they have itching ears;
and they will turn away their ears from the truth, and turn aside to fables.
But be thou watchful in all things, endure hardship, do the work of an evangelist, fully accomplish thy ministry.
For I am already about to be offered as a sacrifice, and the time of my departure is at hand.
I have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith;
henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will give to me at that day, and not to me only, but to all those who have loved his appearing.
Use diligence to come to me shortly.
For Demas forsook me, because he loved the present world, and went to Thessalonica; Crescens to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia.
Only Luke is with me. Take Mark, and bring him with thee; for he is useful to me for the ministry.
But Tychicus I sent to Ephesus.
The cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus, when thou comest bring with thee, and the books, especially the parchments.
Alexander the coppersmith did me much evil; the Lord will reward him according to his works;
of whom do thou also beware; for he hath greatly withstood our words.
At my first defence no one came forward with me, but all forsook me. May it not be laid to their charge!
But the Lord stood by me, and strengthened me, that the preaching might be fully accomplished by me, and that all the gentiles might hear; and I was delivered out of the lion's mouth.
The Lord will deliver me from every evil deed, and preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom; to whom be the glory for ever and ever. Amen.
Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the household of Onesiphorus.
Erastus remained at Corinth, but Trophimus I left at Miletus sick.
Use diligence to come before winter. Eubulus saluteth thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren.
The Lord be with thy spirit. Grace be with you.
Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Christ Jesus, for the faith of God's elect, and the knowledge of the truth which is according to godliness,
in hope of everlasting life, which God, who cannot lie, promised from the most ancient times,
but in his own seasons manifested his word through the preaching with which I was intrusted by the commandment of God our Saviour:
to Titus, true child after the common faith: Grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Saviour.
For this cause I left thee behind in Crete, that thou shouldst set in order the things that are wanting, and appoint elders in every city, as I directed thee;
if any one is without reproach, the husband of one wife, having believing children, that are not accused of dissoluteness, or unruly.
For a bishop must be without reproach, as God's steward; not self-willed, not soon angry, not given to wine, not a striker, not greedy of base gain,
but hospitable, a lover of what is good, discreet, just, holy, temperate,
holding fast the sure word according to what he was taught, that he may be able by sound teaching both to exhort, and to refute the gainsayers.
For there are many unruly vain talkers and deceivers, especially they of the circumcision;
whose mouths must be stopped, since they overturn whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for the sake of base gain.
One of themselves, even a prophet of their own, said: “The Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, slothful gluttons.”
This testimony is true; for which cause rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith,
not giving heed to Jewish fables, and commandments of men who turn away from the truth.
To the pure all things are pure; but to the defiled and unbelieving nothing is pure, but both their mind and conscience are defiled.
They profess that they know God, but by their works they deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and for every good work reprobate.
But do thou speak the things which become sound teaching;
that aged men be sober, grave, discreet, sound in faith, in love, in patience;
that aged women likewise be in behavior as becometh holiness, not false accusers, not enslaved to much wine, teachers of what is good,
that they may teach the young women to love their husbands, to love their children,
to be discreet, chaste, workers at home, good, in subjection to their own husbands, that the word of God be not blasphemed.
The younger men likewise exhort to be sober-minded;
in all things showing thyself a pattern of good works, in teaching showing uncorruptness, gravity,
sound speech that cannot be condemned; that he that is opposed to us may be put to shame, having no evil thing to say of us.
Exhort bond-servants to be in subjection to their own masters, in all things to be well-pleasing to them,
not contradicting, not purloining, but showing all good faith; that they may adorn the teaching of God our Saviour in all things.
For the grace of God, that bringeth salvation to all men, was manifested,
teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in the present world;
looking for the blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of the great God and of our Saviour Jesus Christ;
who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a people to be his own, zealous in good works.
These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all authority. Let no one despise thee.
Put them in mind to submit themselves to governments, to authorities, to obey magistrates, to be ready for every good work,
to speak evil of no one, to be averse to strife, forbearing, showing all meekness to all men.
For we ourselves also were once foolish, disobedient, going astray, slaves to divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, hating one another.
But when the kindness and love for men of God our Saviour appeared,
not by works of righteousness which we did, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the bath of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Spirit,
which he poured out upon us richly through Jesus Christ our Saviour,
that having been accepted as righteous by his grace, we might become heirs according to the hope of everlasting life.
True is the saying; and these things I desire that thou affirm earnestly, that they who have believed in God may be careful to practise good works. These things are good and profitable to men;
but avoid foolish questionings, and genealogies, and strifes, and contentions about the Law; for they are unprofitable and vain.
A man that stirs up divisions, after a first and second admonition, avoid;
knowing that he that is such is utterly perverted, and sinneth, being self-condemned.
When I shall have sent Artemas to thee, or Tychicus, use diligence to come to me to Nicopolis; for there I have determined to pass the winter.
Zenas the lawyer and Apollos forward on their journey diligently, that nothing may be wanting to them.
And let those also who belong to us learn to practise good works for the necessary wants that arise, that they may not be unfruitful.
All that are with me salute thee. Salute those who love us in the faith. Grace be with you all.
Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timothy the brother, to Philemon our beloved friend and fellow-laborer,
and to the beloved Apphia, and to Archippus our fellow-soldier, and to the church in thy house:
Grace be to you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I thank my God at all times, making mention of thee in my prayers,
hearing of thy love and faith, which thou hast toward the Lord Jesus and toward all the saints;
that the fellowship of thy faith may become effectual in the knowledge of every good thing which is in us, for Christ Jesus.
For we have great thankfulness and comfort on account of thy love, because the hearts of the saints have been refreshed by thee, brother.
Wherefore, though I have much boldness in Christ to enjoin upon thee that which is befitting,
yet for love's sake I beseech thee rather; being such a one as Paul an old man, and now also a prisoner of Christ Jesus,
I beseech thee for my child, whom I begot in my bonds, Onesimus;
who in time past was unprofitable to thee, but is now profitable to thee and to me;
whom I have sent back; and do thou [[receive]] him, that is, my own flesh.
Whom I would have retained with me, that in thy stead he might minister to me in the bonds of the gospel;
but I chose to do nothing without thy consent, that thy benefit may be not as from necessity, but willingly.
For perhaps he was separated from thee for a season to this end, that thou shouldst receive him back as thine for ever;
no longer as a bond-servant, but above a bond-servant, a brother beloved, especially to me, but how much more to thee, both in the flesh, and in the Lord!
If thou then regardest me as a partner, receive him as myself.
And if he wronged thee in anything, or oweth thee, put that to my account.
I Paul have written it with my own hand, I will repay it; not to say to thee, that to me thou owest even thy own self besides.
Yea, brother, let me have joy of thee in the Lord; refresh my heart in Christ.
Having confidence in thy obedience I have written to thee, knowing that thou wilt do even more than I say.
And at the same time make ready a lodging for me; for I hope that through your prayers I shall be granted to you.
Epaphras, my fellow-prisoner in Christ Jesus,
Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, Luke, my fellow-laborers, salute thee.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.
God, who at different times and in different ways spoke of old to the fathers by the prophets,
hath at the end of these days spoken to us by his Son, whom he appointed heir of all things, by whom he also made the worlds,
who being a brightness from his glory and an image of his being, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself accomplished a cleansing of sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high;
having become so much superior to the angels, as he hath inherited a more excellent name than they.
For to which of the angels did he ever say: “Thou art my Son, I this day have begotten thee?” and again: “I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son?”
And again, when he hath brought in the first-begotten into the world, he saith: “And let all the angels of God pay him homage.”
And of the angels he saith: “Who maketh his angels winds, and his ministers a flame of fire;”
but of the Son: “Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever; and the sceptre of thy kingdom is a sceptre of righteousness.
Thou lovedst righteousness, and hatedst iniquity; therefore God, thy God, anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.”
And: “Thou, Lord, in the beginning didst found the earth, and the heavens are the works of thy hands.
They will perish, but thou remainest; and they will all become old as doth a garment,
and thou wilt fold them up as a vesture, and they will be changed; but thou art the same, and thy years will not fail.”
But to which of the angels hath he ever said: “Sit on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool?”
Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for the sake of those who are to inherit salvation?
Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest haply we let them slip.
For if the word spoken through angels proved steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just retribution,
how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first was spoken through the Lord, and was confirmed to us through those who heard him,
God also bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Spirit, according to his will?
For not to angels did he put in subjection the world to come, of which we are speaking.
But one in a certain place bore testimony, saying, “What is man, that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man, that thou carest for him?
Thou madest him a little lower than the angels; thou crownedst him with glory and honor;
thou didst put all things in subjection under his feet.” For in that he put all things in subjection under him, he left nothing that is not put under him. But now we do not yet see all things put under him.
But we see him who was made a little lower than the angels, Jesus, on account of the suffering of death crowned with glory and honor; that by the grace of God he might taste death for every one.
For it became him, for whom are all things, and through whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, to make the author of their salvation perfect through sufferings.
For both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren;
saying, “I will declare thy name to my brethren, in the midst of the congregation will I sing praise to thee.”
And again, “I will put my trust in him;” and again, “Behold, I, and the children which God gave me.”
Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself in like manner shared in the same, that through death he might bring to nought him who had the power of death, that is, the Devil,
and might deliver those who, through fear of death, were all their life-time subject to bondage.
For surely he doth not help angels, but he helpeth the offspring of Abraham.
Whence it was right for him to be in all respects made like to his brethren, that he might become a merciful and faithful high-priest in things pertaining to God, to make propitiation for the sins of the people.
For in that he himself hath suffered, being tempted, he is able to help those who are tempted.
Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of a heavenly calling, consider the apostle and high-priest of our profession, Jesus;
who was faithful to him that appointed him, as also was Moses in all his house.
For he hath been counted worthy of more glory than Moses, inasmuch as greater than the house is he who built it.
For every house is builded by some one; but he who built all things is God.
And Moses indeed was faithful in all his house as a servant, that he might testify of those things which were to be spoken;
but Christ as a son over his house; whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and joyousness of our hope.
Wherefore, as the Holy Spirit saith: “To-day, if ye hear his voice,
harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of the temptation in the wilderness,
where your fathers tempted me by proving me, and saw my works forty years.
Wherefore I was offended with that generation, and said, They always err in their heart, but they knew not my ways;
so I swore in my wrath, They shall not enter into my rest.”
Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any one of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God.
But exhort one another daily, as long as it is called To-day, that none of you may be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.
For we have become partakers of Christ, if we hold fast our first confidence firm to the end.
When it is said, “To-day, if ye hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation,”
who then, when they had heard, provoked? Was it not all who came out of Egypt by means of Moses?
And with whom was he offended forty years? Was it not with those who sinned, whose carcasses fell in the wilderness?
And to whom did he swear that they should not enter into his rest, except to those who were disobedient?
So then we see that they could not enter in because of unbelief.
Let us then fear, since a promise is still left us of entering into his rest, lest any one of you should appear to fail of obtaining it.
For to us were glad tidings addressed, as well as to them; but the word which was heard did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in those who heard it.
For we who believed enter into the rest, as he hath said: “So I swore in my wrath, they shall not enter into my rest;” although the works were finished from the foundation of the world.
For he hath spoken in a certain place of the seventh day thus: “And God rested on the seventh day from all his works;”
and in this place again: “They shall not enter into my rest.”
Since then it still remaineth for some to enter into it, and they to whom the glad tidings of it were first brought did not enter in because of disobedience,
he again appointeth a certain day, “To-day”—saying in David so long a time after, as hath before been said—”To-day, if ye hear his voice, harden not your hearts.”
For if Joshua had given them rest, he would not after this be speaking of another day.
There remaineth therefore a sabbath-rest to the people of God.
For he that hath entered into his rest, hath himself rested from his works, as God did from his own.
Let us then strive to enter into that rest, that no one may fall, as a like example of disobedience.
For the word of God is living, and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, both the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart;
and there is no creature that is not manifest in his sight; but all things are naked and laid open to the eyes of him with whom we have to do.
Since, then, we have a great high-priest, who hath passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession.
For we have not a high-priest who cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but one who hath in all points been tempted as we are, without sin.
Let us therefore come boldly to the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.
For every high-priest, being taken from among men, is appointed for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins;
being able to be forbearing toward the ignorant and the erring, since he himself also is compassed with infirmity;
and by reason of this infirmity he must, as for the people, so also for himself, offer sacrifice for sins.
And no one taketh this honor to himself, but when called by God, as was Aaron.
Thus Christ did not glorify himself to be made high-priest, but he who said to him, “Thou art my Son, I this day have begotten thee;”
as also he saith in another place, “Thou art a priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek.”
Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, to him that was able to save him from death, and was heard by reason of his godly reverence,
though a son yet learned his obedience from what he suffered;
and being perfected became the author of everlasting salvation to all who obey him,
being addressed by God as high-priest after the order of Melchizedek.
Of whom we have much to say, and hard to be explained, seeing ye have become dull of hearing.
For while on account of the length of time ye ought to be teachers, ye again have need that some one should teach you the first elements of the oracles of God, and are become such as have need of milk, and not of solid food.
For every one that feedeth on milk is unacquainted with the word of righteousness; for he is a babe;
but solid food belongs to those who are of full age, who by use have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil.
Let us then, leaving the first principles of the doctrine of Christ, press on to perfection; not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God,
of the doctrine of baptisms, and of the laying on of hands, and of resurrection of the dead, and of everlasting judgment.
And this we will do, if God permit.
For it is impossible that those who have once been enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and been make partakers of the Holy Spirit,
and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come,
and have fallen away, should again be renewed to repentance, since they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to open shame.
For the earth which hath drunk in the rain that cometh often upon it, and beareth plants useful to those for whose sake it is tilled, receiveth blessing from God;
but if it bear thorns and briers it is disapproved, and is near to being accursed; and its end is to be burned.
But, beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things that are connected with salvation, though we do thus speak.
For God is not unjust so as to forget your work, and the love which ye showed toward his name, in that ye ministered and are still ministering to the saints.
But we earnestly desire that every one of you may show the same diligence with regard to the full assurance of your hope even to the end;
that ye may not become slothful, but imitators of those who through faith and endurance inherit the promises.
For when God made a promise to Abraham, since he could swear by no greater, he swore by himself,
saying, “Surely blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee.”
And so, having endured with patience, he obtained the promised blessing.
For men indeed swear by one who is greater, and the oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife.
Wherefore God, wishing more abundantly to show to the heirs of the promise the immutability of his purpose, confirmed it by an oath,
that by two immutable things, in which it is impossible for God to lie, we may have strong encouragement, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us;
which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, sure and steadfast, and which entereth within the veil;
where as forerunner for us Jesus entered, having become a high-priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek.
For this Melchizedek, king of Salem, priest of the most high God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed him,
to whom also Abraham apportioned a tenth part of all, who by interpretation is first King of righteousness, and then also was King of Salem, which is, King of peace,
without father, without mother, without record of descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life, but likened to the Son of God, remaineth a priest for ever.
Consider now how great this man was, to whom even Abraham the patriarch gave a tenth of the spoils.
And those indeed of the sons of Levi who receive the office of the priesthood have a command to take tithes of the people by the Law, that is, of their brethren, though they have come out of the loins of Abraham;
but he whose descent is not reckoned from them took tithes of Abraham, and blessed him who had the promises.
And beyond all contradiction the less is blessed by the greater.
And here indeed men that die receive tithes; but there he of whom it is testified that he liveth.
And so to speak, Levi also, who receiveth tithes, paid tithes in Abraham;
for he was yet in the loins of his father when Melchizedek met him.
If indeed perfection had been by the Levitical priesthood, (for under it the people hath received the Law,) what further need was there that a different priest should arise after the order of Melchizedek, and not be called alter the order of Aaron?
For if the priesthood is changed, there takes place of necessity a change of the law.
For he of whom these things are spoken belonged to another tribe, of which no one hath given attendance at the altar;
for it is well-known that our Lord sprang out of Judah, in regard to which tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning priests.
And it is still more abundantly evident, if after the likeness of Melchizedek there ariseth a different priest,
who hath been made, not according to the law of a fleshly commandment, but according to the power of an indissoluble life.
For it is testified of him, “Thou art a priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek.”
For on the one hand there takes place an annulling of the commandment which went before, on account of its weakness and unprofitableness,—
for the Law perfected nothing,—and on the other, the bringing in of a better hope, by which we draw near to God.
And inasmuch as it was not without an oath that he was made priest,
—for they indeed have been made priests without an oath; but he with an oath by him who said to him, “The Lord swore, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever,”—
by so much hath Jesus become the surety of a better covenant.
And they indeed have been many priests, because they have been prevented from continuing by reason of death;
but he, because he abideth ever, hath an unchangeable priesthood;
wherefore he is able also to save to the utmost those who come to God through him, since he ever liveth to make intercession for them.
For such a high-priest also became us, holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens;
who hath not necessity daily, as the high-priests, to offer up sacrifice first for his own sins, and then for those of the people; for this he did once for all, when he offered up himself.
For the Law maketh men high-priests, who have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was after the Law, maketh the Son, who is perfected for ever.
Now the principal thing among those of which we are speaking is this: We have such a high-priest, who sat down on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens;
a minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, not man.
For every high-priest is appointed to offer gifts and sacrifices; whence it is necessary that this one also have something which he may offer.
For if, indeed, he were on earth, he would not be a priest, since there are those that offer the gifts according to the Law;
who serve the mere delineation and shadow of the heavenly things, as Moses was admonished by God when he was about to make the tabernacle; for, “See,” saith he, “that thou make all things according to the pattern which was shown thee in the mount.”
But now he hath obtained a more excellent ministry, in proportion as he is the mediator of a better covenant, which hath been established upon better promises.
For if that first covenant had been faultless, then a place would not have been sought for a second.
For finding fault with them, he saith: “Behold, the days are coming, saith the Lord, when I will make with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah a new covenant;
not according to the covenant which I made with their fathers, in the day when I took them by the hand, to bring them out of the land of Egypt; because they continued not in my covenant, and I regarded them not, saith the Lord.
For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, saith the Lord: I will put my laws into their mind, and on their hearts will I write them; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people.
And they shall not teach every one his fellow-citizen, and every one his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for all shall know me, from the least to the greatest.
For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities I will remember no more.”
In that he saith, “a new covenant,” he hath made the first old; but that which is becoming old, and worn out with age, is ready to vanish away.
The first covenant, then, had indeed ordinances of religious service, and a worldly sanctuary.
For a tabernacle was prepared, the first, wherein was the candlestick, and the table, and the show-bread; which is called the holy place:
and after the second veil, the tabernacle which is called the holy of holies,
which had the golden altar of incense, and the ark of the covenant overlaid on every side with gold, wherein was the golden pot containing the manna, and the rod of Aaron which budded, and the tables of the covenant;
and over it the cherubs of glory, overshadowing the mercy-seat; of which we cannot now speak particularly.
Now these things being thus prepared, into the first tabernacle indeed the priests enter at all times, performing the services;
but into the second the high-priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he offereth for himself, and for the errors of the people;
the Holy Spirit clearly showing this, that the way into the sanctuary hath not yet been made manifest, while the first tabernacle is yet standing:
which is a figure for the present time, in accordance with which are offered both gifts and sacrifices, which have no power as to the conscience to perfect the worshipper,
being only ordinances pertaining to the flesh, which in addition to meats and drinks and divers washings are imposed until the time of reformation.
But Christ having appeared, as a high-priest of the good things to come, passing through the greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is, not of this creation, entered once for all into the sanctuary,
not with the blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood, and obtained for us everlasting redemption.
For if the blood of goats and bulls, and the ashes of a heifer sprinkling those who have been defiled, sanctify to the purifying of the flesh,
how much more shall the blood of Christ, who by his everlasting spirit offered himself without spot to God, purify your conscience from dead works, for the worship of the living God!
And for this cause he is the mediator of a new covenant, that, death having taken place for redemption from the transgressions under the first covenant, they who have been called may receive the everlasting inheritance which was promised.
For where there is a testament there must of necessity be implied the death of the testator;
for a testament is of force after men are dead, since it is of no force while the testator is living.
Hence neither was the first covenant ratified without blood.
For when Moses had spoken every precept according to the Law to all the people, he took the blood of the calves and of the goats, with water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book itself and all the people,
saying, “This is the blood of the covenant which God enjoined in respect to you.”
The tabernacle also and all the vessels of the service he in like manner sprinkled with the blood.
And almost all things are according to the Law purified with blood, and without shedding of blood there is no remission.
It was necessary therefore that the copies of the things in the heavens should be purified with these; but the heavenly things themselves with sacrifices better than these.
For Christ did not enter into a sanctuary made with hands, which is only a copy of the true one, but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God in our behalf.
Nor yet to make an offering of himself many times, as the high-priest entereth into the holy place every year with blood of others;
for then must he have suffered many times since the foundation of the world; but now once in the end of the world he hath appeared, to put away sin by means of his sacrifice.
And as it is appointed to men once to die, but after this the judgment;
so also Christ having been once offered up to bear the sins of many, will appear the second time, without sin, for the salvation of those who are waiting for him.
For the Law but shadowing forth the good things to come, and not having the very image of the things, can never with the same sacrifices which they offer year by year continually make those who come with them perfect.
For in that case would they not have ceased to be offered, because the worshippers, having been once purified, would have had no more consciousness of sins?
But in these sacrifices there is a remembrance of sins every year.
For it is impossible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away sins.
Wherefore, when he cometh into the world, he saith: “Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not, but a body didst thou prepare for me;
in whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices for sin thou hadst no pleasure.
Then said I, Lo, I have come—in the volume of the book it is written of me—to do thy will, O God.”
Saying above, “Sacrifices and offerings, and whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices for sin thou wouldest not, and hadst no pleasure in them,”—such as are offered in conformity to the Law,—
then hath he said, “Lo, I have come to do thy will.” He setteth aside the first, that he may establish the second.
And in this will we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.
And every priest indeed standeth performing daily service, and offering again and again the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins;
but he, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, sat down for ever on the right hand of God,
thenceforth waiting until his enemies be made his footstool.
For by one offering he hath perfected for ever those who are sanctified.
Moreover the Holy Spirit also is a witness to us of this. For after he had said,
“This is the covenant that I will make with them after those days,” the Lord saith, “I will put my laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I write them,
and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more.”
But where there is remission of these, there is no longer offering for sin.
Having therefore, brethren, boldness for entrance into the sanctuary by the blood of Jesus,
a new and living way, which he consecrated for us, through the veil, that is, his flesh,
and having a great priest over the house of God,
let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having had our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience; and having had our bodies washed with pure water,
let us hold fast the profession of our hope without wavering, for he is faithful who promised;
and let us consider one another, to excite to love and to good works,
not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the custom of some is, but exhorting one another; and so much the more, as ye see the day approaching.
For if we sin willingly after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there no longer remaineth a sacrifice for sins;
but a certain fearful looking for judgment, and an indignation by fire, which will devour the adversaries.
He that hath set at nought the law of Moses dieth without mercy under two or three witnesses;
of how much heavier punishment, think ye, will he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done despite to the Spirit of grace?
For we know him who said, “Vengeance belongeth to me, I will recompense, saith the Lord;” and again, “The Lord will judge his people.”
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
But call to remembrance the former days, in which, after ye were enlightened, ye endured a great struggle with sufferings;
partly, while ye were made a gazing-stock both by reproaches and afflictions; and partly, while ye became partakers with those that were so used.
For ye sympathized with those in bonds, and ye took joyfully the plundering of your goods, knowing that ye have for yourselves a better and an enduring substance.
Cast not away therefore your confidence, which hath great recompense of reward.
For ye have need of endurance; that, after ye have done the will of God, ye may receive what is promised.
For yet a very little while, and “he that is to come will come, and will not tarry.
Now my righteous man shall live by faith; but if he draw back, my soul hath no pleasure in him.”
But we are not of those who draw back, unto perdition; but of those who believe, to the saving of the soul.
Now faith is assurance of things hoped for, a conviction of things not seen.
For by it the elders obtained a good report.
Through faith we perceive that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that that which is seen hath not been made out of things which appear.
By faith Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, through which he received testimony that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts; and by it though dead he yet speaketh.
By faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death; and he was not found, because God translated him; for before his translation he had the testimony that he pleased God.
But without faith it is impossible to please him; for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of those who diligently seek him.
By faith Noah, being warned by God of things not yet seen, moved with fear, prepared an ark for the saving of his house; by which he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousness which is according to faith.
By faith Abraham, when called, obeyed to go forth to a place which he was afterward to receive for an inheritance, and went forth, not knowing whither he was going.
By faith he sojourned in the land of the promise, as in a foreign country, dwelling in tents with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise;
for he was looking for the city which hath foundations, whose maker and builder is God.
Through faith Sarah herself also received power to conceive, even when she was past age, because she accounted him faithful who had promised.
Wherefore there sprang even from one, and him become as dead, a race like the stars of heaven in multitude, and like the sand by the seashore which cannot be numbered.
These all died in faith, not having received the promised blessings, but having seen them from afar, and greeted them, and having professed that they were strangers and sojourners on the earth.
For they who say such things show plainly that they are seeking a country.
And if indeed they had been mindful of that from which they came out, they would have had opportunity to return;
but now they desire a better country, that is, a heavenly. Wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God; for he prepared for them a city.
By faith Abraham, when tried, offered up Isaac, and he who had received the promises was offering up his only-begotten son,
he to whom it was said, “From Isaac shall thine offspring be reckoned;”
accounting that God is able even to raise from the dead; whence also he did figuratively receive him back.
By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau even concerning things to come.
By faith Jacob, when dying, blessed each of the sons of Joseph; and worshipped, leaning upon the top of his staff.
By faith Joseph, when dying, made mention of the departure of the sons of Israel, and gave directions concerning his bones.
By faith Moses, when born, was hidden three months by his parents, because they saw that the child was fair and they feared not the king's commandment.
By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called son of Pharaoh's daughter,
choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season;
esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt; for he looked to the recompense of reward.
By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king; for he endured as seeing him who is invisible.
Through faith he kept the passover, and the sprinkling of the blood, that he who destroyed the first-born might not touch them.
By faith they passed through the Red Sea as through dry land; which the Egyptians attempted and were swallowed up.
By faith the walls of Jericho fell down, after they had been encompassed for seven days.
By faith Rahab the harlot did not perish with those who disobeyed, after having received the spies with peace.
And what shall I say more? For the time would fail me to tell of Gideon, of Barak, and Samson, and Jephthah, of David and Samuel, and the prophets;
who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promised blessings, stopped the mouths of lions,
quenched the power of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, became mighty in war, put to flight the armies of the aliens.
Women received back their dead by a resurrection; but others were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection;
and others had trial of mockings and scourgings, and also of bonds and imprisonment;
they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword; they went about in sheep-skins and goat-skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented,
of whom the world was not worthy; they wandered in deserts and mountains, and caves and the clefts of the earth.
And these all, having obtained a good report through faith, received not the promised blessing,
God having provided for us some better thing, that they might not be made perfect without us.
Therefore let us also, being surrounded by so great a cloud of witnesses, lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth easily beset us, and let us run with perseverance the race that is set before us;
looking to the author and perfecter of the faith, Jesus, who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, despising the shame, and hath sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.
For consider him that endured such contradiction by sinners against him, lest ye faint in your souls, and become weary.
Not yet have ye resisted unto blood, in your contest against sin;
and ye have forgotten the exhortation, which reasoneth with you as with sons: “My son, despise not the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when reproved by him;
for whom the Lord loveth, he chasteneth; and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth.”
It is for chastening that ye endure; God dealeth with you as with sons; for what son is he, whom the father chasteneth not?
But if ye are without chastening, of which all have been made partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons.
Furthermore, we were chastened by the fathers of our flesh, and we gave them reverence; shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of spirits, and live?
For they indeed for a few days chastened us, according as it seemed good to them; but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.
Now all chastening for the present indeed seemeth to be not joyous, but grievous; but afterward it yieldeth the peaceful fruit of righteousness to those who have been exercised thereby.
Wherefore lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees;
and make straight paths for your feet, that the lame may not be turned out of the way, but may rather be healed.
Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no one will see the Lord;
looking diligently, lest any one come short of the grace of God; lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and the many be thereby defiled;
lest there be any fornicator, or profane person as Esau, who for one meal sold even his birthright.
For ye know that when he afterward wished to inherit the blessing, he was rejected; for he found no place for repentance, though he sought it earnestly with tears.
For ye have not come to a mount that can be touched, and burning with fire, and to blackness, and darkness, and tempest,
and the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words, which voice they who heard, entreated that no more should be spoken to them;
for they could not bear that which was commanded, “If even a beast touch the mountain, it shall be stoned;” and,
so terrible was the sight, Moses said: “I exceedingly fear and tremble;”
but ye have come to Mount Zion, and to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; and to myriads, the general assembly of angels;
and to the church of the first-born, who are enrolled in heaven; and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of righteous men made perfect;
and to Jesus the mediator of a new covenant; and to a sprinkling with that blood which speaketh something better than Abel.
See that ye refuse not him who speaketh. For if they did not escape, who refused him who spoke his will on earth, much more shall not we, if we turn away from him who speaketh from heaven;
whose voice then shook the earth; but now he hath promised, saying, “Yet once more will I shake, not the earth only, but also the heaven.”
And this expression, “Yet once more,” signifieth the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that have been made, in order that those things which are not shaken may abide.
Wherefore receiving a kingdom which cannot be shaken, let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear.
For our God is a consuming fire.
Let brotherly love continue.
Be not forgetful to entertain strangers; for thereby some have entertained angels unawares.
Remember those in bonds, as bound with them; those in distress, as being yourselves also in the body.
Let marriage be honored in all respects, and the bed be undefiled; but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.
Let your disposition be without covetousness, and be content with what ye have; for he hath said, “I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee;”
so that we boldly say, “The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear; what shall man do to me?”
Remember your leaders, who spoke to you the word of God; and considering well the end of their manner of life, imitate their faith.
Jesus Christ is yesterday and to-day the same, and for ever.
Be not carried aside with various and strange teachings; for it is good that the heart be established with grace, not with meats, in which those who walked were not profited.
We have an altar, of which they cannot eat who serve the tabernacle.
For the bodies of those beasts whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high-priest are burned without the camp.
Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people by his own blood, suffered without the gate.
Let us then go forth to him without the camp, bearing his reproach;
for here we have no abiding city, but are seeking that which is to come.
Through him therefore let us offer up a sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of lips giving thanks to his name.
But works of kindness and liberality forget not; for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.
Obey your leaders, and submit yourselves to them; for they keep watch in behalf of your souls, as those who must give an account; that they may do this with joy, and not with grief; for this is not for your advantage.
Pray for us; for we are persuaded that we have a good conscience, desiring in all things to conduct ourselves well;
but I the more earnestly entreat you to do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner.
Now may the God of peace, who brought up from the dead the great Shepherd of the sheep through the blood of an everlasting covenant, even our Lord Jesus,
make you perfect in every good work, to do his will, doing in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be the glory for ever. Amen.
But I beseech you, brethren, bear with the word of my exhortation; for I have written to you in few words.
Know that the brother Timothy hath been set at liberty, with whom, if he come shortly, I will see you.
Salute all your leaders, and all the saints. Those from Italy salute you.
Grace be with you all. Amen.
James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad, greeting.
Count it all joy, my brethren, when ye fall into various temptations;
knowing that the trying of your faith worketh endurance.
But let endurance have a perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting in nothing.
But if any one of you is wanting in wisdom, let him ask of God, who giveth to all liberally, and upbraideth not; and it will be given him.
But let him ask in faith, nothing doubting; for he that doubteth is like a wave of the sea driven by the wind and tossed.
For let not that man think that he shall receive anything from the Lord,
a double-minded man as he is, unstable in all his ways.
Let the brother of low degree glory in that he is exalted;
but the rich, in that he is made low; because as the flower of the grass he will pass away.
For the sun rose with its burning heat, and withered the grass, and its flower fell off, and the beauty of its appearance perished; so also will the rich man fade away in his ways.
Blessed is the man that endureth temptation; for when he is approved, he will receive the crown of life, which He promised to them that love him.
Let no one when he is tempted, say, I am tempted by God; for God cannot be tempted with evil, and he tempteth no one.
But each one is tempted when by his own lust he is led away and enticed;
then lust, having conceived, bringeth forth sin, and sin, when completed, bringeth forth death.
Do not err, my beloved brethren.
Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of the lights, with whom is no change, nor shadow from turning.
Of his own will he begot us with the word of truth, that we should be a kind of first-fruits of his creatures.
Wherefore, my beloved brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath.
For the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God.
Wherefore put off all filthiness, and excess of wickedness, and receive with meekness the implanted word, which is able to save your souls.
But be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves.
For if any one is a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like a man beholding his natural face in a glass;
for he beholds himself, and goes away, and immediately forgets what manner of man he was.
But he who looks into the perfect law of liberty, and remains there, being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man will be blessed in his deed.
If any one thinks that he is religious, and bridles not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's religion is vain.
Pure religion and undefiled before God, the Father, is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep one's self unspotted from the world.
My brethren, hold not the faith of our Lord of glory, Jesus Christ, with respect of persons.
For if there come into your assembly a man with a gold ring, in splendid apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment,
and ye have respect to him that weareth the splendid apparel, and say, Sit thou here in a good place, and say to the poor man, Stand thou there, or, Sit under my footstool,
have ye not been partial among yourselves, and become judges with evil thoughts?
Hearken, my beloved brethren. Did not God choose the poor as to the world to be rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he promised to them that love him?
but ye have despised the poor man. Do not the rich oppress you, and do not they drag you before the judgment-seats?
Do not they blaspheme the worthy name by which ye are called?
If indeed ye fulfill the royal law, according to the scripture, “Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself,” ye do well.
But if ye have respect to persons, ye commit sin, and are convicted by the law as transgressors.
For whoever hath kept the whole law, and yet hath offended in one point, hath become guilty of all.
For he who said, “Do not commit adultery,” said also, “Do not kill.” Now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou hast become a transgressor of the law.
So speak, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law of liberty.
For the judgment shall be without mercy to him that showed no mercy. Mercy glorieth against judgment.
What doth it profit, my brethren, if any one say that he hath faith, and have not works? Can his faith save him?
If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food,
and one of you say to them, Depart in peace, be warmed and be filled, notwithstanding ye give them not the things needful for the body, what doth it profit?
So also faith, if it hath not works, is dead in itself.
But some one will say, Thou hast faith, and I have works; show me thy faith without works, and I will show thee my faith by my works.
Thou believest that God is one; thou doest well; the demons also believe, and tremble.
But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is idle?
Was not Abraham our father accepted as righteous through works, when he offered Isaac his son upon the altar?
Thou seest that faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith made perfect.
And the scripture was fulfilled, which saith, “Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him for righteousness;” and he was called the friend of God.
Ye see that by works a man is accounted as righteous, and not by faith only.
And in like manner was not also Rahab the harlot accounted as righteous through works, when she received the messengers, and sent them out another way?
For as the body without the spirit is dead, so also faith without works is dead.
My brethren, be not many teachers, knowing that we shall receive the greater condemnation.
For in many things we all offend. If any one offend not in speech, the same is a perfect man, able to bridle the whole body also.
For when we put the bits into the horses' mouths, that they may obey us, we turn about also their whole body.
Behold also the ships, which, though they are so great, and driven by fierce winds, are yet turned about with a very small rudder, whithersoever the steersman chooseth.
So also the tongue is a little member, and boasteth great things. Behold, how great a forest a little fire kindleth!
And the tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity! The tongue among our members is that which defileth the whole body, and setteth on fire the wheel of life, and is itself set on fire by hell.
For every kind of beasts and of birds, of creeping things and things in the sea, is tamed and hath been tamed by mankind;
but the tongue can no man tame; it is a restless evil, full of deadly poison.
Therewith bless we the Lord and Father, and therewith curse we men, who have been made after the likeness of God;
out of the same mouth proceedeth blessing and cursing. My brethren, these things ought not so to be.
Doth a fountain from the same opening send forth sweet water and bitter?
Can a fig-tree, my brethren, bear olives, or a vine, figs? Neither can salt water yield fresh.
Who is wise and endued with knowledge among you P let him show out of a good course of conduct his works in meekness of wisdom.
But if ye have bitter rivalry and strife in your hearts, do not glory and lie against the truth.
This wisdom is not that which descendeth from above, but earthly, sensual, devilish.
For where there is rivalry and strife, there is confusion and every evil work.
But the wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, without hypocrisy.
And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace by those who make peace.
Whence are wars and whence are fightings among you? Are they not hence, from your lusts that war in your members?
Ye lust, and have not; ye kill, and earnestly covet, and cannot obtain; ye fight and war. Ye have not, because ye ask not;
ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts.
Ye adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? Whoever therefore chooseth to be a friend of the world, becometh an enemy of God.
Do ye think that the scripture saith in vain, “Zealously doth the Spirit, which made its abode in us, long for us”?
but he giveth more grace. Wherefore he saith, “God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble.”
Submit yourselves therefore to God; resist the Devil, and he will flee from you.
Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you. Cleanse your hands, ye sinners, and purify your hearts, ye double-minded.
Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep; let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness.
Humble yourselves in the sight of the Lord, and he will exalt you.
Speak not against one another, brethren; he that speaketh against his brother, or judgeth his brother, speaketh against the law, and judgeth the law; but if thou judge the law, thou art not a doer of the law, but a judge.
One is the Lawgiver and Judge, he who is able to save, and to destroy; but who art thou, that judgest thy neighbor?
Come now, ye that say, To-day and to-morrow we will go into such a city, and spend a year there and traffic, and get gain,
(whereas ye know not what will be on the morrow; for what is your life? Ye are even a vapor, that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away;)
instead of saying, If the Lord will, we shall both live and do this or that;
but now ye glory in your boastings. All such glorying is evil.
Therefore to him that knoweth how to do good, and doeth it not, to him it is sin.
Come now, ye rich men, weep and wail for your miseries that are coming upon you.
Your riches are corrupted, and your garments are become moth-eaten;
your gold and silver is rusted, and the rust of them will be a witness against you, and will eat your flesh as fire; ye have heaped up treasure in the last days!
Behold, the hire of the laborers who reaped your fields, which is fraudulently kept back by you, crieth out; and the cries of those who reaped have entered into the ears of the Lord of Hosts.
Ye have lived in luxury on the earth, and have been given to pleasure; ye have pampered your hearts in a day of slaughter.
Ye have condemned, ye have killed the just man; he doth not resist you.
Be patient therefore, brethren, until the coming of the Lord. Behold, the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth, and is patient about it, until it hath received the early and latter rain.
Be ye also patient, establish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh.
Murmur not against each other, brethren, that ye be not judged. Behold, the Judge standeth before the door.
Take, brethren, the prophets, who spoke in the name of the Lord, for an example of affliction, and of patience.
Behold, we count those happy who have endured. Ye have heard of the patience of Job; behold also the end of the Lord, that he is very pitiful, and of tender mercy.
But above all things, my brethren, swear not; neither by heaven, nor by the earth, nor by any other oath; but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay; that ye fall not under condemnation.
Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. Is any cheerful? let him sing praise.
Is any sick among you? let him call to him the elders of the church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord.
And the prayer of faith will save the sick, and the Lord will raise him up; even if he have committed sins, it shall be forgiven him.
Confess your trespasses to one another, and pray for one another, that ye may be healed. The earnest prayer of a righteous man availeth much.
Elijah was a man of like nature with us, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain; and it rained not on the earth for three years and six months;
and again he prayed, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit.
Brethren, if any one among you be led astray from the truth, and one convert him,
let him know that he who converteth a sinner from the error of his way will save a soul from death, and will cover a multitude of sins.
Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the strangers scattered through Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,
chosen according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, in sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ: Grace and peace be multiplied to you.
Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who, according to his abundant mercy, begot us again into a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
to an inheritance imperishable, and undefiled, and unfading, reserved in heaven for you,
who are guarded by the power of God through faith unto a salvation ready to be revealed in the last time;
wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a short time, if need be, made sorrowful by manifold trials,
that the proof of your faith, much more precious than gold which perisheth, but is tried with fire, may be found unto praise and glory and honor at the manifestation of Jesus Christ;
whom, having not seen, ye love; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory,
receiving the end of your faith, the salvation of your souls.
Concerning which salvation the prophets sought earnestly and searched earnestly, who prophesied of the grace that was to come to you;
searching what or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them signified, when it testified beforehand the sufferings to come upon Christ, and the glories that were to follow;
to whom it was revealed, that not to themselves, but to you, they were ministering the things, which have now been announced to you by them that have brought the glad tidings to you by the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven; which things angels desire to look into.
Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope undoubtingly for the grace that is to be brought to you at the manifestation of Jesus Christ;
as children of obedience, not conforming yourselves to the former lusts in your ignorance;
but as he who called you is holy, be ye also holy in all your conduct;
because it is written, “Ye shall be holy, for I am holy.”
And if ye call him Father who without respect of persons judgeth according to each one's work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear;
knowing that not with perishable things, silver or gold, were ye redeemed from your vain manner of life received by tradition from your fathers,
but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot;
who was foreknown indeed before the foundation of the world, but manifested in these last times for you,
who through him have faith in God, who raised him from the dead and gave him glory, so that your faith and hope are in God.
Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth unto unfeigned brotherly love, love one another from the heart, fervently;
being born again, not of perishable seed, but of imperishable, through the word of God, which liveth and abideth.
Because, “All flesh is as grass, and all its glory as the flower of grass; the grass withered, and its flower fell off;
but the word of the Lord abideth for ever;” and this is the word which was preached to you.
Laying aside therefore all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and all slander,
as new-born babes, desire the spiritual, pure milk, that ye may grow thereby to salvation;
if indeed ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious.
To whom coming, a living stone, rejected indeed by men, but in the sight of God chosen, honored,
be ye yourselves also, as living stones, built up, a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
Because it is contained in the Scripture: “Behold, I lay in Zion a chief corner-stone, chosen, honored; and he that believeth in him shall not be put to shame.”
To you therefore who believe, is the honor; but to the disobedient, “the stone which the builders rejected, the same hath become the corner-stone,”
and “a stone of stumbling, and a rock to strike against;” even to those who stumble, being disobedient to the word; to which they were also appointed.
But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for a possession, that ye may show forth the praises of him who called you out of darkness into his wonderful light;
who once were not a people, but are now the people of God; who had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.
Beloved, I exhort you, as sojourners and strangers, to abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul;
having your manner of life among the gentiles honorable; that, whereas they speak against you as evil-doers, they may by your good works, which they behold, glorify God in the day of visitation.
Submit yourselves therefore to every human institution for the Lord's sake; whether to the king, as supreme;
or to governors, as being sent by him for the punishment of evil-doers, and the praise of those who do well.
For so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men;
as free, and not using your freedom for a cloak of wickedness, but as servants of God.
Honor all men; love the brotherhood; fear God; honor the king.
Servants, be subject to your masters with all fear, not only to the good and considerate, but also to the perverse.
For this is acceptable, if any one on account of a sense of duty to God endureth hardships, suffering wrongfully.
For what glory is it, if, when ye are beaten for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently [[it is glory]]; for this is acceptable with God.
For to this ye were called; because even Christ suffered for us, leaving you an example, that ye should follow his steps;
who committed no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth;
who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered did not threaten, but committed himself to him that judgeth righteously;
who himself bore our sins in his own body on the cross, that we, having died to our sins, should live to righteousness; by whose stripes ye were healed.
For ye were going astray like sheep; but ye have now returned to the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls.
In like manner, ye wives, be in subjection to your own husbands, that even if any obey not the word, they may without the word be won by the behavior of the wives,
when they behold your chaste behavior coupled with fear.
Whose adorning, let it not be the out yard adorning of braiding the hair, and of wearing golden ornaments, or of putting on apparel;
but the hidden man of the heart, in that which is imperishable, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price.
For in this manner in the old time the holy women also, who hoped in God, adorned themselves, being in subjection to their own husbands;
as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord; whose daughters ye have become, if ye do well, and fear no alarm.
Dwell likewise, O husband, with thy wife according to knowledge, as with the weaker vessel, giving her honor as being heir with thee of the grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered.
Finally, be, all of one mind, have fellow feeling, love as brethren, be compassionate, be humble;
not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing; but, on the contrary, blessing the evil-doer; because for this end ye were called, that ye might inherit blessing.
“For he that would love life, and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips from speaking guile;
let him turn away from evil, and do good; let him seek peace, and pursue it.
For the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are toward their supplication; but the face of the Lord is against those who do evil.”
And who is he that shall harm you, if ye are followers of that which is good?
But if ye even suffer for righteousness' sake, happy are ye. And be not afraid at their terrors, nor alarmed;
but sanctify Christ as Lord in your hearts. And be ready always to give an answer to every one that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you, but with meekness and fear;
having a good conscience, that, wherein ye are evil spoken of, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conduct in Christ.
For it is better, if it be the will of God, that ye suffer for well-doing, than for evil-doing.
For Christ also suffered once for sins, the righteous one for the unrighteous, that he might bring you to God, being put to death in the flesh, but made alive in the spirit;
in which also he went and preached to the spirits in prison,
who were disobedient in times past, when the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was preparing, wherein a few, that is, eight souls, were saved by water;
which in its antitype, baptism, is now saving you,—not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the earnest seeking for a good conscience toward God,—by the resurrection of Jesus Christ;
who is on the right hand of God, having gone into heaven, angels and authorities and powers being made subject to him.
Christ then having suffered in the flesh, do ye also arm yourselves with the same mind; for he that hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin;
that ye may no longer live the remaining time in the flesh after the lusts of men, but after the will of God.
For sufficient is the time past to have wrought the will of the gentiles, when ye walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revelings, carousings, and abominable idolatries;
at which they are astonished that ye run not with them to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of you;
who shall give account to him that is ready to judge the living and the dead.
For to this end was the gospel preached also to the dead, that they might indeed be judged according to men in the flesh, but might live according to God in the spirit.
But the end of all things is at hand; be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer.
And above all things have fervent love among yourselves; for love covereth a multitude of sins.
Be hospitable to one another without grudging.
According as each one hath received a gift, minister the same to one another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God.
If any one speak, let him speak as uttering the oracles of God; if any minister, let him do it as from the ability which God giveth; that in all things God may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory and the dominion for ever and ever. Amen.
Beloved, be not surprised at the fiery trial which is taking place among you to prove you, as though a strange thing were befalling you;
but, in so far as ye share in Christ's sufferings, rejoice; that also at the manifestation of his glory ye may rejoice with exceeding joy.
If ye are reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye for the Spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you.
For let none of you suffer as a murderer, or a thief, or an evil-doer, or as a busybody in other men's matters;
but if as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God in this name.
For the time is come for judgment to begin at the house of God; but if it first begin with us, what will be the end of those who obey not the gospel of God?
and “if the righteous scarcely is saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?”
Wherefore let those who suffer according to the will of God commit the keeping of their souls to him in well-doing, as to a faithful Creator.
The elders among you I exhort, who am a fellow-elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, who am also a sharer in the glory that is to be revealed;
tend the flock of God which is among you, overseeing it, not by constraint, but willingly; not for base gain, but with ready mind;
not as lording it over your allotted charge, but being examples to the flock;
and when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye will receive the crown of glory that fadeth not away.
In like manner, ye younger men, submit yourselves to the elder; and all of you be clothed with humility toward each other; for “God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble.”
Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time;
casting all your care upon him, because he careth for you.
Be sober, be watchful. Your adversary the Devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour;
whom resist, steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same sufferings are being accomplished in your brethren in the world.
But the God of all grace, who called you to his everlasting glory in Christ Jesus, will, after ye have suffered a while, himself make you perfect, establish, strengthen, settle you.
To him be the dominion for ever. Amen.
By Silvanus, the faithful brother as I think, I have written to you in few words, exhorting, and testifying that this is the true grace of God wherein ye stand.
The church in Babylon, chosen with you, saluteth you; and Mark, my son.
Salute one another with a kiss of love. Peace to you all that are in Christ.
Symeon Peter, a servant and apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who have obtained like precious faith with us through the righteousness of our God, and the Saviour Jesus Christ:
Grace and peace be multiplied to you in the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord.
Seeing that his Divine power hath given to us all things that pertain to life and godliness, through the knowledge of him who called us by his own glory and goodness;
through which he hath given us exceedingly great and precious promises, that by these ye may become partakers of the Divine nature, having escaped from the corruption that is in the world through lust;
even for this very reason, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge,
and to knowledge self-control, and to self-control endurance, and to endurance godliness,
and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness love.
For if these things are in you and abound, they make you neither inactive nor unfruitful in gaining the full knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
But he that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath forgotten that he was cleansed from his old sins.
Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure; for if ye do these things, ye will never fall.
For in this way the entrance will be richly furnished you into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
Wherefore I shall be careful always to remind you of these things, though ye know them, and are established in the truth that is with you.
Yea, I think it right, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up by reminding you;
knowing that I must soon put off my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ declared to me.
Moreover I shall endeavor that at all times ye may be able, after my departure, to call these things to mind.
For we did not follow cunningly devised fables, when we made known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but had been made eye-witnesses of his majesty.
For he received from God the Father honor and glory, when such a voice as this was borne to him from the excellent glory: “This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased.”
And this voice we heard borne from heaven when we were with him in the holy mount.
And we have more sure the prophetic word, to which ye do well in taking heed, as to a lamp shining in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day-star arise in your hearts;
knowing this first, that no prophecy of the Scripture cometh from private interpretation.
For prophecy never came by the will of man; but moved by the Holy Spirit, men spoke from God.
But there arose false prophets also among the people, as there will be false teachers among you also, who will stealthily bring in destructive factions, even denying the Lord that bought them; bringing upon themselves swift destruction.
And many will follow their dissolute ways, by reason of whom the way of truth will be evil spoken of;
and in covetousness will they with feigned words make merchandise of you; for whom the judgment long ago ordained lingereth not, and their destruction slumbereth not.
For if God spared not angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them over to chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment;
and spared not the old world, but saved Noah with seven others, a preacher of righteousness, when he brought in the flood upon the world of the ungodly;
and turning into ashes the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, condemned them to overthrow, making them an example for those who in after time should live ungodly;
and delivered righteous Lot, distressed by the lewd conduct of the lawless men;
(for that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing tormented his righteous soul from day to day with their lawless deeds;)
the Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to reserve the unrighteous under punishment to the day of judgment;
but chiefly those who walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and despise dominion. Presumptuous, self-willed, they are not afraid to rail at dignities;
whereas angels, who are greater in strength and power, bring not against them a railing accusation;
but these, as brute beasts, by nature born to be taken and destroyed, railing at things which they understand not, shall even perish in their own corruption,
receiving the wages of unrighteousness. Counting it pleasure to riot in the day-time, spots and blemishes, reveling in their deceits while they feast with you,
having eyes full of an adulteress, and that cannot cease from sin, alluring unstable souls, having a heart exercised in covetousness, children of a curse,
they have forsaken the right way, and have gone astray, following the way of Balaam the son of Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness,
but was rebuked for his iniquity; the dumb ass, speaking with man's voice, restrained the madness of the prophet.
These are wells without water, and mists driven by a tempest; for whom the blackness of darkness is reserved.
For speaking great swelling words of vanity, they allure in the lusts of the flesh, by dissolute ways, such as were in some measure escaping from those who live in error;
promising them liberty, while they themselves are slaves of corruption; for by what a man is overcome, by the same is he also brought into bondage.
For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein and overcome, the last state is worse with them than the first.
For it would have been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after having known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered to them.
It hath happened to them according to the true proverb, The dog returned to his own vomit; and, The sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire.
This second letter, beloved, I now write to you, in both which I stir up your pure minds by putting you in remembrance;
that ye may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets, and of the commandment of the Lord and Saviour by your apostles;
knowing this first, that there will come in the last days open scoffers following their own lusts,
and saying, Where is his promised coming? for, from the time when the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as then, and as they have continued from the beginning of the creation.
For of this they are willingly ignorant, that of old by the word of God there were heavens, and an earth formed out of the water and by the water,
by means of which the world that then was, being overflowed with water, perished;
but the present heavens and the present earth are by his word kept in store, reserved for fire against the day of judgment and the perdition of ungodly men.
But forget not, beloved, this one thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.
The Lord is not tardy concerning his promise, as some men count tardiness; but is long-suffering toward you, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.
But the day of the Lord will come as a thief; in which the heavens will pass away with a great noise, and the elements will melt with fervent heat, and the earth and the works that are therein will be burned up.
Seeing that all these things are thus to be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in holy conduct and godliness,
looking for and hastening the coming of the day of God, by reason of which the heavens being on fire will be dissolved, and the elements will melt with fervent heat!
But, according to his promise, we look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.
Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for these things, be diligent that ye may be found without spot and blameless before him in peace,
and account the long-suffering of our Lord salvation; as also our beloved brother Paul, according to the wisdom given to him, wrote to you,
as also in all his letters, speaking in them of these things; in which things are some that are hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as also the other Scriptures, to their own destruction.
Do ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things beforehand, beware lest, being led away with the error of the lawless, ye fall from your own steadfastness.
But grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. To him be the glory, both now and for ever.
That which was from the beginning, that which we have heard, that which we have seen with our eyes, that which we looked upon, and our hands handled, concerning the word of life,
—and the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and announce to you the everlasting life, which was with the Father, and was manifested to us,—
that which we have seen and heard we announce to you, that ye also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.
And these things we write to you, that your joy may be full.
And this is the message which we have heard from him, and announce to you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.
If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in the darkness, we lie, and do not the truth;
but if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus his Son cleanseth us from all sin.
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.
My children, these things I write to you, that ye may not sin. And if any one have sinned, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.
And he is a propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also for the whole world.
And hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his commandments.
He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.
But whoever keepeth his word, truly in him is the love of God perfected. Hereby we know that we are in him.
He that saith he abideth in him ought himself also so to walk, even as he walked.
Beloved, I write no new commandment to you, but an old commandment, which ye have had from the beginning. The old commandment is the word which ye have heard.
Again, a new commandment I write to you, which thing is true in him, and in you; because the darkness is passing away, and the true light now shineth.
He that saith he is in the light, and hateth his brother, is in the darkness until now.
He that loveth his brother abideth in the light, and there is no occasion of stumbling in him;
but he that hateth his brother is in the darkness, and walketh in the darkness, and knoweth not whither he goeth, because the darkness hath blinded his eyes.
I write to you, my children, because your sins have been forgiven you for his name's sake.
I write to you, fathers, because ye know him that was from the beginning. I write to you, young men, because ye have overcome the Evil One. I have written to you, my children, because ye know the Father.
I have written to you, fathers, because ye know him that was from the beginning. I have written to you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abideth in you, and ye have overcome the Evil One.
Love not the world, nor the things in the world. If any one loveth the world, the love of the Father is not in him;
because all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world.
And the world is passing away, and the lust thereof; but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever.
My children, the last time is come; and as ye have heard that Antichrist is coming, even now there are many antichrists; whereby we know that the last time is come.
They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would have remained with us; but they went out, that they might be made manifest that they are not all of us.
And ye have an anointing from the Holy One, and know all things.
I have not written to you because ye know not the truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth.
Who is the liar, but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? This is the antichrist, who denieth the Father and the Son.
Whoever denieth the Son, the same hath not the Father; he that acknowledgeth the Son hath also the Father.
As for you, let that which ye have heard from the beginning abide in you. If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall abide in you, ye also will abide in the Son, and in the Father.
And this is the promise which he himself promised us, even the life everlasting.
These things I have written to you concerning those who seduce you.
And the anointing which ye yourselves received from him abideth in you, and ye have no need that any one teach you; but as his anointing teacheth you concerning all things, and is truth, and is not a lie, even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him.
And now, my children, abide in him; that when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming.
If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one also that doeth righteousness hath been born of him.
Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called children of God l For this cause the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not.
Beloved, now are we children of God, and it hath not yet been manifested what we shall be. We know that, when it shall be manifested, we shall be like him; because we shall see him as he is.
And every one that hath this hope in Him purifieth himself, even as He is pure.
Whoever committeth sin transgresseth thereby the law; for sin is a transgression of the law.
And ye know that he was manifested to take away sins; and in him is no sin.
Whoever abideth in him sinneth not; whoever sinneth hath not seen him, nor known him.
My children, let no one deceive you; he that doeth righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous.
He that committeth sin is of the Devil; for the Devil sinneth from the beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil.
Whoever hath been born of God doth not commit sin, because his seed abideth in him; and he cannot sin, because he hath been born of God.
In this are manifest the children of God and the children of the Devil. Whoever doeth not righteousness is not of God, and he that loveth not his brother.
For this is the message that ye have heard from the beginning, that we should love one another;
not as Cain was of the Evil One, and slew his brother. And wherefore did he slay him? Because his own works were evil, and his brother's righteous.
Wonder not, brethren, if the world hateth you.
We know that we have passed out of death into life, because we love the brethren; he that loveth not abideth in death.
Whoever hateth his brother is a murderer; and ye know that no murderer hath everlasting life abiding in him.
Herein we know love, in that he laid down his life for us; and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.
But whoever hath this world's goods, and seeth his brother having need, and shutteth up his compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him?
My children, let us not love in word, nor in tongue, but in deed and in truth.
And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him;
because if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and knoweth all things.
Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, we have confidence toward God;
and whatever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do the things that are pleasing in his sight.
And this is his commandment, that we should believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and should love one another, as he gave commandment.
And he that keepeth his commandments abideth in him, and he in him; and hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit, which he gave us.
Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of God; because many false prophets have gone forth into the world.
Hereby ye know the Spirit of God: Every spirit that acknowledgeth that Jesus Christ hath come in the flesh, is of God.
And every spirit that doth not acknowledge Jesus, is not of God; and this is that spirit of Antichrist, of which ye have heard that it is to come, and even now it is already in the world.
Ye are of God, my children, and have overcome them; because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world.
They are of the world; therefore they speak of the world, and the world heareth them.
We are of God; he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of God heareth us not. Hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error.
Beloved, let us love one another; for love is from God, and every one that loveth hath been born of God, and knoweth God;
he that loveth not hath not known God; for God is love.
In this was manifested the love of God in regard to us, that God hath sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we may live through him.
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a propitiation for our sins.
Beloved, if God so loved us, we also ought to love one another.
No one hath ever seen God. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us.
Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit.
And we have seen and bear witness, that the Father hath sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world.
Whoever acknowledgeth that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God.
And we have known and believed the love that God hath in regard to us. God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him.
Herein hath love been perfected with us, that we have confidence in the day of judgment; because as he is, so are we in this world.
There is no fear in love, but perfect love casteth out fear; because fear hath torment; and he that feareth is not made perfect in love.
We love, because he first loved us.
If any one saith, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar; for he that loveth not his brother, whom he hath seen, how can he love God, whom he hath not seen?
And this commandment we have from him, that he who loveth God love also his brother.
Whoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ hath been born of God; and every one that loveth him that begat, loveth also him that hath been begotten of him.
By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God, and do his commandments.
For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments; and his commandments are not burdensome,
because whatever is born of God overcometh the world; and this is the victory that hath overcome the world, even our faith.
Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?
This is he who came by water and blood, Jesus Christ; not in the water only, but in the water and in the blood; and the Spirit is that which beareth witness, because the Spirit is truth.

For there are three that bear witness, the Spirit, and the water, and the blood; and these three agree in one.
If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater; for this is the witness of God, that he hath borne witness concerning his Son.
He that believeth in the Son of God hath the witness within him; he that believeth not God hath made him a liar, because he hath not believed in the witness which God hath borne concerning his Son.
And this is the witness, that God gave to us everlasting life, and this life is in his Son.
He that hath the Son hath the life; he that hath not the Son of God hath not the life.
These things have I written to you, that ye may know that ye who believe in the name of the Son of God have everlasting life.
And this is the confidence which we have toward him, that, if we ask anything according to his will, he heareth us;
and if we know that he heareth us, whatever we ask, we know that we have the requests which we have asked of him.
If any one see his brother sin a sin not unto death, he shall ask, and shall give him life,—to those who sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death; for that I do not say that he shall pray.
All unrighteousness is sin; and there is a sin not unto death.
We know that whoever hath been born of God sinneth not; but he that is born of God keepeth himself, and the Evil One toucheth him not.
We know that we are of God, and the whole world lieth under the dominion of the Evil One.
And we know that the Son of God hath come, and hath given us understanding, that we may know the True One; and we are in the True One, in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and everlasting life.
My children, keep yourselves from idols.
The elder to the elect Cyria, and to her children, whom I love in truth, and not I only, but also all that know the truth,—
for the sake of the truth which abideth in us, and will be with us for ever.
Grace, mercy, peace shall be with you from God the Father, and from Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and love.
I rejoiced greatly, that I found some of thy children walking in truth, as we received commandment from the Father.
And now I beseech thee, Cyria, not as writing to thee a new commandment, but that which we have had from the beginning, that we love one another.
And this is love, that we walk according to his commandments. This is the commandment, as ye have heard from the beginning, that ye should walk in it.
For many deceivers went out into the world, who do not acknowledge Jesus Christ coming in the flesh; this is the deceiver and the antichrist.
Look to yourselves, that ye lose not the things which ye wrought, but receive a full reward.
Whoever goeth beyond, and abideth not in the teaching of Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in the teaching, he hath both the Son and the Father.
If any one cometh to you, and bringeth not this teaching, receive him not into your house, and do not bid him good speed.
For he that biddeth him good speed taketh part in his evil deeds.
Having many things to write to you, I would not write with paper and ink; but I hope to come to you, and to speak face to face, that our joy may be full.
The children of thy elect sister salute thee.
The elder to Gaius the beloved, whom I love in truth.
Beloved, in all things I pray that thou mayst prosper and be in health, as thy soul prospereth.
For I rejoiced greatly, when brethren came and bore witness to thy truth, as thou walkest in truth.
I have no greater joy than this, to hear that my children walk in the truth.
Beloved, thou doest a faithful thing whatever thou doest to the brethren, and that to strangers,
who bore witness of thy love before the church; whom if thou send forward on their journey in a manner worthy of God, thou wilt do well.
For in behalf of the Name they went forth, taking nothing of the gentiles.
We therefore ought to sustain such persons, that we may be fellow-workers for the truth.
I wrote something to the church; but Diotrephes, who loveth to have the pre-eminence among them, receiveth us not.
Wherefore, if I come, I will bring to remembrance his deeds which he doeth, prating against us with malicious words; and not content therewith, he himself doth not receive the brethren, and those that would he forbiddeth, and casteth them out of the church.
Beloved, do not imitate that which is evil, but that which is good. He that doeth good is of God; he that doeth evil hath not seen God.
To Demetrius testimony hath been borne by all, and by the truth itself; yea, we also bear witness, and ye know that our witness is true.
I had many things to write to thee, but I do not wish to write to thee with ink and pen;
but I hope to see thee immediately, and we shall speak face to face. Peace be to thee. The friends salute thee. Salute the friends by name.

Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to the called, loved in God the Father and kept by Jesus Christ:
Mercy and peace and love be multiplied to you.
Beloved, while giving all diligence to write to you, I found it necessary to write to you concerning the common salvation, exhorting you to contend earnestly for the faith which was once delivered to the saints.
For there have stealthily crept in certain men who were of old appointed beforehand for this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into wantonness, and denying the only Sovereign, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
But I wish to remind you as once knowing it all, that the Lord, having saved the people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed those who believed not;
and the angels which kept not their principality, but left their own dwelling-place, he hath kept in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day;
even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them, in like manner with them giving themselves over to fornication, and going away after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of everlasting fire.
Yet in like manner these dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and rail at dignities.
Yet Michael the archangel, when contending with the Devil he disputed about the body of Moses, dared not bring against him a railing accusation, but said: The Lord rebuke thee.
But these rail at the things which they know not; but what things they understand naturally, as brute beasts, in these they corrupt themselves.
Woe to them! for they have gone in the way of Cain, and rushed on in the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Korah.
These are the rocks in your feasts of love, feasting together without fear, feeding only themselves; clouds without water, carried away by winds; trees in late autumn, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots;
raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame; wandering stars, for whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.
Yea, and against these Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied, saying, “Behold, the Lord cometh in the midst of his holy myriads,
to execute judgment upon all, and to convict all the ungodly among them of all the deeds of their ungodliness which they committed; and of all the hard things which ungodly sinners spoke against him.”
These are murmurers, complaining of their lot, walking according to their own lusts; and their mouth speaketh great swelling words; admiring men's persons, for the sake of profit.
But do ye, beloved, remember the words which were before spoken by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ;
that they told you that at the last time there would be scoffers, walking according to their own ungodly lusts.
These are they that separate themselves, sensual, not having the Spirit.
But do ye, beloved, building up yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit,
keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.
And some rebuke when they contend; and others save, snatching them out of the fire; and on others have compassion
with fear, hating even the garment spotted by the flesh.
But to him that is able to keep them from falling, and to present them faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy,
to the only God our Saviour, through Jesus Christ our Lord, is glory, majesty, dominion and power, before all time, and now, and for ever. Amen.
The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to show to his servants what must shortly come to pass; and he sent and signified it by his angel to his servant John;
who bore witness of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ,—of whatever he saw.
Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of the prophecy, and keep the things written therein; for the time is at hand.
John to the seven churches which are in Asia: Grace be to you, and peace, from him who is, and who was, and who is to come; and from the seven spirits which are before his throne;
and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the first-born of the dead, and the ruler of the kings of the earth. To him that loveth us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood,
and made us a kingdom, priests to God his Father, to him be the glory and the dominion for ever. Amen.
Behold, he cometh with the clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they who pierced him; and all the tribes of the earth shall wail because of him. Even so, Amen.
I am the Alpha and the Omega, saith the Lord God, he who is, and who was, and who is to come, the Almighty.
I John, your brother, and companion in the affliction and kingdom and endurance in Jesus, was in the isle that is called Patmos, on account of the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus.
I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day; and I heard behind me a loud voice, as of a trumpet,
saying: What thou seest, write in a book, and send it to the seven churches; to Ephesus, and to Smyrna, and to Pergamus, and to Thyatira, and to Sardes, and to Philadelphia, and to Laodicea.
And I turned to see the voice that was speaking with me; and having turned, I saw seven golden candlesticks,
and in the midst of the candlesticks one like to a son of man, clothed with a garment reaching down to the feet, and girded at the breasts with a golden girdle.
His head and his hairs were white as white wool, as snow; and his eyes were as a flame of fire;
and his feet were like fine brass, as if burning in a furnace; and his voice was as the sound of many waters.
And he had in his right hand seven stars; and out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword; and his countenance was as the sun shineth in his strength.
And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead; and he laid his right hand on me, saying, Fear not; I am the first and the last,
and he that liveth; and I was dead, and behold, I am alive for evermore; and I have the keys of death and the underworld.
Write therefore the things which thou sawest, and the things which are, and the things which shall be after these;
the mystery of the seven stars which thou sawest in my right hand, and the seven golden candlesticks. The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches; and the seven candlesticks are the seven churches.
To the angel of the church in Ephesus write: These things saith he that holdeth the seven stars in his right hand, who walketh in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks:
I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy endurance, and that thou canst not bear evil men; and thou didst try those who say they are apostles, and are not, and didst find them liars;
and thou hast endurance, and hast borne on account of my name, and hast not become weary.
But I have this against thee, that thou hast left thy first love.
Remember therefore whence thou hast fallen, and repent, and do the first works; or else I will come to thee, and will remove thy candlestick out of its place, unless thou repent.
But this thou hast, that thou hatest the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the churches. To him that overcometh I will give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the paradise of my God.
And to the angel of the church in Smyrna write: These things saith the first and the last, who was dead, and lived again:
I know thy affliction and poverty, (but thou art rich,) and the blasphemy of those who say they are Jews, and are not, but are a synagogue of Satan.
Fear not the things which thou art about to suffer. Behold, now, the Devil is about to cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried; and ye will have tribulation ten days. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life.
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the churches. He that overcometh shall not be hurt by the second death.
And to the angel of the church in Pergamus write: These things saith he that hath the sharp two-edged sword:
I know where thou dwellest, where the throne of Satan is; and thou holdest fast my name, and didst not deny my faith, even in the days in which Antipas was my witness, my faithful one, who was slain among you, where Satan dwelleth.
But I have a few things against thee; thou hast there them that hold the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to put a stumbling-block in the way of the sons of Israel, and to eat things sacrificed to idols, and to commit fornication.
So thou also hast men holding the teaching of the Nicolaitans, in like manner.
Repent therefore; or else I will come to thee quickly, and will make war with them with the sword of my mouth.
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the churches. To him that overcometh, I will give of the hidden manna, and will give him a white stone, and on the stone a new name written, which no one knoweth but he that receiveth it.
And to the angel of the church in Thyatira write: These things saith the Son of God, who hath his eyes like a flame of fire, and his feet are like fine brass:
I know thy works, and love, and faith, and service, and thy endurance, and that thy last works are more than the first.
But I have this against thee, that thou sufferest thy wife Jezebel, who calleth herself a prophetess, and she teacheth and seduceth my servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed to idols.
And I gave her time to repent, and she will not repent of her fornication.
Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and those who together with her commit adultery into great distress, unless they repent of her deeds.
And her children I will slay with death; and all the churches shall know that I am he who searcheth the reins and hearts; and I will give to every one of you according to your works.
But to you I say, the rest who are in Thyatira, as many as have not this teaching, such as have not known “the depths” of Satan, as they speak; I put upon you no other burden;
but that which ye have, hold fast till I come.
And he that overcometh, and he that keepeth my works to the end, to him I will give authority over the nations,—
and he shall rule them with a rod of iron, as the vessels of a potter are broken to shivers,—as I also have received of my Father.
And I will give him the morning star.
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the churches.
And to the angel of the church in Sardes write: These things saith he who hath the seven spirits of God, and the seven stars: I know thy works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, and art dead.
Be watchful, and strengthen the remaining things, that were ready to die; for I have not found thy works perfect before my God.
Remember therefore how thou hast received and heard, and keep those things, and repent. If therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come as a thief, and thou shalt not know at what hour I will come upon thee.
But thou hast a few names in Sardes which have not defiled their garments; and they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy.
He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white garments; and I will not blot out his name from the book of life, and I will acknowledge his name before my Father, and before his angels.
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the churches.
And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write: These things saith he who is holy, he who is true, he who hath the key of David; he who openeth, and no one shall shut; and shutteth, and no one shall open:
I know thy works; behold, I have set before thee an open door, which no one can shut; for thou hast little power, and yet hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name.
Behold, I will make those of the synagogue of Satan, who say they are Jews, and are not, but do lie,—behold, I will make them to come and bow down before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee.
Because thou hast kept my injunction of endurance, I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which is about to come upon the whole world, to try those who dwell upon the earth.
I come quickly; hold fast that which thou hast, that no one may take thy crown.
He that overcometh, I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall nevermore go out; and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from my Gods and I will write upon him my new name.
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the churches.
And to the angel of the church in Laodicea write: These things saith the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation of God:
I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot; I would thou wert cold or hot.
So then, because thou art lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold, I am about to vomit thee out of my mouth.
Because thou sayest, I am rich, and have gotten wealth, and have need of nothing, and knowest not that thou art the wretched and the pitiable one, and poor, and blind, and naked,
I advise thee to buy of me gold refined by fire, that thou mayst be rich; and white garments, that thou mayst be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness may not be made manifest; and eye-salve to anoint thine eyes, that thou mayst see.
As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. Be zealous therefore, and repent.
Behold, I stand at the door, and knock; if any one hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.
He that overcometh, I will give to him to sit with me on my throne, even as I also overcame, and sat down with my Father on his throne.
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith to the churches,
After this I saw, and lo! an open door in heaven; and the former voice, which I heard as of a trumpet speaking with me, said, Come up hither, and I will show thee what things must take place after these.
Immediately I was in the Spirit; and lo! a throne was set ha heaven, and one sat on the throne.
And he who sat was in appearance like a jasper stone and a sardius; and there was a rainbow around the throne like in appearance to an emerald.
And around the throne were twenty-four thrones; and upon the thrones I saw the twenty-four elders sitting, clothed in white garments, and on their heads crowns of gold.
And out of the throne proceed lightnings, and voices and thunders; and there were seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, which are the seven spirits of God;
and before the throne there was as it were a sea of glass like to crystal; and in the middle before the throne, and around the throne, were four living creatures full of eyes before and behind.
And the first living creature was like a lion, and the second living creature like a calf, and the third living creature had the face of a man, and the fourth living creature was like a flying eagle.
And the four living creatures, having each of them six wings, around and within are full of eyes; and they have no rest day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, who was, and who is, and who is to come.
And when the living creatures give glory, and honor, and thanksgiving to him that sitteth on the throne, who liveth for ever and ever,
the twenty-four elders fall down before him that sitteth on the throne, and worship him that liveth for ever and ever, and cast their crowns before the throne, saying,
Worthy art thou, O Lord, and our God, to receive the glory, and the honor, and the power; for thou didst create all things, and on account of thy will they were, and were created.
And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne a book written within and without, sealed fast with seven seals.
And I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is worthy to open the book, and to loose its seals?
And no one in heaven, nor on the earth, nor under the earth, was able to open the book, nor to look thereon.
And I wept much, because no one was found worthy to open the book, nor to look thereon.
And one of the elders saith to me, Weep not; behold, the Lion that is of the tribe of Judah, the shoot from David, conquered, he that openeth the book, and its seven seals.
And I saw, between the throne and the four living creatures and the elders, a Lamb standing, as if it had been slain, having seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God sent forth into all the earth.
And he came and took the book out of the right hand of him that sat upon the throne.
And when he had taken the book, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb, having each one a harp, and golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints.
And they sing a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open its seals; for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed to God by thy blood men out of every tribe and tongue and people and nation,
and hast made them a kingdom and priests, and they reign on the earth.
And I saw, and I heard the voice of many angels around the throne and the living creatures and the elders; and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands;
saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive the power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing.
And every creature which is in heaven, and those which are on the earth and under the earth, and on the sea, and the things in them, I heard them all saying, To him that sitteth upon the throne, and to the Lamb, be the blessing, and the honor, and the glory, and the dominion, for ever and ever.
And the four living creatures said Amen. And the elders fell down and worshipped.
And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seven seals, and I heard, as it were the voice of thunder, one of the four living creatures saying, Come!
And I saw, and lo! a white horse, and he that sat on him, having a bow; and a crown was given to him, and he went forth conquering, and to conquer.
And when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature saying, Come!
And there went forth another horse, that was red; and to him that sat thereon it was given to take peace from the earth, and that men should slay one another; and there was given to him a great sword.
And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature saying, Come! And I saw, and lo! a black horse, and he that sat on him, having a pair of scales in his hand.
And I heard a voice in the midst of the four living creatures, saying, A quart of wheat for a denary, and three quarts of barley for a denary; and, Hurt not the oil and the wine.
And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the fourth living creature saying, Come!
And I saw, and lo! a pale horse, and the name of him that sat on him was Death; and the underworld was following with him; and there was given to them power over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with famine, and with death, and by the wild beasts of the earth.
And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain on account of the word of God, and on account of the testimony which they had borne;
and they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, the holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on those who dwell on the earth?
And a white robe was given to them, and it was said to them that they should rest yet for a time, until their fellow-servants also and their brethren, that were about to be killed as they were, should finish their course.
And I saw when he had opened the sixth seal, and there was a great earthquake; and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the whole moon became as blood,
and the stars of heaven fell to the earth, as a fig-tree casteth its untimely figs when shaken by a great wind;
and the heaven passed off, as a scroll when it is rolled up, and every mountain and island were moved out of their places;
and the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the chief captains, and the rich men, and the strong men, and every bondman and freeman hid themselves in the caves and in the rocks of the mountains;
and they say to the mountains and the rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb;
for the great day of his wrath is come, and who is able to stand?
And after this, I saw four angels standing on the four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that no wind should blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree.
And I saw another angel coming up from the rising of the sun, having the seal of the living God; and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels, to whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea,
saying, Hurt not the earth, nor the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God on their foreheads.
And I heard the number of the sealed. A hundred and forty-four thousand were sealed out of all the tribes of the sons of Israel.
Out of the tribe of Judah were sealed twelve thousand; out of the tribe of Reuben, twelve thousand; out of the tribe of Gad, twelve thousand;
out of the tribe of Asher, twelve thousand; out of the tribe of Naphtali, twelve thousand; out of the tribe of Manasseh, twelve thousand;
out of the tribe of Simeon, twelve thousand; out of the tribe of Levi, twelve thousand; out of the tribe of Issachar, twelve thousand;
out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve thousand; out of the tribe of Joseph, twelve thousand; out of the tribe of Benjamin twelve thousand were sealed.
After these things I saw, and lo! a great multitude, which no one could number, out of every nation and all tribes and peoples and tongues, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, clothed in white robes, and palms in their hands.
And they cry with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God who sitteth upon the throne, and to the Lamb.
And all the angels were standing around the throne and the elders and the four living creatures, and they fell before the throne on their faces, and worshipped God,
saying, Amen; the blessing, and the glory, and the wisdom, and the thanksgiving, and the honor, and the power, and the might, be to our God, for ever and ever.
And one of the elders answered, saying to me, These who are clothed in the white robes, who are they, and whence came they?
And I said to him, My lord, thou knowest. And he said to me, These are they who come out of the great tribulation, and they washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple; and he that sitteth on the throne will make his abode with them.
They shall hunger no more, nor thirst any more; neither shall the sun fall upon them, nor any burning heat;
for the Lamb who is in the midst before the throne is a shepherd to them, and leadeth them to the fountains of the waters of life; and God will wipe away every tear from their eyes.
And when be had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven about haft an hour.
And I saw the seven angels who stand before God; and there were given to them seven trumpets.
And another angel came, and stood at the altar, having a golden censer; and there was given to him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all the saints upon the golden altar which was before the throne.
And the smoke of the incense went up with the prayers of the saints before God out of the angel's hand.
And the angel took the censer, and filled it from the fire of the altar, and cast it upon the earth; and there followed thunders, and lightnings, and voices, and an earthquake.
And the seven angels who had the seven trumpets prepared themselves to sound.
And the first sounded, and there followed hail and fire mingled with blood, and they were cast upon the earth; and the third part of the earth was burnt up, and the third part of the trees was burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up.
And the second angel sounded, and as it were a great mountain burning with fire was cast into the sea;
and the third part of the sea became blood; and the third part of the creatures which were in the sea, and had life, died; and the third part of the ships were destroyed.
And the third angel sounded, and there fell from heaven a great star, burning as a torch, and it fell upon the third part of the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters.
And the name of the star is called Wormwood; and the third part of the waters became wormwood; and many men died of the waters, because they were made bitter.
And the fourth angel sounded, and the third part of the sun was smitten, and the third part of the moon, and the third part of the stars, so that the third part of them was darkened, and the day shone not for a third part of it, and the night in like manner.
And I saw, and heard an eagle flying in mid-heaven, saying with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe, to those who dwell on the earth, by reason of the remaining voices of the trumpet of the three angels who are yet to sound!
And the fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star fallen out of heaven to the earth, and to him was given the key of the pit of the abyss;
and he opened the pit of the abyss. And there went up a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace, and the sun and the air were darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit.
And out of the smoke went forth locusts upon the earth, and to them was given power, as the scorpions of the earth have power;
and it was commanded them that they should not hurt the grass of the earth, nor any green thing, nor any tree, but only those men who have not the seal of God upon their foreheads;
and it was given to them that they should not kill them, but that they should be tormented five months; and their torment was as the torment of a scorpion, when it hath struck a man.
And in those days men will seek death, and shall not find it; and will desire to die, and death will flee from them.
And the shapes of the locusts were like horses prepared for battle; and on their heads were as it were crowns like gold, and their faces were as the faces of men;
and they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were as the teeth of lions.
And they had breastplates like breastplates of iron, and the sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots of many horses running to battle.
And they have tails like scorpions, and stings; and in their tails is their power to hurt men five months.
They have over them a king, the angel of the abyss, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek he hath for his name Apollyon.
The first woe is past; behold, two woes more are yet to come.
And the sixth angel sounded, and I heard a voice out of the four horns of the golden altar, which is before God,
saying to the sixth angel who had the trumpet, Loose the four angels who are bound at the great river Euphrates.
And the four angels were loosed, who were in readiness for the hour, and day, and month, and year, to slay the third part of men.
And the number of the armies of the horsemen was two hundred thousand thousand; I heard the number of them.
And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and those who sat on them, having breastplates of a fiery, and a dark blue, and a brimstone color; and the heads of the horses were as the heads of lions, and out of their mouths issued fire, and smoke, and brimstone.
By these three plagues was the third part of men killed, by the fire, and the smoke, and the brimstone, which issued out of their mouths.
For the power of the horses is in their mouth, and in their tails; for their tails are like to serpents, having heads; and with them they do hurt.
And the rest of men, who were not killed by these plagues, did not repent of the works of their hands, that they should not worship demons, and idols of gold, and of silver, and of brass, and of stone, and of wood, which can neither see; nor hear, nor walk;
and they did not repent of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts.
And I saw another strong angel coming down from heaven, clothed with a cloud, and a rainbow was upon his head, and his face was like the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire.
And he had in his hand a little book open. And he set his right foot upon the sea, and the left upon the land;
and he cried with a loud voice, as a lion roars. And when he had cried, the seven thunders uttered their voices.
And when the seven thunders had spoken, I was about to write; and I heard a voice from heaven saying, Seal up the things which the seven thunders spoke, and write them not.
And the angel whom I saw standing upon the sea, and upon the land, lifted up his right hand to heaven,
and swore by him who liveth for ever and ever, who created the heaven, and the things therein, and the earth and the things therein, and the sea, and the things therein, that there should be no longer delay;
but in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he is about to sound, then should be finished the mystery of God, as he declared the glad tidings to his servants the prophets.
And the voice which I heard out of heaven I heard again speaking to me, and saying: Go, take the little book which is open in the hand of the angel who is standing upon the sea, and upon the land.
And I went to the angel, telling him to give me the little book. And he saith to me, Take it, and eat it up; and it will make thy stomach bitter, but in thy mouth it will be sweet as honey.
And I took the little book out of the angel's hand, and ate it up; and it was in my mouth sweet as honey; and when I had eaten it, my stomach became bitter.
And it was said to me, Thou must again prophesy concerning many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings.
And there was given me a reed like to a staff, a voice saying: Rise, and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and them that worship therein;
but the court which is outside the temple, leave out, and measure it not, for it hath been given to the gentiles; and the holy city will they tread under foot forty-two months.
And I will give power to my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and sixty days, clothed in sackcloth.
These are the two olive-trees, and the two candlesticks, which stand before the Lord of the earth.
And if any one designs to hurt them, fire goeth out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies; and if any one designs to hurt them, he must in this manner be killed.
These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy; and have power over the waters, to turn them to blood, and to smite the earth with every plague, as often as they will.
And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that cometh up out of the abyss will make war against them, and will overcome them, and kill them.
And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where their Lord also was crucified.
And some from among the peoples, and tribes, and tongues, and nations, will look upon their dead bodies three days and a half, and will not suffer their dead bodies to be put into a tomb.
And they that dwell upon the earth will rejoice over them, and make merry, and will send gifts to one another, because these two prophets tormented those who dwelt on the earth.
And after three days and a half the spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet; and great fear fell upon those who saw them.
And they heard a loud voice from heaven, saying to them, Come up hither; and they went up into heaven in a cloud; and their enemies beheld them.
And in that hour there was a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the city fell, and in the earthquake were slain seven thousand men; and the rest became afraid, and gave glory to the God of heaven.
The second woe is past; behold, the third woe cometh quickly.
And the seventh angel sounded, and there followed loud voices in heaven, saying, The kingdom of the world is become the kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and he will reign for ever and ever.
And the twenty-four elders, who sat before God on their thrones, fell upon their faces, and worshipped God,
saying, We give thanks to thee, O Lord God Almighty, who art and who wast, because thou hast taken thy great power, and hast reigned.
And the nations were enraged, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead to be judged, and to give the reward to thy servants the prophets, and to the saints, and to them that fear thy name, the small and the great; and to destroy the destroyers of the earth.
And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and the ark of his covenant was seen in his temple; and there were lightnings, and voices, and thunders, and an earthquake, and a great hailstorm.
And a great sign was seen in heaven; a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars;
and being with child she crieth out, travailing in birth, and pained to be delivered.
And another sign was seen in heaven; and behold, a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and on his heads seven diadems;
and his tail dragged the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast them to the earth. And the dragon standeth before the woman who was about to bring forth, that when she hath brought forth he may devour her child.
And she brought forth a man-child, who is to rule all the nations with a rod of iron; and her child was caught up to God, and to his throne.
And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she hath a place prepared by God, that they should nourish her there a thousand two hundred and sixty days.
And there was war in heaven; Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels,
and prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven.
And the great dragon was cast down, the old serpent, called the Devil and Satan, who deceiveth the whole world; he was cast down to the earth, and his angels were cast down with him.
And I heard a loud voice in heaven, saying, Now is come the salvation and the power and the kingdom of our God, and the authority of his Christ; for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, who accused them before our God day and night;
and they conquered him because of the blood of the Lamb, and because of the word of their testimony; and they loved not their lives, even to death.
Therefore rejoice, ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them. Woe to the earth and the sea! for the Devil is come down to you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time.
And when the dragon saw that he was cast down to the earth, he persecuted the woman who brought forth the man-child.
And to the woman were given the two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent.
And the serpent cast out of his mouth water as a river, after the woman, that he might cause her to be carried away by the river.
And the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up the river which the dragon cast out of his mouth.
And the dragon was enraged at the woman, and went away to make war with the rest of her offspring, who keep the commandments of God, and maintain the testimony to Jesus.

And I stood upon the sand of the sea. And I saw a beast coming up out of the sea, having ten horns and seven heads, and upon his horns ten diadems, and upon his heads names of blasphemy.
And the beast which I saw was like a leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion. And the dragon gave him his power, and his throne, and great authority.
And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death; and his deadly wound was healed. And the whole earth wondered after the beast.
And they worshipped the dragon, because he gave the authority to the beast; and they worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like to the beast, and who is able to make war with him?
And there was given to him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemy; and power was given to him to work forty-two months.
And he opened his mouth in blasphemies against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and those who dwell in heaven.
And it was given to him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them; and power was given him over every tribe, and people, and tongue, and nation.
And all who dwell on the earth wilt worship him, every one whose name hath not been written in the book of life of the Lamb that was slain from the foundation of the world.
If any one hath an ear, let him hear.
If any one [[leadeth]] into captivity he shall go into captivity; if any one shall kill with the sword, he must be killed with the sword. Here is the endurance and the faith of the saints.
And I saw another beast coming up out of the earth; and he had two horns like a lamb, and he spoke as a dragon.
And he exerciseth all the authority of the first beast in his presence; and causeth the earth and those who dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed.
And he doeth great signs, so that he even causeth fire to come down from heaven on the earth, in the sight of men.
And he deceiveth them that dwell on the earth, by reason of the signs which it was given him to do in the presence of the beast; commanding those who dwell on the earth to make an image to the beast which had the wound by a sword, and lived.
And it was given to him to give breath to the image of the beast, that the image of the beast should even speak, and cause that all who did not worship the image of the beast should be killed.
And he causeth all, the small and the great, and the rich and the poor, and the flee and the bond, to receive a mark on their right hand, or on their forehead;
and that no one shall be able to buy or sell, except him that hath the mark, the name of the beast, or the number of his name.
Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast; for it is the number of a man, and his number is six hundred and sixty-six.
And I saw, and lo! the Lamb stood on Mount Zion, and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand, having his name and the name of his Father written on their foreheads.
And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of loud thunder; and the voice which I heard was as that of harpers, harping with their harps.
And they sing a new song before the throne, and before the four living creatures and the elders; and no one was able to learn the song but the hundred and forty-four thousand, who were redeemed from the earth.
These are they who were not defiled with women; for they are virgins. These are they who follow the Lamb wherever he goeth. These were redeemed from among men, a first-fruits to God and to the Lamb.
And in their mouth was found no falsehood; for they are without fault.
And I saw another angel flying in mid-heaven, having an everlasting message of good tidings to proclaim to those who dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and tribe, and tongue, and people;
saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come; and worship him that made the heaven, and the earth, and sea, and fountains of waters.
And another, a second angel, followed, saying: Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great, which hath made all the nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication.
And another, a third angel, followed them, saying with a loud voice: If any one worship the beast and his image, and receive the mark on his forehead or on his hand,
the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the angels, and in the presence of the Lamb.
And the smoke of their torment goeth up for ever and ever; and they have no rest day or night, who worshiped the beast and his image, and whoever receiveth the mark of his name.
Here is the endurance of the saints, who keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.
And I heard a voice from heaven, saying, Write, Blessed are the dead, who die in the Lord from henceforth. Yea, saith the Spirit, that they shall rest from their labors; and their works do follow them.
And I saw, and lo! a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sat like to a son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle.
And another angel came out of the temple, crying with a loud voice to him who sat on the cloud, Thrust in thy sickle, and reap, for the time to reap is come, because the harvest of the earth is ripe.
And he who sat on the cloud thrust in his sickle upon the earth; and the earth was reaped.
And another angel came out of the temple which is in heaven, he also having a sharp sickle.
And another angel came out from the altar, who had power over fire; and he cried with a loud cry to him who had the sharp sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth, for the grapes of the earth are fully ripe.
And the angel thrust in his sickle into the earth, and gathered the fruit of the vine of the earth, and cast it into the great wine-press of the wrath of God.
And the wine-press was trodden outside the city, and blood came out of the winepress, even to the bits of the horses, to the distance of a thousand six hundred furlongs.
And I saw another sign in heaven, great and marvelous seven angels, having seven plagues, which are the last, because in them is completed the wrath of God.
And I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire, and those who had gained the victory over the beast, and over his image, and over the number of his name, standing at the sea of glass, having harps of God.
And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying: Great and marvelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of the nations;
who shall not fear, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy; for all nations shall come and worship before thee, because thy judgments are made manifest.
And after these things I saw, and the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened;
and the seven angels who had the seven plagues came forth, clothed in pure shining linen, and girded about the breasts with golden girdles.
And one of the four living creatures gave to the seven angels seven golden vials, full of the wrath of God, who liveth for ever and ever.
And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and from his power; and no one was able to enter the temple, till the seven plagues of the seven angels were completed.
And I heard a loud voice out of the temple, saying to the seven angels, Go, and pour out the seven vials of the wrath of God upon the earth.
And the first departed, and poured out his vial upon the earth; and there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men who had the mark of the beast, and who worshipped his image.
And the second poured out his vial into the sea; and it became blood, as of a dead man, and every living thing died, that was in the sea.
And the third poured out his vial into the rivers and fountains of waters; and they became blood.
And I heard the angel of the waters saying, Righteous art thou, who art and wast holy, because thou hast judged thus;
for they shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou hast given them blood to drink; they deserve it.
And I heard the altar saying, Even so, Lord God Almighty! true and righteous are thy judgments.
And the fourth poured out his vial upon the sun; and it was given to it to scorch men with fire;
and men were scorched with great heat. And men blasphemed the name of God, who had the power over these plagues; and they repented not, to give him glory.
And the fifth poured out his vial upon the throne of the beast; and his kingdom became darkened; and they gnawed their tongues for pain,
and blasphemed the God of heaven, because of their pains and because of their sores; and they repented not of their deeds.
And the sixth poured out his vial upon the great river, the Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the kings who are from the rising of the sun might be prepared.
And I saw come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet, three unclean spirits like frogs;
for they are the spirits of demons, working signs, which go forth to the kings of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God l Almighty.
Behold, I come as a thief; blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, that he may not walk naked, and his shame be seen.
And he gathered them together into the place called in the Hebrew tongue, Harmegedon.
And the seventh poured out his vial upon the air; and there came forth a loud voice from the temple, from the throne, saying, It is done.
And there followed lightnings, and voices, and thunders, and there was a great earthquake, such as there was not since there was a man upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so great.
And the great city was divided into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell; and Babylon the great was remembered before God, to give to her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath.
And every island fled away, and no mountains were found;
and there came down from heaven upon men a great storm of hail, every stone weighing about a talent; and men blasphemed God on account of the plague of the hail; for the plague thereof was exceeding great.
And there came one of the seven angels who had the seven vials, and talked with me, saying, Come hither; I will show thee the judgment of the great harlot that sitteth upon the many waters;
with whom the kings of the earth committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth were made drunk with the wine of her fornication.
So he carried me away in the Spirit into the wilderness. And I saw a woman sitting upon a scarlet-colored beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns.
And the woman was clothed in purple and scarlet, decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand, full of abominations and the impurities of the fornication of the earth,
and upon her forehead a name written: MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF THE HARLOTS AND OF THE ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.
And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the witnesses of Jesus. And when I saw her, I wondered with great wonder.
And the angel said to me, Wherefore didst thou wonder? I will tell thee the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that carrieth her, which hath the seven heads, and the ten horns.
The beast which thou sawest, was, and is not, and is to come up out of the abyss, and goeth into perdition; and they that dwell on the earth, whose names have not been written in the book of life from the foundation of the world, will wonder, when they see the beast, that he was, and is not, and yet will come.
Here is the mind that hath wisdom. The seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman sitteth.
And they are seven kings; five of them are fallen, one is; the other is not yet come, and when he hath come, he must remain a short time.
And the beast that was, and is not, he is an eighth, and is of the seven, and goeth into perdition.
And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings, who have received no kingdom as yet, but receive authority as kings one hour with the beast.
These have one mind, and give their power and authority to the beast.
These will make war with the Lamb; and the Lamb will overcome them, because he is Lord of lords, and King of kings: and they who are with him are called, and chosen, and faithful.
And he saith to me, The waters which thou sawest, where the harlot sitteth, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.
And the ten horns which thou sawest, and the beast, these will hate the harlot, and will make her desolate and naked, and will eat her flesh, and will burn her up with fire.
For God hath put in their hearts to do his will, and to form one purpose, and to give their kingdom to the beast, until the words of God shall be fulfilled.
And the woman which thou sawest is the great city, which reigneth over the kings of the earth.
After these things I saw another angel coming down from heaven, having great power; and the earth was lightened with his glory.
And he cried with a strong voice, saying: Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great, and is become a habitation of demons, and a hold of every unclean spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird;
for all the nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth became rich out of the abundance of her luxury.
And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues;
for her sins have reached to heaven, and God hath remembered her iniquities.
Requite her even as she requited, and render to her double according to her works; in the cup which she mixed, mix to her double.
As much as she glorified herself and lived luxuriously, so much torment and mourning give her. For she saith in her heart, I sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no mourning;
therefore in one day shall her plagues come, death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall be burned up with fire; for strong is the Lord God who judged her.
And the kings of the earth who committed fornication and lived luxuriously with her shall weep and lament for her, when they see the smoke of her burning,
standing afar off for the fear of her torment, saying, Alas, alas, the great city! Babylon, the mighty city! for in one hour is thy judgment come.
And the merchants of the earth weep and mourn over her, because no one buyeth their merchandise any more;
merchandise of gold and of silver, and of precious stones and of pearls, and of fine linen and of purple, and of silk and of scarlet; and all citron wood, and all manner of vessels of ivory, and all manner of vessels of most costly wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble;
and cinnamon, and amomum, and odors, and ointment, and frankincense, and wine, and oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and cattle, and sheep; and merchandise of horses and chariots and slaves; and souls of men.
And the fruits that thy soul desired are departed from thee, and all thy dainty and splendid things are perished from thee, and thou shalt find them no more.
The merchants of these things, who became rich by her, shall stand afar off for the fear of her torment, weeping and mourning,
saying: Alas, alas, the great city, that was clothed in tilde linen and purple and scarlet, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls!
for in one hour so great wealth is made desolate. And every pilot, and every one that saileth to any place, and mariners, and as many as trade by sea, stood afar off,
and cried out when they saw the smoke of her burning, saying, What city is like the great city!
And they cast dust on their heads, and cried out, weeping and mourning, saying: Alas, alas, the great city, whereby were made rich all that had ships in the sea by reason of her wealth! for in one hour she is made desolate.
Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye saints and ye apostles and ye prophets! for God hath avenged you on her.
And a strong angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall Babylon the great city be thrown down, and shall never more be found.
And the sound of harpers, and of musicians, and of pipers, and of trumpeters shall be heard in thee no more, and no craftsman, of whatever craft, shall be found any more in thee, and the sound of a millstone shall never more be heard in thee,
and the light of a lamp shall shine no more in thee, and the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard in thee no more; for thy merchants were the great men of the earth; for by thy sorcery were all the nations deceived.
And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that have been slain upon the earth.
After these things I heard as it were a loud voice of a great multitude in heaven, saying, Hallelujah I The salvation, and the glory, and the power, belong to our God;
for true and righteous are his judgments; for he hath judged the great harlot, who corrupted the earth with her fornication, and hath avenged the blood of his servants at her hand.
And a second time they said, Hallelujah! and her smoke goeth up for ever and ever.
And the twenty-four elders and the four living creatures fell down and worshipped God that sat on the throne, saying, Amen, hallelujah!
And a voice came forth from the throne, saying, Praise our God, all ye his servants, and ye that fear him, the small and the great.
And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunders, saying, Hallelujah! for the Lord our God the Almighty reigneth.
Let us rejoice and exult, and we will give to him the glory; for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself ready;
and it was given to her that she should be clothed in fine linen, shining and pure. For the fine linen is the righteousness of the saints.
And he saith to me, Write, Blessed are they who are called to the marriage-supper of the Lamb. And he saith to me, These are the true words of God.
And I fell at his feet to worship him; and he saith to me, See thou do it not; I am a fellow-servant of thee, and of thy brethren who maintain the testimony to Jesus; worship God. For the testimony to Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.
And I saw heaven opened, and behold, a white horse, and he who sat upon him was called Faithful and True, and in righteousness he doth judge and make war.
His eyes were a flame of fire, and on his head were many diadems; and he had names written, and a name written which no one knoweth but he himself;
and he was clothed with a garment dipped in blood; and his name is called, The Word of God.
And the armies which are in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and pure.
And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he may smite the nations; and he will rule them with a rod of iron; and he treadeth the wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of God Almighty.
And he hath on his garment and on his thigh a name written: KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.
And I saw an angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a loud voice, saying to all the birds that fly in mid-heaven, Come, gather yourselves together to the great supper of God;
that ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of those who sit on them, and the flesh of all men, both free and bond, lieth small and great.
And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies, gathered together to make war against him who sat on the horse, and against his army.
And the beast was seized and he who was with him, the false prophet who wrought the signs in his presence, with which he deceived those who received the mark of the beast, and who worshipped his image; the two were cast alive into the lake of fire burning with brimstone.
And the rest were slain with the sword of him who sat upon the horse, the sword which proceeded out of his mouth; and all the birds were glutted with their flesh.
And I saw an angel coming down from heaven, having the key of the abyss, and a great chain in his hand.
And he laid hold of the dragon, the old serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, and bound him a thousand years,
and cast him into the abyss, and shut him up and set a seal over him, that he may deceive the nations no more, till the thousand years are ended: after that he must be loosed for a short time.
And I saw thrones; and they sat on them, and judgment was given to them; and I saw the souls of those beheaded on account of the testimony to Jesus, and on account of the word of God, and of all who had not worshipped the beast, nor his image, and had not received his mark upon their forehead, or upon their hand; and they lived, and reigned with Christ a thousand years.
And the rest of the dead lived not until the thousand years were ended. This is the first resurrection.
Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection; on these the second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.
And when the thousand years are ended, Satan will be loosed out of his prison;
and will go out to deceive the nations which are in the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to the war, the number of whom is as the sand of the sea.
And they went up upon the breadth of the earth, and encompassed the camp of the saints, and the beloved city; and fire came down out of heaven, and devoured them.
And the Devil who deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where are also the beast and the false prophet; and they will be tormented day and night for ever and ever.
And I saw a great white throne, and him who sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away, and no place was found for them.
And I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne, and books were opened; and another book was opened, which is the book of life; and the dead were judged out of the things written in the books, according to their works.
And the sea gave up the dead which were in it, and death and the underworld gave up the dead which were in them; and they were judged each one according to his works.
And death and the underworld were cast into the lake of fire; this is the second death, the lake of fire.
And if any one was not found written in the book of life, he was cast into the lake of fire.
And I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and the sea was no more.
And I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.
And I heard a loud voice out of the throne, saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they will be his people, and God himself will be with them, their God;
and God will wipe away every tear from their eyes, and death shall be no more, neither shall mourning, nor crying, nor pain he any more; for the former things are passed away.
And he that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make all things new. And he saith, Write; for these words are faithful and true.
And he said to me, All things are accomplished. I am the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end. To him that thirsteth I will give of the fountain of the water of life freely.
He that overcometh shall inherit these things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my son.
But the cowardly, and unbelieving, and the polluted with abominations, and murderers, and fornicators, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all the liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone; which is the second death.
And there came one of the seven angels who had the seven vials filled with the seven last plagues, and talked with me, saying, Come hither; I will show thee the bride, the wife of the Lamb.
And he carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high mountain, and showed me the holy city, Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God,
having the glory of God; her light was like to a most precious stone, as it were a jasper stone, clear as crystal;
having a wall great and high; having twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names written thereon, which are the names of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel;
on the east, three gates; and on the north, three gates; and on the south, three gates; and on the west, three gates.
And the wall of the city had twelve foundation-stones, and on them the twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.
And he who talked with me had for a measure a golden reed, to measure the city, and the gates thereof, and the wall thereof.
And the city lieth four-square, and its length is as great as its breadth. And he measured the city with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs. The length and the breadth and the height of it are equal.
And he measured the wall thereof, a hundred and forty-four cubits, according to a man's measure, which is that of an angel.
And the material of its wall was jasper; and the city was of pure gold, like to clear glass.
The foundation-stones of the wall of the city were adorned with all manner of precious stones: the first foundation-stone was jasper; the second, sapphire; the third, chalcedony; the fourth, emerald;
the fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh, chrysolite; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, topaz; the tenth, chrysoprasus; the eleventh, hyacinth; the twelfth, amethyst.
And the twelve gates were twelve pearls; every several gate was of one pearl. And the street of the city was pure gold, like transparent glass.
And I saw no temple therein; for the Lord God Almighty is its temple, and the Lamb.
And the city hath no need of the sun, nor of the moon, to shine upon it; for the glory of God lightened it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.
And the nations will walk by the light of it; and the kings of the earth bring their glory into it;
and the gates of it shall not be shut by day, for there will be no night there;
and they will bring the glory and the honor of the nations into it.
And there shall not enter into it anything unclean, or that worketh abomination and falsehood; but only they that are written in the Lamb's book of life.
And he showed me a river of water of life, clear as crystal, coming out of the throne of God and of the Lamb.
Between the street of the city and the river, on one side and on the other, is the tree of life, hearing twelve kinds of fruit, and yielding its fruit every month; and the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations.
And there shall be no more curse; and the throne of God and of the Lamb will be in it, and his servants will serve him;
and they will see his face, and his name will be upon their foreheads.
And there will be no night, and no need of lamp or light, for the Lord God will shine upon them; and they will reign for ever and ever.
And he said unto me, These words are faithful and true; and the Lord God of the spirits of the prophets sent his angel to show to his servants what must shortly come to pass.
And behold, I come quickly. Blessed is he that keepeth the words of the prophecy of this book.
And I John am he who heard and saw these things; and when I had heard and when I had seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel who showed me these things.
And he saith to me, See thou do it not; I am a fellow-servant of thee, and of thy brethren the prophets, and of those who keep the words of this book; worship God.
And he saith to me, Seal not the words of the prophecy of this book; the time is at hand.
He that is unjust, let him be unjust still, and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is righteous, let him do righteousness still, and he that is holy, let him be holy still.
Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give to every one according as his work is.
I am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end.
Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they may have a right to the tree of life, and may enter by the gates into the city.
Without are dogs, and sorcerers, and fornicators, and murderers, and idolaters, and whoever loveth and practiseth falsehood.
I Jesus sent my angel to testify these things to you for the churches. I am the shoot and the offspring of David, the bright morning-star.
And the Spirit and the bride say, Come! And let him that heareth say, Come! And let him that thirsteth come! Whoever will, let him take the water of life freely.
I testify to every one that heareth the words of the prophecy of this book, If any one shall add to them, God will add to him the plagues that are written in this book;
and if any one shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God will take away his part from the tree of life, and out of the holy city, which are written of in this book.
He who testifieth these things saith, Yea, I come quickly. Amen; come, Lord Jesus!
The grace of the Lord Jesus be with all.









































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































