In the first times the Lord created the heavens and the earth.
And the earth was waste and empty, and darkness was upon the face of the abyss; and a wind from before the Lord blew upon the face of the waters.
And the Lord said, Let there be light; and there was light.
And the Lord saw the light that it was good. And the Lord distinguished between the light and between the darkness.
And the Lord called the light the Day, and the darkness He called the Night. And there was evening, and there was morning, Day the First.
And the Lord said, Let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters, and let it distinguish between waters and waters.
And the Lord made the expanse, and distinguished between the waters which were under the expanse, and between the waters which were above the expanse: and it was so.
And the Lord called the expanse the Heavens. And it was evening, and it was morning, the Second Day.
And the Lord said, The waters shall be collected under the heavens into one region, and the dry land shall appear. And it was so.
And the Lord called the dry land Earth, and the place of the collection of waters He called Sea. And the Lord saw that it was good.
And the Lord said, The earth shall bring forth grass; the plant whose germ-seed is to be sown; the fruit-tree making fruit according to its kind, whose germ-seed is in it upon the earth; and it was so.
And the earth put forth grass; the herb, whose germ-seed is sown after its kind; and the tree making fruit, whose seed is in it after its kind. And the Lord saw that it was good.
And it was evening, and it was morning, Day the Third.
And the Lord said, There shall be Lights in the expanse of heaven, to distinguish between the day and the night; and they shall be for signs and for times, for the numbering of days and years.
And they shall be for luminaries in the expanse of heaven to shine upon the earth; and it was so.
And the Lord made the two great luminaries: the greater luminary to rule in the day; and the smaller luminary to rule in the night, and the stars.
And the Lord set them in the expanse of heaven to shine upon the earth,
and to rule in the day and in the night, and to distinguish between light and darkness. And the Lord saw that it was good.
And there was evening, and there was morning, Day the Fourth.
And the Lord said, Let the waters generate the moving creature (having) life; and the fowl which flieth over the earth on the face of the expanse of heaven.
And the Lord created the great taninia and every living animal which moveth, which the waters generated according to their kind, and every fowl which flieth according to his kind; and the Lord saw that it was good.
And the Lord blessed them, saying, Spread abroad and become many, and fill the waters of the seas; and let the fowl become many on the earth.
And it was evening, and it was morning, Day the Fifth.
And the Lord said, Let the earth produce the living animal after its kind, cattle, and reptile, and beast of the earth, according to its kind; and it was so.
And the Lord mad, the beast of the earth after its kind, and cattle after their kind, and every reptile of the earth after its kind; and the Lord saw that it was good.
And the Lord said, Let us make Man in Our image, as Our likeness; and shall have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the heavens, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every reptile which moveth upon the earth.
And the Lord created the Adam in His image, in the image of the Lord He created him; male and female He created them.
And the Lord blessed them, and said to them, spread abroad, and become many, and fill the earth, and be strong upon it; and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the heavens, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.
And the Lord said, Behold, I have given to you every plant which seedeth green-seed which is upon all the earth; and every tree in which is the fruit of the tree which seedeth germ-seed; unto you it shall be for food,
and unto every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the heavens, and to every reptile upon the earth in which is the breath of life, every green herb to eat; and it was so.
And the Lord saw all that He had made, and, behold, it was very steadfast. And it was evening, and it was morning, Day the Sixth.
And the heavens and the earth and all their host were completed.
And the Lord finished in the Seventh Day His work which He had wrought, and rested in the Seventh Day from all His work which He had wrought.
And the Lord blessed the Seventh Day and made it holy, because in it He rested from all His work which the Lord had created to make.
These are the memorials of the heavens and the earth, when they were created in the day when the Lord God made the earth and the heavens.
And all trees of the field were not yet in the earth, and every herb of the field had not yet sprung up, because the Lord God had not caused rain to come upon the earth, and there was no man to cultivate the ground.
And a mist ascended from the earth, and moistened all the face of the ground.
And the Lord God created Adam from dust of the ground, and breathed upon his face the breath of lives, and it became in Adam a Discoursing Spirit.
And the Lord God planted a garden in a region of pleasantness in the time of the beginning, and He made to dwell there the man whom He had created.
And the Lord God caused to grow from the earth every tree desirable to look upon, and good for food, and the Tree of Life (Lives) in the midst of the garden, and the Tree of whose fruit they who eat know between good and evil.
And a river went forth from Eden to water the garden, and from thence it was divided and became four heads of rivers (or four chief rivers).
The name of the first is Pishon, that which encompasseth all the land of Havilah, where is gold;
and the gold of that land is good; there is bedalcha and Burilla stones.
And the name of the second river is Gichon, which encompasseth all the land of Kush.
And the name of the third river is Digelatlh, which goeth to the east of Athur. And the fourth river is Pherat.
And the Lord God took Adam and placed him in the garden of Eden to culture it and keep it.
And the Lord God commanded Adam, saying, Of every tree of the garden eating thou mayest eat;
but of the tree of whose fruit they who eat know between good and evil thou shalt not eat; for in the day that thou eatest of it dying thou shalt die.
And the Lord God said, It is not right that Adam should be solitary; I will make for him a helper as for his sake (or, as suited to him: Heb., kenegdo, as his counterpart).
And the Lord God created from the earth every beast of the field and every fowl of the heavens, and brought them to Adam to see what he would call him; and every (name by) which Adam called the living animal, that was its name.
And Adam called the name of all cattle, and of the fowl of the heaven, and of every beast of the field; but to Adam was not found a helper as for him.
And the Lord God threw a sleep upon Adam, and he slept; and He took one of his ribs, and filled with flesh in place thereof;
and the Lord God builded the rib which He took from Adam into Woman, and He brought her unto Adam.
And Adam said, This now (this time) is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh: this shall be called Woman, because from her husband this was taken.
Therefore shall a man forsake the couch (beth mishkeb, the sleeping-house) of his father and his mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and they shall be of one flesh.
And they were both naked, Adam and his wife, and were not ashamed.
And the serpent (chivja) was more crafty than all the animals of the field which the Lord God bad made. And he said to the woman, Is it in truth (that) the Lord said, You shall not eat of every tree of the garden?
And the woman said to the serpent, Of the fruit of the trees of the garden we may eat;
but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, the Lord hath said, You shall not eat of it, nor approach to it, lest you die.
And the serpent said to the woman. Not to die will you die:
for it is manifest before the Lord, that in the day in which you eat of it your eyes will be opened, and you will be (ki-rabrebin) as the Great-ones, knowing good and evil.
And the woman saw that the tree was good to eat, and that it was salutary to the eyes, and a tree desirable to contemplate; and she took of its fruitage (aiba) and ate; and she gave to her husband with her, and he ate.
And the eyes of both of them were opened, and they knew that they were naked; and they sewed for themselves the leaves of the fig tree, and made for themselves cinctures.
And they heard the voice of the Word of the Lord God walking in the garden in the evening of the day; and Adam and his wife hid themselves from before the Lord God among the trees of the garden.
And the Lord God called to Adam and said to him, Where art thou?
And he said, The voice of Thy Word heard I in the garden, and I was afraid, because I (was) naked, and I would hide.
And He said, Who showed thee that thou wast naked? Of the tree of which I commanded that eating of it thou shouldst not eat, hast thou eaten?
And Adam said, The woman whom Thou gavest (to be) with me, she gave to me of the tree, and I did eat.
And the Lord God said to the woman, What is this that thou hast done? And the woman said, The serpent led me astray, and I did eat.
And the Lord God said to the serpent, Because thou hast done this, more accursed art thou than all cattle, and than all the beasts of the held; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and the dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life.
And I will put enmity between thee and between the woman, and between thy son and her son. He will remember thee, what thou didst to him (at) from the beginning, and thou shalt be observant unto him at the end.
And to the woman He said, Multiplying, I will multiply thy sorrows and thy pains. In sorrow shalt thou bring forth children; and unto thy husband shall be thy desire, and lie. He shall rule over thee.
And unto Adam He said, Because thou hast obeyed the word of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree (about) which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it, accursed is the ground on thy account. With labour shalt thou eat from it all the days of thy life.
Thorns and thistles it shall put forth for thee, and thou shalt eat the herb of the field.
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, until that thou return to the earth, because from it thou wast created; for dust thou art, and to dust thou wilt return.
And Adam called the name of his wife Hava, because she was the mother of all the children of men.
And the Lord God made for Adam and for his wife vestments of honor upon the skin of their flesh, and clothed them.
And the Lord God said, Behold, man is become singular (or alone, yechid) in the world by himself, knowing good and evil; and now, lest he stretch forth his hand and take also of the Tree of Life, and eat, and live forever.
And the Lord God sent him forth from the Garden of Eden to till the ground from whence he had been created.
And He drove out the man, and before the garden of Eden he caused to dwell the kerubaya, and the sharp sword which revolved to keep the way of the Tree of Life.
And Adam knew Hava his wife, and she conceived, and gave birth to Kain; and she said I have acquired the man from before the Lord.
And she added to give birth to his brother, Habel. And Habel was a shepherd of the flock, and Kain a man working on the ground.
And it was at the end (or complement) of days, that Kain brought of the product of the earth an oblation before the Lord;
and Habel he brought also of the first-born of his sheep and of their fatlings. And there was acceptableness before the Lord in Habel and in his oblation;
but in Kain and his oblation there was not acceptableness. And it was greatly displeasing to Kain, and his countenance was downcast.
And the Lord said to Kain, Why art thou displeased, and why is thy countenance downcast?
If thou doest thy work well, is it not remitted to thee? And if thou doest not thy work well, thy sin unto the day of judgment is reserved, when it will be exacted of thee, if thou convert not: but if thou convert, it is remitted to thee.
And Kain spake with Habel his brother; and it was in their being in the field that Kain arose against Habel his brother, and killed him.
And the Lord said to Kain, Where is Habel thy brother? And he said, I know not; am I the keeper of my brother?
And He said, What hast thou done? The voice of the blood of generations which were to come from thy brother complaineth before Me, from the earth!
And now, accursed art thou from the earth, which hath opened her mouth and received the blood of thy brother from thy hand.
When thou tillest the earth, it shall not add to give its virtue to thee; a castaway and a wanderer shalt thou be in the earth.
And Kain said before the Lord, Greater is my guilt than may be forgiven.
Behold, Thou hast rejected me this day from the face of the earth, and from Thy presence it is not possible to hide; and I shall be a castaway and a wanderer in the earth, and anyone who findeth me will slay me.
And the Lord said to him, Therefore anyone who killeth Kain, unto seven generations it shall be exacted of him. And the Lord set unto Kain a sign, lest anyone who found him should kill him.
And Kain went out from before the Lord, and dwelt in the land of the wanderer and outcast, which was made for him in the beginnings in the Garden of Eden.
And Kain knew his wife, and she conceived and bare Hanoch, and he became the builder of a city, and called the name of the city after the name of his son Hanoch.
And there was born to Hanoch Irad, and Irad begat Mahujael; and Mahujael begat Methu-sael, and Methusael begat Lemek.
And Lemek took unto him two wives, the name of the one Ada, and the name of the second Zillah.
And Ada bare Javal; he was the master (rab) of all dwellers in tents and lords of cattle.
And the name of his brother was Juval. He was the master of all who play upon the mouth of the pipe, who know the song of the harp and of the organ.
And Zillah also, she bare Tuval-kain, the master of all them who understand the working of brass and iron. And the sister of Tuval-kain was Naamah.
And Lemek said to his wives Ada and Zillah, Hear my voice, wives of Lemek, attend to my words: I have not slain a man, that on his account I should bear the condemnation of death; or destroyed a young man, that on his account my posterity should be consumed.
If seven generations are suspended unto Kain, will there not be to Lemek his son seventy and seven?
And Adam knew yet his wife, and she bare a son, and called his name Sheth; Because, said she, the Lord hath given me another son instead of Habel, whom Kain slew.
And to Sheth also was born a son, and he called his name Enosh. Then in his days the sons of men desisted (or forbore) from praying in the name of the Lord.
This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day that the Lord God created man, in the resemblance of Elohim He made him;
Male and female He created them; and He blessed them, and called their name Man, in the day that they were created.
And Adam lived a hundred and thirty years, and begat in his resemblance (one) who was like to himself, and he called his name Sheth.
And the days of Adam after he had begotten Sheth were eight hundred years, and be begat sons and daughters.
And all the days of Adam which he lived were nine hundred and thirty years, and he died.
And Sheth lived a hundred and five years, and begat Enosh.
And Sheth lived after he had begotton Enosh eight hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters.
And all the days of Sheth were nine hundred and twelve years, and he died.
And Enosh lived ninety years, and begat Keinan.
And Enosh lived after he had begotten Keinan eight hundred and fifteen years, and begat sons and daughters.
And all the days of Enosh were nine hundred and five years, and he died.
And Keinan lived seventy years, and begat Mahalalel.
And Keinan lived after he had begotten Mahalalel eight hundred and forty years, and begat sons and daughters.
And all the days of Keinan were nine hundred and ten years, and be died.
And Mahalalel lived sixty and five years, and begat Jered.
And Mahalalel lived after he had begotten Jered eight hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters.
And all the days of Mahalalel were eight hundred and ninety and five years, and he died.
And Jered lived an hundred and sixty and two years, and begat Hanok.
And Jered lived after he had begotten Hanok eight hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.
And all the days of Jared were nine hundred and sixty and two years, and he died.
And Hanok lived sixty and five years, and begat Methushelach.
And Hanok walked in the fear of the Lord, after he had begotten Methushelach, three hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.
And all the days of Hanok were three hundred and sixty and five years.
And Hanok walked in the fear of the Lord; and he was not; for the Lord had not made him to die.
And Methushelach lived an hundred and eighty and seven years, and begat Lemek.
And Methushelach lived after he had begotten Lemek seven hundred and eighty and two years, and begat sons and daughters.
And all the days of Methushelach were nine hundred and sixty and nine years, and he died.
And Lemek lived a hundred and eighty and two years, and begat a son.
And he called his name Noach, saying, This shall console us from the works and from the labour of our hands from the earth which the Lord bath cursed.
And Lemek lived, after he had begotten Noach, five hundred and ninety and five years, and begat sons and daughters.
And all the days of Lemek were seven hundred and seventy and seven years, and he died.
And Noach was a son of five hundred years, and Noach begat Shem, Cham, and Japheth.
And it was when the sons of men had begun to multiply upon the earth, and daughters were born to them,
that the sons of the mighty saw the daughters of men that they were beautiful, and took to them wives of all whom they pleased.
And the Lord said, This evil generation shall not stand before me forever, because they are flesh, and their works are evil. A term (or length) will I give them, an hundred and twenty years, if they may be converted.
Giants were in the earth in those days; and also when, after that the sons of the mighty had gone in unto the daughters of men, there were born from them giants who from of old were men of name.
And the Lord saw that the wickedness of man had multiplied in the earth, and that every formation (or image) of the thought of his heart was only evil every day.
And it repented the Lord in His Word that He had made men upon the earth.
And He said, (in His Word,) that He would break their strength according to His pleasure. And the Lord said, Man whom I have made will I blot out I from the face of the earth; from man to the beast, to the reptile, and to the fowls of heaven; because it repenteth Me in My Word that I have made them.
But Noach found mercy before the Lord.
These are the memorials of Noach. Noach was a man righteous and perfect in his generation; in the fear of the Lord walked Noach.
And Noach begat three sons, Shem, Cham, and Yapeth.
And the earth was corrupted before the Lord, and the earth was filled with violences.
And the Lord saw the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt, because all flesh had corrupted, each one, his way upon the earth.
And the Lord said to Noach, The end of all flesh cometh before Me, because the earth is filled with violences from the face of their wicked works; and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth.
Make thee an ark with the wood of cedar; dwellings shalt thou make in the ark, and overlay it within and without with pitch.
And thus shalt thou make it: three hundred cubits shall be the length of the ark, fifty cubits its breadth, and thirty cubits its height.
A light shalt thou make to the ark, and at a cubit shalt thou complete it above, and the door of the ark thou shalt place in its side. Lower dwellings, second and third, shalt thou make in it.
And I, behold, I do bring the deluge of waters upon the earth to destroy all flesh in which is the breath of life from under the heavens. Everything that is on the earth shall die.
And I will establish My covenant with thee; and thou shalt enter into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and the wives of thy sons with thee.
And of all that liveth of all flesh two and two of all that enter into the ark to abide with thee, male and female shall they be.
Of fowl according to its kind, and of cattle according to her kind, and of every creeping thing of the earth after his kind, two of all shall enter with thee to abide.
And thou, take with thee of all food which is eaten, and gather to be with thee; and it shall be for thee and for them to eat.
And Noach did according to all which the Lord had commanded him, so did he.
And the Lord said to Noach, Enter thou and all the men of thy house into the ark; for thee have I seen righteous before Me in this generation.
Of all clean animals take thou seven and seven, male and female; and of animals not clean, two and two, male and female.
Also of the fowls of heaven, seven and seven, male and female, to continue the seed upon the face of all the earth.
Because yet a time of seven days and I will cause rain to descend upon the earth forty days and forty nights, and I will blot out every subsistence which I have made upon all the face of the earth.
And Noach did according to all that the Lord had instructed him.
And Noach was a son of six hundred years; and the deluge of waters was upon the earth.
And Noach entered, and his sons, and his wife, and the wives of his sons with him, into the ark from before the water of the deluge.
Of animals clean, and of animals not clean, and of birds, and of all which creepeth upon the earth,
two and two, they entered with Noach into the ark, male and female, as the Lord had instructed Noach.
And it was at the time of seven days, and the waters of the deluge were upon the earth.
In the six-hundredth year of the life of Noach, in the second month, in the seven-teenth day of the month, in that day were all the springs of the great abyss upbroken, and the windows of heaven opened,
and the rain came down upon the earth forty days and forty nights.
In that very day entered Noach, and Shem, Cham, and Yapheth, sons of Noach, and the wife of Noach, and the three wives of his sons with them, into the ark;
They, and every animal after his kind, and all cattle after its kind, and every, reptile which creepeth upon the earth after its kind, and every fowl after its kind, every bird, everyone that flieth:
And they entered with Noach into the ark, two and two of all flesh in which is the breath of life;
And they, entering, male and female of all flesh, entered, as the Lord had commanded him, and the Lord protected them by His Word.
And there was a deluge forty days upon the earth, and the waters increased, and took up the ark, and it was lifted up above the earth.
And the waters prevailed and increased mightily upon the earth, and the ark went upon the faces of the waters.
And the waters prevailed most mightily over the earth, and all the high hills were covered which were under all the heavens.
Fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail, and the mountains were covered;
And all flesh died which moved upon the earth, of fowl, and of cattle, and of the wild beast, and of every reptile which creepeth upon the earth, and every man.
Everything in whose nostrils was the breath of the Spirit of life, of all which was upon the dry ground, died.
And every subsistence was blotted out that was upon the faces of the earth, from man to the beast, to the reptile, and to the fowl of heaven, it was blotted out from the earth, and Noach was left alone, and they who were with him in the ark.
And the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty days.
And the Lord remembered Noach, and every living thing, and all the cattle which were with him in the ark; and the Lord caused a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters rested,
and the springs of the abyss were shut, and the windows of the heavens, and the rain from the heavens was restrained, and the waters turned from on the earth, going and returning;
And the waters diminished from the end of a hundred and fifty days.
And the ark rested on the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, upon the mountains of Kardu.
And the waters went and diminished until the tenth month: in the tenth, on the first of the mouth, the heads of the mountains appeared.
And it was at the end of forty days, and Noach opened the windows of the ark which he had made.
And he sent forth a raven, and going he went out, and returned until the waters were dried upon the earth.
And he sent forth a dove from (being) with him, to see whether the waters were lightened (or consumed) from the surface of the earth.
But the dove found no rest for the dividing of her foot, and she returned unto him into the ark, because the waters were upon all the earth; and he stretched forth his hand, and took her, and brought her to be with him in the ark.
And he prolonged yet seven days, and afterward added to send forth the dove from the ark.
And the dove came to him at the time of evening, and, behold, a leaf of olive broken off was in her mouth; and Noach knew that the waters were lightened from upon the earth.
And he prolonged yet other seven days, and sent forth the dove, and she added not to return to be with him again.
And it was in the six-hundredth and first year, in the beginning of the first month, the waters were dried from off the earth; and Noach removed the covering of the ark, and looked, and, behold, the faces of the ground were dry.
And in the second month, in the seventeenth day of the month, the earth was fully dry.
And the Lord spake with Noach, saying:
Go forth from the ark, thou, and thy wife, and thy sons, and the wives of thy sons with thee.
Every living thing which is with thee of all flesh, of fowl, and of cattle, and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, bring forth with thee, and they shall generate in the earth, and spread abroad and multiply upon the earth.
And Noach went forth, and his sons, and his wife, and the wives of his sons with him;
Every animal, every reptile and bird, everything which moveth upon the earth after their kind, went forth from the ark.
And Noach builded an altar before the Lord, and took of every clean beast and of every clean bird, and uplifted an offering upon the altar.
And the Lord received with approval his oblation; and the Lord said in His Word, I will not add to curse again the earth on account of the guilt of man, because the creations of the heart of man are evil from his infancy; and I will not add again to smite every living thing as I have done.
Yet all the days of the earth, seed-time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease.
And the Lord blessed Noach and his sons, and said to them, Spread abroad, and multiply, and fill the earth.
And the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the heavens, in all which creepeth upon the earth, and in all fish of the sea; into your hands shall they be delivered.
Every moving thing that liveth, for you it shall be to eat; as the green herb I have given you the whole.
But the flesh with its life-blood you shall not eat.
And also your blood of your lives will I require, from every beast will I require it, and from the hand of man. From the hand of the man who sheddeth the blood of his brother will I require the life of man.
Whoso sheddeth the blood of man, by witnesses, upon the sentence of the judges, his blood shall be shed; because in the image of the Lord made He man.
And you, spread abroad and multiply; bring forth in the earth and multiply therein.
And the Lord spake to Noach, and to his sons with him, saying,
and I, behold, I establish my covenant with you and with your children after you,
and with every living thing which is with you, of fowl, of cattle, and of every beast of the field that is with you, of all going forth from the ark of every animal of the earth.
And I will establish My covenant with you, and all flesh shall not again be consumed by the waters of a deluge, nor shall there be again a deluge to destroy the earth.
And the Lord said, This is the sign of the covenant which I appoint (give) between My Word, and between you, and between every living soul that is with you unto perpetual generations.
I have set My bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a sign of the covenant between My Word and between the earth.
And it shall be that when clouding I becloud the earth, the bow shall be seen in the cloud,
and I will remember the covenant which is between My Word, and between You, and between every living soul of all flesh; and there shall not be again the waters of a deluge to destroy all flesh.
And the bow shall be in the cloud, and I will look upon it, to remember the everlasting covenant between the Word of the Lord and between every living soul of all flesh that is upon the earth.
And the Lord said, This is the sign of the covenant which I have established between My Word and between all flesh which is upon the earth.
And the sons of Noach who went forth from the ark were Shem and Cham and Yapheth: and Cham is the father of Kenaan.
These three are the sons of Noach and from them was the whole earth Overspread.
And Noach began to be a man working on the earth; and he planted a vineyard,
and he drank of the wine, and was drunk; and he was uncovered in the midst of his tent.
And Cham the father of Kenaan saw the nakedness of his father, and he showed to his two brethren without.
And Shem and Yapheth took a mantle, and laid it upon the shoulders of both, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their father; and their faces were averted, and the nakedness of their father they saw not.
And Noach awoke from his wine, and knew that which his youngest son had done unto him;
and he said; Accursed be Kenaan, A working servant shall he be to his brethren.
And he said: Blessed be the Lord the God of Shem, And Kenaan shall be servant unto them.
The Lord shall enlarge Yapheth, And He shall make his Shekinah to dwell in the tabernacles of Shem: And Kenaan shall be servant unto them.
And Noach lived after the deluge three hundred and fifty years.
And all the days of Noach were nine hundred and fifty years; and he died.
And these are the generations of the sons of Noach, Shem, Cham, and Yapheth; and sons were born to them after the deluge.
The sons of Yepheth, Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Yavan, and Thuval, and Meshek, and Tiras.
And the sons of Gomer, Ashkenaz, and Rephath, and Thogarmah.
And the sons of Yavan, Elishah and Tharshish, and Dodanim.
From these were the isles (nagvath) of the peoples divided in their lands, each according to his language, according to their families in their nations.
And the sons of Cham, Kush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and Kenaan.
And the sons of Kush, Seba, and Chavilah, and Sabetha, and Raamah, and Sabtekah. And the sons of Raamah, Sheba and Dedan.
And Kush begat Nimrod: he began to be a powerful man in the earth.
He was a powerful man before the Lord: therefore it is said, Like Nimrod the man of might before the Lord.
And the head (beginning) of his kingdom was Bavel, and Erek, and Akad, and Kalneh in the land of Bavel.
From that land he went forth to Athura, and built Nineveh, and the city of Rechov, and Kalach,
and Resen, between Nineveh and Kalach, which was a great city.
And Mizraim begat the Ludaee, and Anamaee, and Lehabaee, and Naphtuhaee,
and Pathrusaee, and Kasluchaee, from whom came forth the Pelishtaee and Kaputkaee.
And Kenaan begat Zidon his firstborn, and Cheth,
and the Jebusaee, and Amoraee, and Girgashee,
and Hivaaee, and Arkaee, and Antasaee,
and Arvadaee, and Zemaraee, and Chamathaee: and afterwards the seed of the Kenaanaee were scattered abroad.
And the frontier of Kenaanaah was from Zidon, coming to Gerar and to Azza, coming unto Sedom, and Amorah, and Admah, and Zeboim, unto Lasha.
These are the sons of Cham, according to their progenies, to their languages, in their lands, in their peoples.
And of Shem was born: (also he is the father of all the sons of Eber, and the brother of Yapheth the Great:)
The sons of Shem, Elim, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram.
And the sons of Aram, Uz, and Chul, and Gether, and Mash.
And Arphaxad begat Shelach; and Shelach begat Eber.
And to Eber were born two sons: the name of the one was Peleg: because in his day the earth was divided. And the name of his brother was Yoktan.
And Yoktan begat Almodad, and Shaleph, and Chatsarmaveth, and Yarech,
and Chadoram, and Uzal, and Dikelah,
and Obal, and Avimael, and Sheba,
and Ophir, and Chavilah, and Yobab: all these are the sons of Yoktan.
And their dwelling was from Mesha, coming to Sephar, an eastern mountain.
These are the sons of Shem, according to their progenies, according to their languages, in their lands, in their peoples.
These are the progenies of the sons of Noach, by their generations, in their peoples: and by them were the peoples outspread in the earth after the deluge.
And all the earth was of one language and one speech.
And it was in their migrations at the beginning, that they found a plain in the land of Babel; and dwelt there.
And they said, a man to his companion, Come, let us cast bricks and bake them in the fire. And they had brick for stone, and bitumen for mortar.
And they said, Come, let us build a city, and a tower, the bead of it coming to the pinnacle of the heavens. And we will make to us a name, lest we be dispersed upon the face of all the earth.
And the Lord was revealed to punish the work of the city and the tower which the sons of men had builded.
And the Lord said, Behold, the people are one and the language one with all of them: and this is what they begin to do. And now nothing will be restrained from them of what they imagine to do.
Come, We will be manifest, and will confuse their language there, that a man shall not bear the language of his companion.
And the Lord dispersed them from thence upon the face of all the earth, and they were restrained from building the city.
Therefore the name of it is called Confusion, because the Lord there confused the tongue of all the earth, and from thence the Lord dispersed them upon the face of all the earth.
These are the generations of Shem. Shem was a son of a hundred years, and he begat Arphaxad, two years after the deluge.
And Shem lived after he had begotten Arphaxad five hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Arphaxad lived thirty and five years, and begat Shelach.
And Arphaxad lived after he had begotten Shelach four hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Shelach lived thirty years, and begat Eber.
And Shelach lived after he had begotten Eber four hundred and three years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Eber lived thirty and four years, and begat Peleg.
And Eber lived after he had begotten Peleg four hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Peleg lived thirty years, and begat Reu.
And Peleg lived after he had begotten Reu two hundred and nine years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Reu lived thirty and two years, and begat Serug.
And Reu lived after he had begotten Serug two hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Serug lived thirty years, and begat Nachor.
And Serug lived after he had begotten Nachor two hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Nachor lived twenty and nine years, and begat Terach.
And Nachor lived after he had begotten Terach a hundred and nineteen years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Terach lived seventy years, and begat Abram, Nachor, and Haran.
And these are the generations of Terach. Terach begat Abram, Nachor, and Haran; and Haran begat Lot.
And Haran died before Terach his father in the land of his nativity, in Ura of the Kasdaee.
And Abram and Nachor took to them wives: the name of the wife of Abram, Sara; and the name of the wife of Nachor, Milcha, daughter of Haran the father of Milcha and the father of Yiska.
And Sara was barren, she had no child.
And Terach took Abram his son, and Lot the son of Haran, the son of his son, and Sara his daughter-in-law, wife of Abram his son, and went forth with them from Ura of the Kasdaee to go to the land of Kenaan. And they came to Charan, and dwelt there.
And the days of Terach were two hundred and five years, and Terach died in Charan.
And the Lord said to ABRAM, Go thou away from thy country, and from the house of thy father, to the land which I will show thee.
And I will make thee to (be) a great people, and will bless thee, and magnify thy name, and thou shalt be blessed.
And I will bless him who blesseth thee, and him who curseth thee I will curse; and through thee all the progenies of the earth shall be blessed.
And Abram went away, according as the Lord had spoken to him, and Lot went with him. And Abram was a son of seventy and five years in his forthgoing from Charan.
And Abram took Sara his wife, and Lot his brother’s son, and all the possessions which they possessed, and the souls whom they had made subject to the law in Charan, and went forth to go into the land of Kenaan; and they came unto the land of Kenaan.
And Abram traversed through the land unto the place of Shekim unto the plain of Moreh; and the Kenaanah was then in the land.
And the Lord revealed Himself unto Abram, and said, To thy sons will I give this land. And he builded there an altar before the Lord who had been revealed to him.
And he ascended from thence to the mountain east of Beth El, and spread out his tabernacle, having Beth El on the west and Ai on the east; and he builded there an altar before the Lord, and prayed in the name of the Lord.
And Abram migrated, going and migrating to the south.
And there was a famine in the land, and Abram went down to Mizraim, to sojourn there, because the famine was strong in the land.
And it was that as he drew nigh to enter Mizraim he said to Sara his wife, Behold, now I know that thou art a woman beautiful in sight;
And it will be that when the Mizraee see thee they will say, This is his wife; and they will kill me, and thee will they reserve.
Say now, thou art my sister, that it may be well with me through thee, and my life may be preserved through thy words.
And it was that when Abram had entered into Mizraim, the Mizraee saw the woman that she was singularly fair;
And the princes of Pharaoh saw her, and extolled her to Pharaoh; and the woman was taken to the house of Pharaoh.
And Abram was well treated on account of her. And he had sheep, and oxen, and asses, and servants, and maidens, and camels.
And the Lord brought upon Pharaoh great plagues, and upon the men of his house, for the affair of Sara the wife of Abram.
And Pharaoh called Abram and said, What is this that thou hast done to me? Why didst thou not show me that she is thy wife?
Why saidst thou, She is my sister, so that I would have taken her to me to wife? And now, behold thy wife: take, and go.
And Pharaoh instructed the men concerning him, and they, conducted him away, and his wife, and all that he had.
And Abram went up from Mizraim, he and his wife, and all that he had, and Lot with him, unto the south.
And Abram was exceeding strong in cattle, in silver, and in gold;
And he proceeded according to his encampments from the south, and unto Bethel, unto the place where he had spread his tabernacle at the first, between Bethel and Ai;
To the place of the altar which he had there made at the first: and Abram prayed there in the Name of the Lord.
And Lot also, who went with Abram, had sheep and oxen and tents.
And the land could not support them, that they might dwell together.
And there was contention between the shepherds of the flock of Abram and the shepherds of the flock of Lot; and the Kenaanah and: the Pherizaah then dwelt in the land.
And Abram said to Lot, Let there not now be contention between me and thee, and between my shepherds and thy shepherds; for men, brethren, are we.
Is not all the land before thee? Separate now from me: if thou to the north, I to the south; and if thou to the south, I to the north.
And Lot lifted up his eyes, and saw all the plain of Yardena that it was altogether a watered place, before the Lord had destroyed Sedom and Amorah, as the garden of the Lord, as the land of Mizraim coming unto Zoar.
And Lot chose to him all the plain of Yardena; and Lot went forth before, and they were separated each man from his brother.
Abram dwelt in the land of Kenaan, and Lot dwelt in the cities of the plain, and extended unto Sedom.
And the men of Sedom were wicked in their riches, and guilty in their bodies before the Lord greatly.
And the Lord said to Abram, after Lot was separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes and see, from the place where thou art, thence to the north and to the south, and to the east and to the west;
For all this land that thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy children forever.
And I will place thy children numerous as the dust of the earth; so that as it is not possible for a man to number the dust of the earth, so also thy sons shall not be numbered.
Arise, go through the land, in its length and in its breadth; for unto thee will I give it.
And Abram spread (his tent), and came and dwelt in the plain of Mamre which is near Hebron, and builded there an altar before the Lord.
And it was in the days of Amraphel, king of Babel, Ariok, king of Elasar, Kedar-laomer, king of Elam, and Thidal, king of peoples,
they made war with Bera, king of Sedom, and with Birsha, king of Amora, Shenab, king of Admah, Shemeber, king of Zeboim, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar.
All these were assembled at the plain of the field, which is (now) the place of the sea of salt.
Twelve years they had served Kedar-laomer, and in the thirteenth year they rebelled.
And in the fourteenth year came Kedar-laomer, and the kings who were with him, and smote the giants who were in Ashtaroth Karnaim, and the mighty who were in Chemta, and the terrible ones who were in Shaveh Kiryathaim,
and the Horaee who were in the mountain of Seir, unto the plain of Paran which lieth upon the desert.
And they turned, and came to the plain of the division of judgment, which is Rekam, and smote all the fields of the Amalkaah, and also the Amoraah who dwelt in Ein-gadey.
And the king of Sedom, and the king of Amoraah, and the king of Admah, and the king of Zeboim, and tile king of Bela, which is Zoar, went forth and set the battle in array against them in the plain of the field,
with Kedar-laomer king of Elam, and Thidal, king of peoples, and Amraphel, king of Babel, and Ariok, king of Elasar; four kings against five.
And the plain of the field had many pits, from which, they raised asphalta; and the kings of Sedom and Amorah fled, and they fell there; and they who remained fled to the mountain.
And they took all the possession of Sedom and Amorah, and, all their food, and went.
And they captured Lot and his substance, son of the brother of Abram, and went. And he had dwelt in Sedom.
And (one) came from those escaped, and showed to Abram the Ivraah; and he had remained in the plain of Moreh Amoraah, the brother of Eshkol and brother of Aner; and they were Abram’s men of covenant.
And Abram heard that his brother had been captured; and he armed the young men born in his house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued unto Dan.
And he divided against them by night, he and his servants, and smote them, and pursued them unto Hoba, which was northward of Damasek.
And he recovered all the substance, and Lot also, the son of his brother; and his substance he recovered, the women also, and the people.
And the king of Sedom came out to meet him after returning from the smiting of Kedar-laomer and the kings who were with him, at the plain of Mephana, which was the king’s place of racing.
And Malki-zedek, king of Yerushelem, brought forth bread and wine (chemar), and he was minister (meshamesh) before EL ILLAAH,
and he blessed him, and said: “Blessed be Abram before El Illah, Whose possession is heaven and earth;
And blessed be El Illah (Most High), Who hath delivered thine enemies into thine hand.” And he gave him one in ten of the whole.
And the king of Sedom said to Abram, Give me the souls, and the substance take thou.
And Abram said to the king of Sedom, I have uplifted my hands in prayer before the Lord God most high, whose possession is heaven and earth:
If from a thread unto the sole of a sandal I take of all that is thine, (and not that thou shouldst say, I have enriched Abram,)
except of the food for the young men, and the share of the men who went with me, Amer, Eshkol, and Mamre, these will receive their shares.
After these things the word (pithgama) of the Lord came to Abram in prophecy, saying, Fear not, Abram: My Word (Memra) shall be thy strength, and thy exceeding great reward.
And Abram said, Lord God, what wilt Thou give me, and I go without a child: and this son of business (bar phargama) who is in My house is the Damasekah Elieser?
And Abram said, Behold, Thou hast not given me a child, and, behold, the son of my house is my heir.
And, lo, the word (pithgama) of the Lord was with him, saying, This shall not be thy heir, but a son whom thou shalt beget will be thine heir.
And He led him without, and said, Behold now the heavens, and number the stars, if thou art able to number them; and He said to him, So will be thy sons.
And he believed in the Word of the Lord, (Memra da Yeya,) and He reckoned it to him unto justification.
And He said to him, I am the Lord, who brought thee forth from Ura of the Kasdaee, to give thee this land to inherit it.
And he said, Lord God, by what may I know that I shall inherit it?
And He said to him, Bring Me three calves, and three goats, and three rams, and a turtle dove, and the young of a pigeon.
And he brought before Him all these. And be divided them equally, and set the divisions a division against his fellow; but the birds he did not divide.
And the fowl descended upon the divisions, and Abram drave them away.
And it was sunset, and sleep fell upon Abram: and, lo, a horror of great darkness fell upon him.
And He said unto Abram, Knowing thou shalt know that thy sons will be sojourners (or aliens) in a land not theirs, and they will serve among them; and they will afflict them four hundred years.
And the people whom they will serve I will judge, and go forth with much substance.
And thou shalt be gathered to thy fathers in peace, and shalt be buried in good old age.
And in the fourth age (or generation) they will return hither; because not (yet) complete is the guilt of the Amoraah.
And it was at the going away of the sun, and there was darkness. And behold a furnace that burned, and a flame of fire which passed between those divisions.
In that day the Lord compacted with Abram a covenant, saying, To thy sons will I give this land; from the river of Mizraim unto the great river, the river of Pherat, the Shalmaee,
and the Kenizaee, and the Kadmonaee,
and the Hittaee, and the Pherizaee, and the Gibbaraee,
and the Amoraee, and the Kenaanaee, and the Girgashaee, and the Yebusaee.
And Sara wife of Abram had no child; and she had an handmaid, a Mizretha, and her name was Hagar.
And Sara said to Abram, Behold now, the Lord hath restrained me from childbearing; go in now to my handmaid, if, perhaps, I may have sons from her. And Abram received the word of Sara.
And Sara wife of Abram took Hagar her handmaid, the Mizretha, at the end of ten years of Abram’s dwelling in the land of Kenaan, and gave her to Abram her husband to be his wife;
And he went in unto Hagar, and she conceived, and she saw that she had conceived, and her mistress was despised in her eyes.
And Sara said to Abram, I have (a cause of) judgment against thee. I have given my handmaid to thee, and she seeth that she hath conceived, and I am despised in her eyes: the Lord judge between me and thee.
And Abram said to Sara, Behold, thy handmaid is in thy hand, do to her as is pleasing in thine eyes: and Sara afflicted her, and she fled from before her.
And the Angel of the Lord found her at the fountain of water in the wilderness, at the fountain in the way of Hagra.
And he said, Hagar handmaid of Sara, whence comest thou, and whither art thou going? And she said, From before Sara my mistress do I escape.
And the Angel of the Lord said to her, Return to thy mistress and be subject under her hand.
And the Angel of the Lord said to her: Multiplying I will multiply thy sons, and they shall not be numbered for multitude.
And the Angel of the Lord said to her, Behold, thou hast conceived, and shalt give birth to a son, and thou shalt call his name Yishmael, because the Lord hath heard thy prayer.
And he will be untameable by man, and he will be needy to everyone, and also all men will be needy to him, and before the face of all his brethren will he dwell.
And she prayed in the Name of the Lord who had spoken with her; and she said: Thou art Eloha, seeing all: for she said, I also have begun to see after that He hath been revealed to me.
Therefore she called the name of the well, The well at which appeared the Angel of the Covenant: behold, it is between Rekam and Hagra.
And Hagar bare to Abram a son, and Abram called the name of his son whom Hagar bare Yishmael.
And Abram was son of eighty and six years when Hagar bare Yishmael unto Abram.
And Abram was son of ninety and nine years: and the Lord was revealed to Abram, and said to him, I am EI-shadai; serve before Me, and be perfect;
And I will set a covenant between My Word and thee, and I will multiply thee exceedingly much.
And Abram fell on his face: and the Lord spake with him, saying,
Behold, I have dedicated My covenant with thee, and thou shalt be the father of many peoples,
and thy name shall no more be called Abram; but thy name shall be Abraham, because the father of many peoples have I appointed (given) thee.
And I will spread thee abroad very greatly, and I will appoint to thee that assemblies and kings who shall rule the peoples, from thee shall come forth.
And I will establish My covenant between My Word and thee, and thy sons after thee unto perpetual generations, to be unto thee a God, and to thy sons after thee.
And I will give to thee and to thy sons after thee the land of thy habitation, all the land of Kenaan, for an everlasting possession; and I will be unto them Eloha.
And the Lord said to Abraham, And thou My covenant shalt keep, thou and thy sons after thee in their generations.
This is My covenant which you shall keep between My Word and you and thy sons after thee, to circumcise every male that is among you.
And you shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be for the sign of the covenant between My Word and you.
And the son of eight days shall be circumcised among you; every male in your generations, born in the house, or bought with money, of every son of the peoples, who is not of thy sons, circumcising you shall circumcise
the one born in the house, and him bought with money; and it shall be My covenant in your flesh for a covenant forever.
And the male who is not circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin, that man shall perish from the people (because) he hath made void My covenant.
And the Lord said to Abraham, The name of Sara thy wife shall not be called Sara, for Sarah shall be her name:
And I will bless her, and I will also give thee a son from her; and I will bless her, and assemblies and kings which have dominion over peoples from her shall be.
And Abraham fell upon his face and rejoiced, and said in his heart, Will the son of a hundred years have a child, and Sarah the daughter of ninety years bring forth?
And Abraham said before the Lord, O that Yishmael may be established before thee!
And the Lord said, In verity Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name Izhak; and I will establish My covenant with him for an everlasting covenant to his sons after him.
And concerning Yishmael I have accepted thy prayer. Behold, I have blessed him, and I will spread him abroad very greatly. Twelve princes will he beget, and I will set him (as) a great people.
But My covenant I will establish with Izhak, whom Sarah shall bear to thee, at this time, in the year following.
And when He had ended to speak with him, the Glory of the Lord ascended up from Abraham.
And Abraham took Yishmael his son, and everyone born in his house, and everyone bought with his money, every male, the men of the house of Abraham, and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in that very same day when the Lord had spoken with him.
And Abraham was son of ninety and nine years, when he circumcised the flesh of his foreskin.
And Yishmael his son was son of thirteen years, when the flesh of his foreskin was circumcised.
In that same day Abraham was circumcised, and Yishmael his son,
And all the men of his house, (whether) born in his house, or bought with money from the sons of the Gentiles, were circumcised with him.
And the Lord was revealed to him in the Vale of Mamre; and he sat in the door of the tent while the day was hot.
And lie lifted up his eyes and looked, and, behold, three men stood towards him; and he saw, and ran from the door of the tent to meet them, and worshipped upon the earth.
And he said, Lord, if now I have found favour in Thine eyes, pass not, I pray, from Thy servant.
Accept now a little water, and wash your feet, and recline under the tree,
and take a mouthful of bread, and strengthen your hearts, afterward you shall pass on; because for this you have come over unto your servant. And He said, So do as thou hast spoken.
And Abraham hastened to the tent to Sarah, and said, Make haste with three seyin of the flour of meal, mix and make cakes.
And to the herd ran Abraham, and took a calf, tender and good, and gave to a young man, and he hastened to dress him.
And he took butter and milk, and the calf which he had prepared, and set before them, and he waited upon them under the tree, and they ate.
And He said to him, Where is Sarah thy wife? And he said, Behold, in the tent.
And He said, Returning I will return to thee, according to the time that you shall revive, and, behold, Sarah thy wife shall have a son. And Sarah heard in the door of the tent, and it was behind Him.
And Abraham and Sarah were old and advanced in days, and with Sarah had ceased to be the way of women.
And Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After that I am old shall I have a child, and my lord (being also) old?
And the Lord said to Abraham, Wherefore laughed Sarah, saying, Can it be in truth that I shall bring forth, and I being old?
What word is hidden from before the Lord? At the time I will return to thee, according to the time that you shall revive, and Sarah shall have a son.
And Sarah denied, saying, I laughed not: for she was afraid. And He said, No, but thou didst laugh.
And the men arose thence, and looked towards the face of Sedom; and Abraham went with them to accompany them.
And the Lord said, Shall I conceal from Abraham what I am doing?
And Abraham shall be indeed a people many and strong, and in him shall all the peoples of the earth be blessed;
because it is manifest before me that he will instruct his children, and the men of his house after him, to keep the ways which are right before the Lord, to do righteousness and judgment; that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which He hath spoken concerning him.
And the Lord said, The cry of Sedom and Amorah (is heard before Me) because it is great, and the guilt of them is very mighty:
I will now see, and will judge, whether they do according to the report of them which hath ascended before me. I will deal with them thoroughly unless they convert; but if they convert, I will not punish.
And the men turned away from thence, and went toward Sedom.
And Abraham yet ministered in prayer before the Lord. And Abraham approached, and said, Wilt Thou, in anger, destroy the righteous with the guilty?
If perhaps there be fifty righteous within the city, wilt Thou in anger destroy and not forgive the place for the fifty righteous who are within it?
More true are Thy judgments than that Thou shouldst do a thing like that, to destroy the just with the guilty, and that the just should be as the guilty! Thy judgments are true! Can the Judge of all the earth but do justice?
And the Lord said, If I find in Sedom fifty righteous in the midst of the city, I will spare all the place for their sake.
And Abraham answered and said, Behold, I have done a great thing, to speak before the Lord, and I dust and ashes!
Perhaps of the fifty righteous there may be wanting five: shall all the city perish through five? And He said, I will not destroy, if I find there forty and five.
And he added yet to speak before Him, and said, Perhaps forty may be found there. And He said, I will not make the end on account of the forty.
And he said, Let not the anger of the Lord now kindle, and I will speak. Perhaps thirty shall be found there. And He said, I will not make the end if I find there thirty.
And he said, Behold, I have done a great thing to speak before the Lord: perhaps twenty shall be found there. And He said, I will not destroy for the sake of twenty.
And he said, Let not now the anger of the Lord kindle, and I will speak only this time: perhaps ten may be found there. And He said, I will not destroy for the sake of the ten!
And the Glory of the Lord ascended when He had ceased to speak with Abraham, and Abraham returned to his place.
And two angels entered into Sedom in the evening; and Lot sat in the gate of Sedom. And Lot saw, and arose to present himself before them, and he bowed with his face to the earth.
And he said, I pray my lords (ribboni) to turn aside unto the house of your servant and lodge, and wash your feet; and rising early you shall go on your way. And they said, Not so, but in the wide place will we lodge.
And he was greatly in earnest with them, and they turned aside with him, and entered into his house: and he made them a supper, and dressed unleavened cakes for them, and they ate.
As yet they had not slept; and the men of the city, the men of Sedom, gathered against the house, from the youth unto the old man, all the people from the extremes;
And they cried to Lot, and said to him, Where are the men who came to thee tonight? Bring them forth to us, and we will know them.
And Lot went out to them to the gate, and the door he shut after him.
And he said, I pray you, my brethren, do not (so) wickedly.
Behold, now, I have two daughters, who have not known man, I would bring them to you, and you should do to them what pleases in your eyes; only to these men do nothing, because they have entered under the shadow of my dwelling.
And they said, Go in, however! And they said, One came to sojourn, and, behold, he judgeth judgment! Now will we do worse to thee than to them; and they prevailed against the man, against Lot, greatly, and came nigh to shatter the door.
And the men put forth their hands, and brought in Lot to be with them in the house, and shut the door.
And the men who were at the gate of the house they smote with blindness, from the little to the great, and they were wearied to find the gate.
And the men said to Lot, Whomsoever thou hast yet here, thy son-in-law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and all that thou hast in the city, lead out from the place:
For we will destroy this place, because their cry is great before the Lord, and the Lord hath sent us to destroy it.
And Lot went forth, and spake with his sons-in-law, the takers of his daughters, and said, Arise, come forth from this place; for the Lord will destroy the city. And he was as a trifler in the eyes of his sons-in-law.
And it was as the morning rose that the angels were urgent upon Lot, saying, Arise, take thy wife and thy two daughters who are found faithful with thee, lest thou be smitten with the punishment of the city.
But he delayed; and the men laid hold of his hands, and of the hand of his wife, and of the hand of his two daughters; for the Lord had mercy upon him; and they brought him forth, and set him without the city.
And it was when he had brought them without, he said, Be merciful on thy life, look not behind thee, and stand not in all the plain, escape to the mountain for deliverance, lest thou perish.
And Lot said to them, Be entreated, O Lord;
behold now, Thy servant hath found mercy before Thee, and Thou hast magnified Thy goodness which Thou hast shown me in saving my life, and I cannot take refuge in the mountain, lest evil befall me, and I die.
Behold now, this city is nigh, to flee there; and it is (but) small; let me now escape thither. Is it not small? And my life shall be sustained.
And He said to him, Behold, I have accepted thee in this thing also, in that I will not overthrow the city for which thou hast prayed.
Haste, escape thither; for I cannot do anything until thou be come thither. Therefore be called the name of the city Zoar.
The sun had come forth upon the earth, and Lot entered Zoar.
And the Lord rained upon Sedom and upon Amorah sulphur and fire from before the Lord from the heavens,
and destroyed those cities and all the plain, and all the dwellers in the cities and the herbage of the earth.
And his wife looked behind her, and she became a statue of salt.
And Abraham ascended in the morning to the place where he had ministered in prayer before the Lord;
And he looked toward Sedom and Amorah, and upon all the place of the plain land, and saw, and, behold, the smoke of the land went up as the smoke of a furnace.
And it was when the Lord destroyed the cities of the plain, that the Lord remembered Abraham, and sent Lot from the midst of the overthrow, when He overthrew the cities in which Lot dwelt.
And Lot went up from Zoar, and dwelt in the mountain, and his two daughters with him: for he feared to dwell in Zoar; and he dwelt in a cavern, he and his two daughters.
And the elder said to the younger, Our father is aged, and there is no man in the earth to go in unto us according to the way of all the earth.
Come, we will pour father wine, and will lie with him, and raise up sons from our father.
And they poured their father wine in that night; and the elder went in and lay with her father; and he knew not, in her lying down nor in her rising up.
And it was in the day which followed that the elder said to the younger, Behold, I lay yesterday with the father: let us give wine also in the night, and go thou in, lie with him, and we will raise up sons from our father.
And they gave that night also wine to their father, and the younger arose and lay with him; and he knew not, in her lying down nor in her rising up.
And the two daughters of Lot conceived from their father;
And the elder brought forth a son, and called his name Moab: he is the father of the Moabaee unto this day.
And the younger also brought forth a son, and she called his name Bar Ammi: he is the father of the B’ni Ammon unto this day.
And Abraham migrated from thence to the southern land, and dwelt between Rekam and Hagra; and he sojourned in Gerar.
And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She is my sister. And Abimelek, king of Gerar, sent and took Sarah.
And the word came from the presence of the Lord to Abimelek in a dream of the night, and said to him, Behold, thou diest, on account of the woman whom thou hast taken, and she a man’s wife.
But Abimelek had not come nigh her. And he said, Lord, wilt Thou also kill the innocent people?
Did he not say to me, She is my sister? And she also said, He is my brother. In the rectitude of my heart, and the cleanness of my bands, have I done this.
And the Lord said to him in a dream, It is also manifest to Me that in the integrity of thy heart thou hast done this, and I have also restrained thee from sinning before Me; therefore I have not permitted thee to approach to her.
And now return the mares wife; for he is a prophet, and he will pray for thee, and thou shalt live. But if thou wilt not return (her), know that dying thou shalt die, thou, and all who are thine.
And Abimelek arose in the morning, and called all his servants, and spake all these words before them; and the men feared greatly.
And Abimelek called Abraham, and said to him, What hast thou done to us, and in what have I sinned against thee, that thou shouldst have brought upon me and upon my kingdom a great sin? Works which are not worthy to be done hast thou done with me.
And Abimelek said to Abraham, What sawest thou, that thou didst this thing?
And Abraham spake, Because I said, Perhaps the fear of the Lord is not in this place, and they will kill me on account of my wife.
Nevertheless, in truth she is my sister, the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife.
And it was, when the people erred after the works of their hands, the Lord did bring me near to the fear of Himself, from (among) the house of my father. And I said to her, This is thy favour which thou canst do for me; in every place through which we pass, say of me, He is my brother.
And Abimelek took sheep, and oxen, and servants, and handmaidens, and gave to Abraham, and returned to him Sarah his wife.
And Abimelek said, Behold, my land is before thee: where it is pleasant in thine eyes, dwell.
And to Sarah he said, Behold, I have given a thousand seleen of silver to thy brother; behold, that is to thee a veil of honour, for my having sent to take thee, and to see thee, and all that is with thee; and concerning all whatever thou hast spoken thou art reproved.
And Abraham prayed before the Lord, and the Lord healed Abimelek, and his wife, and his handmaids, and they were revived:
For the Lord had shut all the wombs of the house of Abimelek, on account of Sarah, the wife of Abraham.
And the Lord remembered Sarah as He had said; and the Lord did unto Sarah according as He had spoken.
And Sarah conceived and bare unto Abraham a son in his old age, in the time of which the Lord had told him.
And Abraham called the name of his son who was born to him, whom Sarah bare to him, Izhak.
And Abraham circumcised Izhak his son (when) the son of eight days, as the Lord had commanded him.
And Abraham was the son of a hundred years when Izhak his son was born to him.
And Sarah said, The Lord hath made me to have gladness; everyone who heareth will give me joy.
And she said, Faithful is He who spake unto Abraham, and certified that Sarah should suckle children; for she hath born a son in his old age.
And the child grew, and was weaned; and Abraham made a great feast in the day when Izhak was weaned.
And Sarah observed the son of Hagar the Mizritha, whom she bare to Abraham, deriding.
And she said, Cast out this handmaid and her son; for the son of the handmaid shall not inherit with my son, with Izhak.
And the word was evil exceedingly in the eyes of Abraham, on account of his son.
And the Lord said to Abraham, Let it not be evil in thine eyes concerning the youth and concerning thine handmaid. All that Sarah saith to thee receive from her, because in Izhak shall thy sons be called to thee.
And also the son of the handmaid will I set for a people, because he is thy son.
And Abraham rose up in the morning, and took bread and a skin of water, and gave to Hagar, setting upon her shoulder, and the youth, and dismissed her. And she went, and wandered in the desert of the well of Shava (Beara de Shava).
And the water was finished from the skin; and she laid the youth under one of the trees,
And (she) went and sat over against, as far off as a bow flight: for she said, I cannot see the death of the child. And she sat over against, and lifted up her voice and wept.
And the voice of the youth was heard before the Lord; and the Angel of the Lord called to Hagar from the heavens, and said to her, What to thee, Hagar? Fear not, for the voice of the youth is heard before the Lord in the place where he is.
Arise, take up the youth and strengthen thine hand in him, because for a great people have I appointed him.
And the Lord opened her eyes, and she saw the well of waters, and went and filled the skin with water, and gave the youth to drink.
And the Word of the Lord was the Helper of the youth, and he grew and dwelt in the wilderness, and became a master of the bow.
And he dwelt in the wilderness of Paran, and his mother took for him a wife from the land of Mizraim.
And it was in that time that Abimelek and Phikol, chief of his host, spake to Abraham, saying, The Word of the Lord is thy Helper in everything thou doest;
And now swear to me here, by the Word of the Lord, that thou wilt not be false with me, nor with my son, nor with my son’s son; and that according to the good which I have done to thee thou wilt do with me and with the land in which thou art a sojourner.
And Abraham said, I will swear.
And Abraham reproved Abimelek, on account of the well of waters which the servants of Abimelek had taken by force.
And Abimelek said, I knew not if this thing had been done, and thou also hadst not shown me, nor have I heard, but this day.
And Abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave to Abimelek, and they struck both of them a covenant.
And Abraham made seven lambs stand apart; and
Abimelek said to Abraham, What are these seven lambs which thou hast made to stand apart?
And he said, That thou mayest take the seven lambs seven lambs from my hand, to testify for me that I have digged that well.
Therefore he called that place Beer Shava, because there they sware together.
And they struck a covenant at Beer Shava. And Abimelek and Phikol, the chief of his host, arose, and returned to the land of the Phelishtaee.
And he planted a tree in Beer Shava, and prayed there in the name of the Lord, the Most High God.
And Abraham sojourned in the land of the Phelislitaee many days.
And it was after these things that the Lord tempted Abraham; and He said to him, Abraham! And he said, Behold, I am.
And He said, Take now thy son, thy only, whom thou lovest, Izhak, and go into the land of worship, and offer him before Me there, a burnt offering, upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee.
And Abraham arose in the morning, and saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him, and Izhak his son, and clave the wood for the burnt offering, and arose and went to the place of which the Lord had spoken to him.
And in the third day Abraham lifted, up his eyes, and saw the place from afar.
And Abraham said to his young men, Wait you here with the ass, and I and the young man will ascend yonder and worship, and return to you.
And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid on Izhak his son; and he took in his hand the fire and the knife, and they went both of them as one.
And Izhak spake to Abraham his father, and said, Father! And he said, Behold, I am, my son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wood; but where is the lamb for the burnt offering?
And Abraham said, The lamb for the burnt offering is revealed before the Lord, my son. And they went, both of them, as one.
And they came to the place of which the Lord had told him. And Abraham builded there the altar, and set in order the woods, and bound Izhak his son, and laid him upon the altar above the woods.
And Abraham stretched forth his hand and took the knife to cut off his son.
And the Angel of the Lord called to him from the heavens, and said, Abraham, Abraham! And he said, Behold, I am.
And he said to him, Stretch not out thy hand upon the youth, neither do anything to him: for now I know that thou fearest the Lord, and that thou hast not spared thy only son for Me.
And Abraham lifted up his eyes after these (words), and saw, and behold, one ram, holden in the bush by his horns. And Abraham went and took the ram, and offered him for a burnt offering instead of his son.
And Abraham worshipped and prayed there in that place, and said before the Lord, Here shall generations worship: wherefore it shall be paid in that day, In this mountain Abraham worshipped before the Lord.
And the Angel of the Lord called to Abraham the second time from the heavens,
And said, By my Word have I sworn, saith the Lord, because thou hast done this thing, and hast not spared thy only son,
therefore, blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thy sons as the stars of heaven and as the sand which is on the sea shore; and thy sons shall inherit the cities of their enemies.
And all the peoples of the earth shall be blessed through thy son: forasmuch as thou hast received My word.
And Abraham returned to his young men, and they arose and went together unto Beer Shava, and Abraham dwelt in Beer Shava.
And it was after these things it was shown to Abraham, saying, Behold, Milcha, also, hath born sons to Nachor, thy brother:
Uts his first-born, and Booz his brother, and Kemuel the father of Aram,
and Kesed, and Chazu, and Phildash, and Yedlaph, and Bethuel.
And Bethuel begat Revekah. These eight bare Milcha to Nahor, brother of Abraham.
And his concubine, whose name was Reuma, she also bare Tebach, and Gacham, and Tachash, and Maaka.
And the life of Sarah was a hundred and twenty and seven years, the years of the life of Sarah.
And Sarah died in Kiryath-arba, which is Hebron, in the land of Kenaan. And Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to lament her.
And Abraham rose up from the presence of his dead, and spake with the sons of Hittah, saying,
I am a guest and a sojourner with you: give me the possession of a sepulchre with you, that I may bury my dead from before me.
And the sons of Hittah answered Abraham, saying to him,
Receive from us Ribbona; a prince before the Lord art thou among us; in the best of our sepulchres bury thy dead. No man of us will refuse his sepulchre to thee for the burial of thy dead.
And Abraham rose and bowed to the people of the land, the sons of Hittah.
And he spake with them, saying, If you are willing in your minds that I should bury my dead from before me, receive from me, and request for me of Ephron bar Zochar
That he will give me the Double Cavern, which is in the side of his field: for the full amount (shelim) of silver he shall give it to me among you for the possession of a sepulchre.
But Ephron was sitting in the midst of the sons of Hittah; and Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham before the sons of Hittah, of all entering the gate of the city, saying,
No, my lord; receive of me; I will present to thee the field and the cavern which is in it; to thee will I present it; in sight of the sons of my people will I present it to thee. Bury thy dead.
And Abraham bowed before the people of the land.
And he spake with Ephron before the people of the land, saying, Nevertheless, if thou wilt do me a grace, receive from me; I will give money for the field; take of me, and I will bury my dead there.
And Ephron answered Abraham, saying to him,
My lord, receive of me: the land is worth four hundred sileen of silver; between me and thee what is it? Bury thy dead.
And Abraham agreed with Ephron, and Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver of which be had spoken before the sons of Hittah, four hundred sileen of silver, which is received in merchandise in every city.
And Ephron confirmed the field in which is the double cavern which is before Mamre; the field, and the cavern that is therein, and all the trees which were in the field, in all its boundaries round about,
To Abraham, for a purchase, in the sight of the sons of Hitah, of all entering the gate of the city.
And after this Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the double cavern of the field which is before Mamre, that is Hebron, in the land of Kenaan.
And the field and the cavern which is in it were confirmed to Abraham for the possession of a sepulchre from the sons of Hittah.
And Abraham was old, (and) advanced in days, and the Lord had blessed Abraham in all things.
And Abraham said to his servant, the elder of his house, who had authority over all which was his, Put now thy hand under my thigh,
And I will adjure thee by the Word of the Lord, the God of heaven and the God of the earth, that thou wilt not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Kenaanaee among whom I dwell.
But to my country and to my kindred thou wilt go, and take a wife for my son Izhak.
And the servant said to him, Perhaps the woman will not be willing to come after me to this land, returning am I to return thy son to the land from which thou hast gone forth?
And Abraham said to him, Take care that thou return not my son thither;
The Lord, the God of heaven, who took me from the house of my father and from the land of my birth, and who spake to me, and sware to me, saying, I will give thee this land, will send His angel before thee, and thou wilt take a wife for my son from thence.
And if the woman be not willing to come after thee, thou shalt be absolved from this my oath; only cause not my son to return thither.
And the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master, and sware to him concerning that matter.
And the servant took ten camels of the camels of his lord and went. And all the goods of his master were in his hand. And he arose and went to Aram, which is upon Phrath, the river, to the city of Nachor.
And he made the camels rest without the city at a well of waters in the evening time, at the time when they came forth to fill.
And he said, Lord God of my master Abraham, let it, I pray, be opportune with me this day, and deal thou graciously with my master Abraham.
Behold, I stand by the fountain of waters, and the daughters of the men of the city will come forth to draw water.
Let the maiden to whom I shall say, Reach thy waterpot, I pray, that I may drink; and she say, Drink, and I will also give thy camels drink, be she whom Thou hast prepared for Thy servant, for Izhak: and in this I shall know that Thou hast dealt graciously with my master.
And it was while he had not ceased to speak that, behold, Revekah came forth, (she) who was born to Bethuel the son of Milcha, wife of Nachor, brother of Abraham, and her pitcher upon her shoulder.
And the maiden was very fair to behold; a virgin, and man had not known her; and she descended to the fountain, and filled her pitcher, and came up.
And the servant hasted to her presence; and said, Let me taste, I pray, a little water from thy pitcher.
And she said, Drink, Ribboni; and she made haste, and held her pitcher upon her hand, and gave him to drink.
And when she had ended giving him drink, she said, For thy camels also I will draw, until they shall have enough to drink.
And she hastened and poured out her pitcher into the place of watering, and ran again to the well to fill, and she filled for all his camels.
And the man wondered at her, gazing silently, to know whether the Lord had prospered his way or not.
And it was when the camels had drunk enough, the man took a ring (qadasha) of gold weighing a shekel, and two bracelets (sherin) for the hand weighing ten sileen of gold.
And he said, Whose daughter art thou? Tell me, I pray, whether there be room in thy father’s house sufficient for us to lodge?
And she said to him, I am the daughter of Bethuel, the son of Milcha, whom she bare to Nachor.
And she said to him, There is much straw and provender with us, also room enough to lodge.
And the man kneeled, and worshipped before the Lord,
and said, Blessed be the Lord the God of my master Abraham, who hath not withheld His grace and His truth from my master; and me hath the Lord led in a right way to the house of my master’s brother.
And the maiden ran and showed these things to her mother’s house.
And Revekah had a brother whose name was Laban; and Laban ran to the man without at the fountain.
And it was when he saw the ring and the bracelets upon the hands of his sister, and heard the words of Revekah his sister, saying, As this spake the man with me, that he came to the man, and, behold, he stood by the camels at the fountain;
And he said, Enter, blessed of the Lord; why standest thou without? And I have a prepared house and a proper place for the camels.
And the man entered the house, and he loosed the camels, and gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet, and the feet of the men who were with him.
And they set before him to eat. And he said, I will not eat until I have spoken my words. And he said, Speak.
And he said, I am a servant of Abraham;
And the Lord hath blessed my master much, and increased, and hath given to him sheep and oxen, silver and gold, servants and handmaidens, camels and asses.
And Sarah the wife of my master bare a son to my master after she was old, and he hath given to him all that he hath.
And my master adjured me, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife for my son from the daughters of Kenaan in whose land I dwell;
But thou shalt go to my father’s house, and to my kindred, and take a wife for my son.
And I said to my master, Perhaps the woman will not come after me.
And he said to me, The Lord before whom I worship will send His angel with thee, and will prosper thy way, and thou shalt take a wife for my son from my kindred and from my father’s house.
Then shalt thou be absolved from my oath when thou hast gone to my kindred: and if they will not give unto thee, thou shalt be absolved from my oath.
And I came this day to the fountain, and I said, Lord God of my master Abraham, if now it is pleasing before thee to prosper the way in which I go,
Behold, I stand at the fountain of waters, and a damsel may come forth to fill; and I will say to her, Give me to drink, I entreat, a little water from thy pitcher;
And she shall say to me, Both for thee and thy camels also I will fill, let her be the wife whom the Lord hath ordained for my master’s son.
And I had not left speaking in my heart, when, behold, Revekah came forth, with her pitcher upon her shoulder, and went down to the fountain and filled. And I said to her, Let me now drink.
And she hastened and let down her pitcher, and said, Drink, and I will give thy camels also drink. And I drank, and the camels also she watered.
And I asked her and said, Whose daughter art thou? And she said, I am the daughter of Bethuel, the son of Nachor, whom Milcha bare to him. And I set an ornament on her face, and bracelets upon her hand,
and bowed down and worshipped before the Lord, and blessed the Lord God of my master Abraham who had led me in a true way, to take the daughter of my master’s brother for his son.
And now, if you will act with goodness and truth with my master, show me; and if not, I will turn to the right or to the left.
And Laban answered, and Bethuel, and said, From before the Lord the word hath come forth: we have no power to say to thee either evil or good.
Behold, Revekah is before thee; take (her) and go; and let her be the wife of thy master’s son, as the Lord hath spoken.
And it was, when the servant of Abraham heard these words, he worshipped on the earth before the Lord.
And the servant brought out vessels of silver and vessels of gold and vestments, and gave to Revekah, and presents gave he to her brother and to her mother.
And they ate and drank, he and the men who were with him, and they lodged and arose in the morning. And he said, Send me to my master.
And her brother said, and her mother, Let the maiden abide with us a season of time, or ten months; after that she shall go.
And he said to them, Keep me not back: the Lord will direct my way, and I will proceed to my master.
And they said, We will call the maiden, and hear what she will say.
And they called Revekah, and said to her, Wilt thou go with this man? And she said, I will go.
And they dismissed Revekah their sister, and her nurse, and the servant of Abraham, and his men.
And they blessed Revekah, and said to her, Thou art our sister; be thou (multiplied) unto thousands and myriads, and may thy children inherit the cities of those who hate them.
And Revekah arose, and her maidens; and they rode upon camels, and went after the man. And the servant took Revekah and went.
And Izhak ascended in coming from the well over which the Angel of Life (malak qayama, “the Eternal Angel”) had appeared; and he dwelt in the land of the south.
And Izhak went forth to pray in the field, at the presence of the evening; and he lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, the camels came.
And Revekah lifted up her eyes, and saw Izhak; and she bowed herself on the camel.
And she said to the servant, Who is the man who is walking in the field to meet us? And the servant said, He is my master. And she took a mantle and covered herself.
And the servant recounted to Izhak all the things which he had done.
And Izhak brought her to the tabernacle: and he saw, and, behold, her works were right as the works of Sarah his mother. And he took Revekah, and she became his wife, and he loved her. And Izhak was comforted after his mother.
And Abraham added, and took a wife, and her name was Keturah;
And she bare to him Zimran, and Yokshan, and Medan, and Midyan, and Yeshbach, and Shuvach.
And Yokshan begat Sheba, and Dedan; and the sons of Dedan have been in camps and tabernacles and islands.
And the sons of Midyan, Eipha, and Epher, and Hanok, and Abidah, and Eldaah: all these the sons of Keturah.
And Abraham gave all that he had unto Izhak.
But to the sons of the concubine of Abraham gave Abraham portions, and sent them from his son Izhak, while he yet lived, eastward in the land of the sunrise.
And these are the days of the years of the life of Abraham that he lived, an hundred and seventy and five years.
And Abraham expired, and died in a good old age, aged, and full of days; and he was gathered unto his people.
And Izhak and Ishmael his sons buried him in the twofold cave in the field of Ephron bar Zochar, the Hittah, which is before Mamre;
the field that Abraham bought from the sons of Hittah: there they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife.
And it was after the death of Abraham that the Lord blessed Izhak his son, and Izhak dwelt at the well over which the Eternal Angel had appeared.
And these are the generations of Ishmael bar Abraham, whom Hagar the Mizretha, the handmaid of Sarah, bare to Abraham.
And these are the names of the sons of Ishmael by their names in their generations. The firstborn of Ishmael, Nebaioth; and Kedar, and Adbeel,
and Mibsam, and Mishma, and Duma, and Massa;
Hadad, and Thema, Yetoor, Naphish, and Kedemah.
These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names in their villages and their towns, twelve chiefs of their peoples.
And these are the years of the life of Ishmael, a hundred and thirty and seven years. And he expired and died, and was gathered to his people.
And they have dwelt from Havilah unto Hagra, which looketh toward Mizraim, reaching unto Athoor. In the presence of all his brethren he dwelt.
And these are the generations of Izhak bar Abraham. Abraham begat Izhak;
And Izhak was a son of forty years when he took Revekah, the daughter of Bethuel the Aramite of Padan Aram, the sister of Laban the Aramite, to be his wife.
And Izhak prayed before the Lord for his wife, because she was barren; and the Lord hearkened to his prayer, and Revekah his wife conceived.
And the children struggled in her womb; and she said, If thus, why have I conceived? And she went to seek instruction before the Lord:
And the Lord said to her, Two nations are in thy womb, and two kingdoms from thy womb shall be divided, and (one) kingdom (shall be) stronger than (the other) kingdom, and the greater shall be subject to the less.
And her days were fulfilled to give birth. And, behold, twins were in her womb.
And the first came forth red, all of him as a garment (covering) of hair; and they called his name Esau.
And afterwards came forth his brother, and his hand grasped the heel of Esau, and they called his name Jakob. And Izhak was sixty years old when he begat them.
And the youths grew; and Esau was a man of idleness, a man going out into the field; and Jakob was a man of peace, a minister of the house of instruction.
And Izhak loved Esau, because he ate of his hunting, and Rivekah loved Jakob.
And Jakob dressed pottage, and Esau came from the field, and he was faint.
And Esau said to Jakob, Let me taste now of that red, that red! For I am faint: (therefore he called his name Edom:)
and Jakob said, Sell this day thy birthright to me.
And Esau said, Behold, I am going to die, and what is this birthright to me?
And Jakob said, Swear to me today; and he sware to him and he sold his birthright to Jakob.
And Jakob gave to Esau bread and pottage of lentiles. And he ate and drank, and arose, and went: and Esau despised the birthright.
And there was a famine in the land, besides the former famine that was in the days of Abraham; and Izhak went to Abimelek, king of the Philistaee, to Gerar.
And the Lord appeared to him and said, Go not down into Mizraim, remain in the land as I have told thee;
Dwell in this land, and My Word shall be to thee for a helper; and I will bless thee. For to thee and to thy son will I give all these lands; and I will confirm the oath that I have sworn to Abraham thy father;
And I will multiply thy son as the stars of heaven, and will give thy son all these lands, and through thy son shall all the peoples of the earth be blessed,
because Abraham obeyed My word, and kept the keeping of My word, My commandments, My covenant, and My law.
And Izhak dwelt at Gerar;
and the men of the place asked respecting his wife. And he said, She is my sister; for he feared to say, My wife, lest the men of the place should kill him on account of Revekah; for she was of beautiful aspect.
And it was when be had been there many days that Abimelek the king of the Philistaee looked from a window, and, behold, Izhak was sporting with Revekah his wife.
And Abimelek called Izhak and said, Nevertheless, behold, she is thy wife: why then hast thou said, She is my sister? And Izhak said to him, Because I said, Lest I be killed on account of her.
And Abimelek said, What is this that thou hast done to us? It might have been that some one of the people had lain with thy wife, and thou wouldst have brought upon us the guilt.
And Abimelek commanded all the people saying, Whoever injureth this man shall surely be put to death.
And Izhak sowed in the land, and found in that year a hundred fold on that which he had expended, (or estimated,) and the Lord blessed him;
And the man increased, and went on multiplying and increasing, until he had increased greatly.
And he had flocks of sheep, and herds of cattle, and many servants; and the Philistaee were envious of him.
And all the wells that the servants of his father had digged in the days of Abraham the Philistaee stopped up, and filled with dust.
And Abimelek said to Izhak, Go from us; for thou art much stronger than we.
And Izhak went thence, and sojourned in the vale of Gerar, and dwelt there.
And Izhak returned, and digged the well of water which they had digged in the days of Abraham his father, and which the Philistaee had stopped after the death of Abraham; and he called their names after the names by which his father had called them.
And the servants of Izhak digged in the valley, and found there a well of flowing waters.
And the shepherds of Gerar strove with the shepherds of Izhak, saying, The water is ours; and he called the name of the well Contention, because they had contended with him.
And they digged another well, and they strove also on account of it, and he called the name of it Hatred.
And he went up from thence, and digged another well; and for that they strove not: and he called the name of it Spaciousness. For he said, Because now hath the Lord enlarged us, and we shall spread abroad in the land.
And he went up from thence to Beer Shava;
and the Lord appeared to him in the night, and said, I am the God of Abraham thy father; fear not: for in thy help is My Word; and I will bless thee, and will multiply thy sons for the sake of Abraham My servant.
And he builded there an altar, and prayed in the name of the Lord. And he spread there his tabernacle; and the servants of Izhak digged there a well.
And Abimelek came to him from Gerar, and a company of his friends, and Phikol the chief of his host.
And Izhak said to him, Why have you come to me, when you have hated me, and sent me from you?
And they said, Seeing we have seen that the Word of the Lord is for thy help; and we have said, Let the oath which was between our fathers be now confirmed between us and thee, and let us enter into a covenant with thee,
that thou do us no evil, as we have not injured thee, and as we have done thee only good, and we will leave thee in peace; thou art now blessed of the Lord.
And he made them a feast, and they ate and drank.
And they arose in the morning and covenanted, each man with his brother; and Izhak dismissed them, and they went from him in peace.
And it was in that day that the servants of Izhak came and showed him concerning the well that they had digged. And they said to him, We have found water.
And he called it Sheva, (the swearing). Wherefore the name of the city is Beer-sheva unto this day.
And Esau was the son of forty years, and he took to wife Jehudith, daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Basemath, daughter of Elon the Hittite;
And they were rebels and irritators against the word of Izhak and Revekah.
And it was, when Izhak was old, and his eyes were darkened from seeing, that he called Esau, his eldest son, and said to him, My son. And he said to him, Behold, I am.
And he said, Behold now, I am old, I know not the day that I shall die:
And now take thy weapons, thy knife and thy bow, and go out into the field, and hunt me venison,
And make me food I such as I like, and bring it to me, and I will eat, and my soul shall bless thee before I die.
And Revekah listened as Izhak was speaking with his son Esau. And Esau went into the field to hunt venison to bring it.
And Revekah spake to Jakob, her son, saying, Behold, I have heard thy father speaking with Esau thy brother, saying,
Bring me now venison, and make me food, and I will eat and bless thee in the presence of the Lord before I die.
And now, my son, obey me in what I command thee.
Go now to the flock, and take thee from thence two good goat-kids, and make them into food for thy father such as he loves,
And carry in to thy father, that he may eat, and bless thee before he die.
And Jakob said to Revekah his mother, Behold, Esau my brother is a hairy man, and I am a smooth man.
It may be that my father will feel me, and I shall be in his eyes as a deceiver, and shall bring upon me curses, and not blessings.
And his mother said to him, Unto me it hath been said in prophecy, that there shall be no curses upon thee, my son; only obey me, and go, and take for me.
And he went, and took, and brought to his mother, and his mother made food such as his father loved.
And Revekah took the vestments of Esau her elder son, (which were) clean, and were with her in the house, and clothed Jakob her younger son.
And with the skins of the kids she covered his hands, and upon the smoothness of his neck.
And she gave the food and the bread that she had made into the hand of Jakob her son.
And he went in to his father, and said, Father! And he said, Behold me. Who art thou, my son?
And Jakob said to his father, I am Esau, thy firstborn: I have done as thou hast told me. Arise now, turn thyself, and eat of my venison, that thy soul may bless me.
And Izhak said to his son, What is this, thou hast so quickly found, my son? And he said, Because the Lord thy God prepared it before me.
And Izhak said to Jakob, Draw near now, and I will feel thee, my son, whether thou be my son Esau or not.
And Jakob drew near to Izhak his father, and he felt him, and said, The voice is the voice of Jakob; but the hands are the hands of Esau.
And he could not be known, because his hands were hairy, like the hands of Esau his brother; and he blessed him.
And he said, But art thou my son Esau? And he said, I am!
And he said, Bring before me, and I will eat of my sons venison, that my soul may bless thee. And he offered to him, and he did eat; and he brought him wine, and he drank.
And Izhak his father said to him, Approach now, and kiss me, my son.
And he approached, and kissed him, and he smelled the fragrance of his vestments, and blessed him, and said, Lo, the smell of my son is as the fragrance of a field which the Lord hath blessed.
And the Lord shall give thee of the dew of heaven, and of the goodness of the earth, and abundance of corn and of wine.
Let the peoples serve thee, and kingdoms be subservient to thee: be thou chief of thy brethren, and let the sons of thy mother worship thee: cursed shall they be who curse thee, and blessed shall they be who bless thee!
And it was when Izhak had completed to bless Jakob, and Jakob had, going, only gone out from Izhak his father, that Esau his brother came in from his hunting.
And he had also made food, and he brought it to his father, and said to his father, Arise, my father, and eat of thy son’s venison, that thy soul may bless me.
And Izhak his father said to him, Who art thou? And he said, I am thy son, thy firstborn, Esau.
And Izhak was wonderstruck with exceeding great wonder, and said, Who was he who prepared venison, and brought it to me, and I have eaten of all before thou camest, and I have blessed him? And blessed shall he be.
When Esau heard the words of his father, he cried a cry, great and bitter exceedingly. And he said to his father, Bless me, also, me, father!
And he said, Thy brother came with subtilty, and hath received thy blessing.
And he said, Rightly is his name called Jakob, he hath dealt subtilly with me these two times; my birthright he took, and, behold, now he hath received my blessing. And he said, Hast thou not left me a blessing?
And Izhak answered, and said to Esau, Behold, I have set him a chief over thee, and all his brethren I have given to him for servants, and with corn and wine have I sustained him: and for thee now what can I do, my son?
And Esau said to his father, Hast thou but one blessing, father? Bless me, me also, my father. And Esau lifted up his voice and wept.
And Izhak his father answered and said to him, Behold, thy habitation shall be of the best of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from above.
And by thy sword shalt thou live, and thy brother obey; and it will be that when his sons shall have transgressed the words of the law, thou wilt cast his yoke from off thy neck.
And Esau kept enmity towards Jakob for the blessing wherewith his father had blessed him. And Esau said in his heart, The days of mourning for father draw near and I wilt kill Jakob my brother.
And the words of Esau her eldest son were shown to Revekah, and she sent and called Jakob her younger son, and said to him, Behold, Esau thy brother plotteth against thee to kill thee.
And now, my son, receive from me, and arise and go to Laban my brother at Haran,
And dwell with him a few days, until thy brother’s wrath turn away,
Until the anger of thy brother turn from thee, and what thou hast done to him be forgotten; and I will send and bring thee thence. Why should I be bereaved of both of you in one day?
And Revekah said to Izhak, I am grieved in my life at the sight of the daughters of Hittah. If Jakob take a wife of the daughters of Hittah, like these of the daughters of the land, what to me is life?
And Izhak called Jakob and blessed him. And he commanded him, and said to him, Thou shalt not take a wife from the daughters of Kenaan;
Arise, go to Padan Aram to the house of Bethuel the father of thy mother, and take to thee from thence a wife of the daughters of Laban, the brother of thy mother.
And the All-sufficient God bless thee, and make thee to increase and multiply, and become an assemblage of tribes;
And give the blessing of Abraham to thee and thy sons with thee, that thou mayest inherit the land of thy habitation which the Lord gave to Abraham.
And Izhak sent Jakob away, and he went to Padan Aram to Laban bar Bethuel, the Aramite, the brother of Revekah, the mother of Jakob and Esau.
And Esau, when he saw that Izhak had blessed Jakob, and sent him to Padan Aram to take from thence a wife, and, as he blessed him, commanded him, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife from the daughters of Kenaan,
and that Jakob had obeyed his father and his mother, and had gone to Padan Aram,
Esau, considering that the daughters of Kenaan were evil in the eyes of Izhak his father,
went to Ishmael, and took Mahalath, daughter of Ishmael bar Abraham, the sister of Nebaioth, over his wives, unto him to wife.
And Jakob went forth from Beersheva, and went to Haran;
and he arrived at a place, and lodged there, because the sun had gone. And he took of the stones of the place, and set his pillow, and lay down in that place.
And he dreamed: and, behold, a ladder was planted in the earth, and the head of it reached unto the height of heaven; and, behold, the angels of the Lord ascended and descended upon it;
and, behold, the Glory of the Lord stood above it, and He said, I am the God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Izhak. The land where thou sleepest, unto thee will I give it, and unto thy sons.
And thy sons shall be many as the dust of the earth, and shall prevail to the west and to the east, and to the north and to the south; and through thee shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed, and through thy sons.
And, behold, My Word shall be for thy help, and I will keep thee in every place whither thou goest, and I will bring thee again to this land; for I will not leave thee until I have done what I say to thee.
And Jakob awoke from his sleep, and said, Verily the Glory of the Lord dwelleth in this place, and I knew it not.
And he feared and said, How awful is this place! This place is not common (ground), but a place where there is pleasantness before the Lord; and this is nigh the gate of heaven.
And Jakob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone which he had set for his pillow, and set it up, a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it.
And he called the name of that place The House of God (Bethel). But Luz was the name of the city at the first.
And Jakob vowed a vow, saying, If the Word of the Lord will be my help, and will keep me in that way in which I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to wear,
and bring me again in peace to the Lord shall be my God.
And at this stone which I have set up (as) a pillar, will I worship before the Lord; and of all that Thou shalt give me, the tenth will I separate before Thee.
And Jakob lifted up his feet, and came to the land of the children of the East.
And he looked, and saw a well in a field; and, behold, three flocks of sheep lying near it, because from that well they watered the flocks; and a great stone was upon the mouth of the well.
And thither all the flocks were gathered together; and they withdrew the stone from the mouth of the well, and watered the flock, and returned the stone upon the mouth of the well unto its place.
And Jakob said to them, My brethren, whence are you? And they said, We are from Haran.
And Jakob said to them, Know you Laban bar Nachor? And they said, We know.
And he said, Hath he peace? And they said, Peace; and, behold, Rahel his daughter cometh with the flock.
And he said, Behold, the day is yet great, it is not time to gather the cattle; water the sheep, and go to the pasture.
And they said, We cannot till all the flocks are gathered, and we remove the stone from the mouth of the well, and water the flock.
While he spake with them, Rahel came, with the flock of her father; for she was a shepherdess.
And it was, when Jakob saw Rahel the daughter of Laban, the brother of his mother, and the flock of Laban the brother of his mother, that Jakob went near, and withdrew the stone from the well’s mouth, and watered the flock of Laban, his mother’s brother.
And Jakob kissed Rahel, and lifted up his voice and wept.
And Jakob showed Rahel that he was the son of her father’s sister, and that he was the son of Revekah. And she ran and showed to her father.
And it was when Laban heard the hearing of Jakob the son of his sister, that he ran to meet him, and embraced him, and kissed him, and brought him into his house; and he narrated to Laban all these words.
And Laban said to him, Thou art, however, my near (kinsman), and thou art my flesh. And he abode with him a month of days.
And Laban said to Jakob, Because thou art my brother, shalt thou serve me for nothing? Tell me, what shall be thy wages?
And Laban had two daughters, the name of the elder Leah, and the name of the younger Rahel.
And the eyes of Leah were beautiful; but Rahel was admirable in form, and beautiful in aspect.
And Jakob loved Rahel, and he said, I will serve thee seven years for Rahel thy younger daughter.
And Laban said, It is better that I give her to thee than give her to another man; reside with me.
And Jakob served for Rahel seven years; and they were in his eyes as a few days, inasmuch as he loved her.
And Jakob said to Laban, Give me my wife; for the days of my service are fulfilled, and I will go to her.
And Laban assembled all the men of the place, and made a feast.
And it was in the evening, that he took Leah his daughter, and introduced her to him, and he entered to her.
And Laban gave her Zilpha his handmaid unto Leah his daughter, to attend on her.
And it was in the morning, and, behold, she was Leah! And he said to Laban, What is this that thou hast done to me? Was it not for Rahel that I served thee? And why hast thou been false with me?
And Laban said, It is not so done in our place, to give the younger before the elder.
Fulfil this week, and I will give thee also that, for the service that thou shalt serve with me yet seven other years.
And Jakob did so, and fulfilled the week of this; and he gave him Rahel his daughter to be his wife.
And Laban gave to Rahel his daughter Bilhah her handmaid to wait upon her.
And he went in also to Rahel, and he loved Rahel more than Leah. And he served yet with him seven other years.
And the Lord saw that Leah was hated, and He gave her to conceive, but Rahel was barren.
And Leah conceived and bare a son, and she called his name Reuben; for she said, Because my affliction was manifest before the Lord; for now will my husband love me.
And she conceived again and bare a son, and she said, Because it was heard before the Lord that I had hatred, and He gave me this also; and she called his name Shemeon.
And she conceived again and bare a son: and she said, This time will my husband adhere to me; for I have born him three sons: therefore she called his name Levi.
And she conceived again and bare a son; and she said, This time will I give praise before the Lord: therefore she called his name Jehudah. And she ceased (stood) from bearing.
And Rahel saw that she did not bear unto Jakob; and Rahel envied her sister, and she said to Jakob, Give me children; and if not, I die.
And the anger of Jakob was incensed against Rahel, and he said, Why ask of me? Is it not before the Lord that thou shouldest ask, who hath denied thee the generation of the womb?
And she said, Behold my handmaid Bilhah, go in unto her, and she shall bear, and I also shall nourish (children), and be builded up from her.
And she gave him Bilhah her handmaid to wife; and Jakob went in unto her,
and Bilhah conceived, and bare to Jakob a son.
And Rahel said, The Lord hath judged me, and hath also received my prayer, and given me a son: therefore she called his name Dan.
And Bilhah the handmaid of Rahel conceived again, and bare a second son to Jakob.
And Rahel said, The Lord hath received my request: when I entreated in my prayer, I desired that I might have offspring as my sister, and also it is given me. And she called his name Naphtali.
And Leah saw that she had ceased from bearing, and she took Zilpha her handmaid, and gave her to Jakob to wife.
And Zilpha the handmaid of Leah bare a son to Jakob,
and Leah said, There cometh prosperity; and she called his name Gad.
And Zilpha the handmaid of Leah bare a second son to Jakob;
And Leah said, Praise shall be mine; now will women praise me; and she called his name Asher.
And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found mandrakes in the field, and he brought them to Leah his mother. And Rahel said to Leah, Give me now of thy son’s mandrakes.
And she said to her, Is it a little that thou hast taken my husband, and thou wilt take also my son’s mandrakes? And Rahel said, Therefore shall he lie with thee at night for thy son’s mandrakes.
And Jakob came in from the field at evening, and Leah went out to anticipate him, and said, With me thou wilt go in, because with hire have I hired thee, with the mandrakes of my son; and he lay with her that night.
And the Lord received the prayer of Leah, and she conceived, and bare to Jakob a fifth son.
And Leah said, The Lord hath given me my reward, because I gave my handmaid to my husband. And she called his name Issakar.
And Leah conceived again, and bare a sixth son to Jakob.
And Leah said, The Lord hath given me a good portion. This time will the habitation of my husband be with me, because I have born him six sons: therefore she called his name Zebulon.
And afterward she bare a daughter, and called her name Dinah.
And the remembrance of Rahel came before the Lord, and the Lord received her prayer, and gave her to conceive.
And she conceived and bare a son, and she said, The Lord hath taken up my reproach.
And she called his name Joseph, saying, The Lord shall add to me another son.
And it was when Rahel had born Joseph, that Jakob said to Laban, Send me away, that I may go to my place, and to my land.
Give me my wives and my children, for whom I have served thee, that I may go: for thou knowest the service with which I have served thee.
And Laban said to him, If now I have found grace in thine eyes, I have proved that the Lord hath blessed me for thy sake.
And he said, Certify thy wages with me, and I will give.
And he said to him, Thou knowest how I have served thee, and what thy flocks have been with me;
For thou hadst few before me, and they have increased into a multitude: and the Lord hath blessed thee for my sake. But now, what shall I do also for my (own) house?
And he said, What shall I give thee? And Jacob said, Thou shalt not give me anything; but if thou wilt do with me this matter, I will return, and, pasturing thy flocks, will keep (them).
I will pass through all thy flocks today, and set apart from them every lamb streaked and speckled, and every black lamb among the lambs, and the streaked and speckled among the goats, and they shall be my wages.
And my righteousness shall be testified in the day following, when thou wilt come upon my reward that shall be before thee: everyone which is not streaked or speckled among the goats, and black among the lambs, that shall be (as if) stolen by me.
And Laban said, Let it be according to thy word.
And he set apart that day the he goats of various colour, and all the goats which were speckled or spotted, everyone which had (some) white in him, and all that were black among the lambs: and he gave them into the hand of his sons.
And he set a walk of three days between them and Jakob; and Jakob pastured the flock of Laban which remained.
And Jakob took to him rods of white poplars, and of almond, (or hazel,) and of plane tree, and peeled in them white peelings, (so that, where) peeled, the white which was in the rods appeared.
And he fixed the rods that he had peeled in the canals, in the place of the watering of waters, the place to which they brought the flocks to drink, to be over against the flocks, that they might be incited when they came to drink.
And the sheep were incited before the rods, and the sheep brought forth with chequered feet and streaked.
And Jakob separated the lambs, and set before the sheep which were various coloured and all that were black among the sheep of Laban; and placed them for himself a flock apart, not mixing them with the sheep of Laban.
And it was that whenever the early (prime) sheep conceived, Jakob placed the rods before the eyes of the sheep in the canals, that they might conceive before the rods: but before the late sheep he did not place them.
And (so) the late ones were Laban’s, and the prime ones Jacob’s.
And the man increased very greatly, and had a multitude of flocks, and handmaids, and servants, and camels, and asses.
And he heard the words of Laban’s sons, saying, Jacob hath taken all that was our father’s; and of that which was our father’s he hath gotten all these possessions.
And Jakob saw the looks of Laban, and, behold, they were not with him as yesterday, and the time before.
And the Lord said to Jacob, Return to thy country and to thy native (place): and My Word shall be for thy help.
And Jacob sent and called Rahel and Leah to the field with his flocks:
And he said to them, I see the looks of your father, that they are not with me as yesterday and the time before; and the God of my father hath been to my help.
And you know that with all my strength I have served your father;
But your father hath lied to me, and hath changed my wages ten times; but the Lord hath not permitted him to hurt me.
If now he said, The streaked shall be thy wages; then all the flock bare streaked: and if now he said, The chequered shall be thy wages; all the flock bare chequered.
And the Lord hath separated them from the cattle of your father, and hath given (them) to me.
And it was at the time when the flocks conceived, I lifted up my eyes, and saw in a dream, and, behold, the rams which leaped upon the flock were chequered, streaked, and speckled.
And the angel of the Lord said to me in a dream, Jacob. And I said, Behold, I am.
And he said, Lift up now thine eyes, and see, all the rams which leap upon the flock are chequered, streaked, and speckled: because all that Laban hath done to thee is manifest before Me.
I am Eloha, who appeared to thee at Bethel, where thou didst anoint the pillar, and where before Me thou didst swear the oath: arise now, go from this land, and return to the land of thy birth.
And Rahel and Leah answered and said to him, Have we yet a portion or inheritance in our father’s house?
Are we not accounted as strangers by him? For he hath sold us, and hath devoured our money also.
Therefore, all the wealth that the Lord hath separated from our father is ours and our children’s: and now all that the Lord hath said to thee, do.
And Jakob arose, and lifted up his sons and his wives upon camels;
And led all his herds and all his substance which he had obtained, his herds and his substance which he had obtained in Padan Aram, to go unto Izhak his father in the land of Kenaan.
And Laban had gone to shear his flock: and Rahel took the images that were her father’s.
And Jakob concealed from Laban the Aramite, and showed him not that he went.
And he went, he and all that were his; and he arose and passed the Phrat, and set his face toward the mountain of Gilead.
And it was shown to Laban on the third day that Jakob had gone.
And he took his brethren with him, and Pursued after him; going seven days; and he overtook him in the Mountain of Gilead.
And a word came from before the Lord to Laban the Aramite in a dream of the night, and He said to him, Beware, lest thou speak with Jakob from good to evil.
And Laban overtook Jakob; and Jakob had spread his tent in the mountain; and Laban made his brethren abide in the mountain of Gilead.
And Laban said to Jacob; What hast thou done, that thou hast hidden from me, and taken away my daughters, as captives of the sword?
Why didst thou conceal thy going, (or conceal thyself to go,) and didst hide it from me, and not show me, that I might then have sent thee away with mirth, and with hymns, and with tambourines, and with harps?
Nor didst thou suffer me to kiss my sons and my daughters. Now hast thou done foolishly.
It is in the power of my bands to do evil with thee: but the God of thy father spake to me in the evening, saying, Beware lest thou speak to Jakob from good to evil.
And now, (though) going thou wouldest go, because desiring thou bast desired the house of thy father, why hast thou taken my religion?
And Jakob answered and said to Laban, Because I feared; for I said, Lest thou shouldst take away thy daughters from me.
The place where thou shalt find thy religious things shall not abide: before our brethren ascertain thou what of thine is with me, and take to thee. But Jakob knew not that Rahel had carried them away.
And Laban entered into the tent of Leah, and into the tent of the two concubines, but found not; and he went forth from the tent of Leah, and entered the tent of Rahel.
But Rahel had taken the images, and laid them in the panniers of the camels, and sat upon them. And Laban searched all the tent, but found not.
And she said to her father, Let it not be displeasing in the eyes of my lord, that I am not able to rise before thee; for the way of women is upon me. And he scrutinized, but found not the images.
And Jakob was angry, and contended with Laban. And Jakob answered and said to Laban, What is my guilt, my crime, that thou hast pursued after me?
Now that thou hast searched all my things, what hast thou found, of all the things of thy house? Set it here before my brethren and thy brethren, and they shall decide between us both.
These twenty years have I been with thee; thy ewes and thy goats have not failed, and the rams of thy flock I have not eaten.
The wounded I have not brought to thee; what was deficient in number, from my hand hast thou required it. I have watched by day, and I have watched by night.
(Thus) have I been; in the day the heat devoured me, and the frost came down upon me at night, and sleep passed away from my eyes.
These twenty years have I served in thy house; fourteen years for thy two daughters; and six years for thy sheep; and thou hast changed my wages ten times.
Unless the God of my fathers, the God of Abraham, and He whom Izhak hath feared, had been my helper, even now thou hadst sent me away empty: but my labour, and the travail of my hands, have been manifest before the Lord, and He rebuked thee in the evening.
And Laban answered and said to Jakob, The daughters are my daughters, and the sons my sons, and the sheep are my sheep, and all whatsoever thou seest is mine; and to these, my daughters, what can I do this day, or unto their children which they have born?
And now come, let us enter into a covenant, I and thou, and it shall be for a witness between me and thee.
And Jakob took a stone, and set it up as a pillar.
And Jakob said to his brethren, Collect stones; and they took stones, and made a mound, and ate there upon the mound.
And Laban called it Yegar Sahadutha, but Jakob called it Gal-Ed.
And Laban said, This mound testifieth between me and thee today.
Therefore he called the name of it The Heap of Witness, and The Observatory; for he said, The Word of the Lord will observe between me and thee, when we are hidden each man from his neighbor.
If thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt take wives over my daughters, no man is with us; see, the Word of the Lord is witness between me and thee.
And Laban said to Jakob, Behold this mound and this pillar, which thou bast erected between me and thee.
And Laban said, This mound testifieth between me and thee today. And Laban said, This mound testifieth between me and thee today. This mound and pillar are a witness, that I will not pass over this mound to thee; and that thou shalt not pass over this mound and this pillar, to do me evil.
The God of Abraham and the God of Nachor shall judge between us, the God of their fathers. And Jakob sware by Him whom Izhak his father feared.
And Jakob sacrificed victims in the mountain, and called his brethren to eat bread; and they ate bread, and tabernacled in the mountain.
And Laban arose in the morning, and kissed his sons and his daughters, and blessed them, and went; and Laban returned to his place.
And Jakob went on his way, and the angels of the Lord met him.
And when Jakob saw them, he said, This is a host from before the Lord; and he called the name of the place Mahanaim.
And Jakob sent messengers before him to Esau his brother to the land of Seir, in the region of Edom;
And he instructed them, saying, So shall you tell to my lord, to Esau: Thus saith thy servant Jakob, With Laban I have dwelt, and have tarried, until now.
And I have oxen, and asses, sheep, and servants, and handmaids, and have sent to show my lord, to find grace in thine eyes.
And the messengers returned to Jakob, saying, We came to thy brother, to Esau; and he cometh also to meet thee, and four hundred men with him.
And Jakob feared greatly, and it distressed him. And he divided the people that were with him, and the sheep, and oxen, and camels, into two hosts,
And said, If Esau come to the one host and smite it, the host that is left may escape.
And Jakob said, God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Izhak, the Lord, who didst say to me, Return to thy country and to thy native place, and I will do thee good;
less are my righteousnesses than all the mercies and all the benefits which Thou hast performed unto Thy servant: for alone I passed this Yardena, and now I have become two bands.
Deliver me now from the hand of my brother, from the band of Esau; for I am afraid of him, lest he come and smite me, and the mother with the children.
And Thou hast said, In doing good I will do good with thee, and will make thy sons many as the sand of the sea which cannot be numbered for number.
And he housed there that night, and took of that which came to his hand, an offering for Esau his brother;
Goats two hundred, rams twenty, ewes two hundred, and rams twenty,
Camels giving milk and their young ones thirty, cows forty, and bulls ten, she-asses twenty, and colts ten.
And he gave them into the hand of his servants, herd by herd separately, and said to his servants, Pass over before me, and put a space between herd and herd.
And he commanded the foremost, saying, If Esau my brother meet thee, and ask thee, saying, Whose art thou? And, Whither goest thou? And, Whose are these that are before thee?
Thou shalt say, They are an offering of thy servant Jakob, which he hath sent to my lord, to Esau; and, behold, he also cometh after us.
And he instructed also the second and the third, and all of them who followed the herds, saying, According to this word you shall speak with Esau, when you find him;
And say also, Behold, thy servant Jakob cometh after. For he said, I will quiet his anger by the offering that goeth before me, and afterward I will see his face; perhaps he will accept me.
And the offering went over before his face, and he himself lodged that night in the camp.
And he arose in the night, and took his two wives, and his two concubines, and his eleven sons, and passed over the ford Jubeka;
And he took them and made them pass over the torrent, and made what was his to pass over.
And Jakob remained alone; and a Man wrestled with him till the morning ascended.
And he saw that he prevailed not with him, and he touched the hollow of his thigh, and the hollow of Jacob’s thigh was dislocated in wrestling with him.
And he said, Let me go; for the morning ascendeth And he said, I will not let Thee go, unless Thou bless me.
And He said to him, What is thy name? And he said, Jakob.
And He said, Thy name shall be no longer Jakob, but Israel; for a prince art thou before the Lord, and with men, and thou hast prevailed.
And Jakob asked Him, and said, Show me now Thy Name! And He said, Why dost thou ask My Name? And He blessed him there.
And Jakob called the name of the place Peniel: because I have seen the Angel of the Lord face to face, and my soul hath been saved!
And the sun arose upon him as he passed over Penuel, and he went lame upon his thigh.
Therefore the sons of Israel do not eat the sinew which shrank, which is upon the hollow of the thigh, unto this day, because He touched the hollow of Jakob’s thigh in the sinew that shrank.
And Jakob lifted up his eyes, and saw, and, behold, Esau came, and with him four hundred men; and he divided the children with Leah, and with Rahel, and with the two concubines.
And he set the concubines and their children first, and Leah and her children after, and Rahel and Joseph after them.
And he passed over before them, and bowed to the earth seven times, until he came nigh to his brother.
And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell upon his neck, and kissed him; and they wept.
And he lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children, and said, What are these to thee? And he said, The children whom the Lord hath given to thy servant.
And the concubines approached, they and their children, and bowed.
And Leah also approached and her children, and bowed; and afterward Joseph and Rahel approached, and bowed.
And he said, What to thee is all this troop which I have met? And he said, To find mercy in the eyes of my lord.
And Esau said, I have much, my brother; let what is thine own profit thee.
And Jakob said, I pray thee, if I have now found mercy in thine eyes, that thou wouldst accept the present from my hand, because I have now seen thy face as the vision of the face of the Great, and thou art pleased with me.
Receive, I pray, my offering which is brought to thee, because the Lord hath been merciful to me, and because I have all.
And he was urgent on him, and he took it. And he said, Let us journey and go, and I will go along with thee.
And he said, My lord knoweth that the little ones are tender, and the sheep and kine giving milk are with me; and if they overdrive them one day, all the flock may die.
Let my lord pass on before his servant, and I will lead on quietly, according to the foot of the little ones, according to the foot of the work that is before me, and according to the foot of the sucklings, until I come to my lord at Seir.
And Esau said, Let me leave with thee of the people who are with me. And he said, Why should this be? Let me find grace in the eyes of my lord.
And Esau returned that day on his way to Seir.
And Jakob journeyed to Succoth, and builded him an house, and made tabernacles for his cattle; therefore he called the name of the place Succoth.
And Jakob came in peace to the city of Shekem, which is in the land of Kenaan, in his coming from Padan Aram, and he abode near the face of the city.
And he bought the possession of the field where he had spread his tent, of the hand of the sons of Hamor, the father of Shekem, for a hundred lambs.
And he raised there an altar, and offered service upon it before God, the God of Israel.
And Dinah, the daughter of Leah, whom she bare to Jakob, went forth to see the daughters of the land.
And Shekem bar Hamor the Hivite, the prince of the land, saw her, and took her, and lay with her, and humbled her.
And his soul took pleasure in Dinah the daughter of Jakob, and he loved the damsel, and spake to the heart of the damsel.
And Shekem spake to Hamor his father, saying, Take to me this damsel for a wife.
And Jakob heard that he had polluted Dinah his daughter. And his sons were with his flocks in the field; and Jakob was silent until they were come.
And Hamor the father of Shekem came forth to Jakob to speak with him.
And the sons of Jakob came up from the field when they heard. And the men were indignant and very angry, because shame had been wrought in Israel by his lying with the daughter of Jacob; for so it should not have been done.
Hamor spake with them, saying, The soul of Shekem my son hath pleasure in your daughter; give her now to him to wife.
And marry with us, and take our daughters to you;
And the land shall be before you; inhabit and do business in it, and possess it.
And Shekem said to her father and to her brethren, Let me find favour in your eyes, and what you shall tell me I will give.
Multiply upon me dowry and present, and I will give as you may tell me; but give me the damsel to wife.
And the sons of Jakob answered Shekem and Hamor his father, and with subtlety they spake, because he had defiled Dinah their sister.
And they said to them, We cannot do this thing, to give our sister to a man uncircumcised; for that (would be) a reproach to us.
Nevertheless in this we will agree with you, if you will be as we are, by circumcising every male among you,
and we will give our daughters to you, and your daughters will we take to us, and will dwell with you and be one people.
But if you will not consent to us to be circumcised, we will take our daughter and go.
And their words were pleasing in the eyes of Hamor, and in the eyes of Shekem the son of Hamor.
And the young man delayed not to do the thing, because he delighted in the daughter of Jakob, and he was more honourable than all his father’s house.
And Hamor came, and Shekem his son, to the gate of the city, and spake to the men of the city, saying,
These men are friendly with us, and they may dwell in the land, and do business in it, and the land, behold, it is wide (on both) hands before them; their daughters we will take to us for wives, and our daughters we will give to them.
Only in this will the men agree with us to dwell with us, to be one people, in every male of us being circumcised, as they are circumcised.
Their flocks, and their possessions, and all their cattle, will they not be ours? Only let us consent to them, and they will dwell with us.
And everyone who went out of the gate of his city received of Hamor and of Shekem his son, and they were circumcised, every male, everyone who went out of the gate of his city.
And it was on the third day, when their pains were strong upon them, that the two sons of Jakob, Shemeon and Levi, the brothers of Dinah, took each man his sword, and came upon the city, which dwelt in security, and slew every male,
and Hamor and Shekem his son they killed with the edge of the sword. And they brought Dinah out of the house of Shekem, and went.
And the sons of Jakob came up to the spoil of the slain, and sacked the town, because they had defiled their sister.
Their sheep, and their oxen, and their asses, and all that was in the city and the field, they took.
And all their substance, and all their little ones, and their wives, they captured and spoiled, and all which was in the house.
And Jakob said to Shemeon and Levi, You have troubled me, in putting strife between me and the inhabitants of the land, the Kenaanites and the Perrezites, and I a people (few) for number; and they will gather against me, and smite me, and I shall perish, I and the men of my house.
And they said, As with an outcast should he deal with our sister?
And the Lord said to Jakob, Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there, and make there an altar unto Eloha, who appeared to thee when in thy flight from before Esau thy brother.
And Jakob said to the men of his house, and to all who were with him, Put away the gentile idols that are among you, and purify; and change your raiment;
And we will arise and go up to Bethel, and I will make there an altar unto Eloha, who heard my prayer in the day of my distress, and whose Word was my helper in the way that I went.
And they gave Jakob all the gentile idols that were in their hands, and the jewels that were in their ears, and Jakob hid them under the terebinth which was near Shekem.
And they journeyed; and fear from before the Lord was upon the peoples in the cities surrounding them; and they followed not after the sons of Jakob.
And Jakob came to Luz, which is in the land of Kenaan, which is Bethel, he and all the people who were with him.
And he builded there an altar, and called the place El Bethel, because the Angel of the Lord had appeared to him there when he fled from before his brother.
And Deborah, the nurse of Revekah, died, and was buried below Bethel, in the declivity of the vale; and he called the name of it, The vale of weeping.
And the Lord appeared unto Jakob again when he had come from Padan Aram, and blessed him.
And the Lord said to Jakob, Thy name shall be no more Jakob, but Israel shall be thy name; and he called his name Israel.
And the Lord said to him, I am El Shadai; increase and multiply; a people and an assemblage of tribes shall be from thee, and kings who shall reign over the peoples shall come forth from thee.
And the land that I gave to Abraham and to Izhak I will give unto thee, and to thy sons after thee, will I give the land.
And the glory of the Lord ascended above him, in the place where He had spoken with him.
And Jakob erected a pillar in the place where He had spoken with him, a pillar of stone, and outpoured libations upon it, and poured oil thereon.
And Jakob called the name of the place where the Lord bad spoken with him Bethel.
And they journeyed from Bethel, and there was yet a space of land to come unto Ephrath; and Rahel travailed, and had hard (pain) in her birth-labour.
And as she travailed in her labour, the midwife said to her, Fear not, for also this to thee is a son.
And it was in the going forth of her soul, for she died, that she called his name The son of my woe; but his father called him Benjamin.
And Rahel died, and was buried in the way of Ephrath, which is Beth-Lechem.
And Jakob erected a pillar upon her grave: that is the pillar of the tomb of Rahel unto this day.
And Israel proceeded and spread his tabernacle beyond the tower of Adar.
And it was while Israel dwelt in that land, that Reuben went and lay with Bilhah, the concubine of his father. And Israel heard it. And the sons of Jakob were twelve.
The sons of Leah, the firstborn of Jakob, Reuben, and Shemeon, and Levi, and Jehudah, and Issakar, and Zebulon.
The sons of Rahel, Joseph and Benjamin.
The sons of Bilhah, the handmaid of Rahel, Dan and Naphtali;
and the sons of Zilpha, the handmaid of Leah, Gad and Asher. These are the sons of Jakob, who were born to him in Padan Aram.
And Jakob came unto Izhak his father, unto Mamre, the city of Arba, which is Hebron; for Abraham and Izhak had dwelt there.
And the days of Izhak were an hundred and eighty years.
And Izhak expired and died, and was gathered unto his people, old and content with days; and Esau and Jakob his sons buried him.
And these are the generations of Esau, who is Edom.
Esau took his wives from the daughters of Kenaan: Ada, daughter of Helon the Hittite, and Ahalivama, the daughter of Ana, the daughter of Sibeon the Hivite,
and Basemath, the daughter of Ishmael, the sister of Nebaioth.
And Ada bare to Esau Eliphaz; and Basemath bare Reuel;
and Ahalivama bare Jehus, and Jaalam, and Korach. These are the sons of Esau who were born to him in the land of Kenaan.
And Esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and all the souls of his house, and his flocks, and all his cattle, and all his substance which he had gotten in the land of Kenaan, and went into another land from before Jakob his brother;
Because their substance was too great for them to dwell together, and the land of their habitation could not sustain them with regard to their cattle.
And Esau dwelt in the mountain of Seir. Esau is Edom.
And these are the generations of Esau, the father of the Edomai, in the mountain of Seir,
these are the names of the sons of Esau: Eliphaz, the son of Ada, the wife of Esau; Reuel, son of Basemath, the wife of Esau.
And the sons of Eliphaz were Theman, Omar, Zepho, and Gaetam, and Kenaz.
And Thimna was the concubine of Eliphaz bar Esau, and she bare to Eliphaz Amalek. These are the sons of Ada, the wife of Esau.
And these are the sons of Reuel, Nahath and Zara, Shamma and Meza. These are the sons of Basemath, the wife of Esau.
And these are the sons of Ahalivama, the daughter of Ana, the daughter of Zebeon, the wife of Esau; and she bare unto Esau Jehus, and Jaalam, and Korach.
These are the chiefs of the sons of Esau. Of the sons of Eliphaz the firstborn of Esau, Rabba Theman, Rabba Omar, Rabba Zepho, Rabba Kenaz,
rabba Korach, Rabba Gaetam, Rabba Amalek These are the chiefs of Eliphaz in the land of Edom; these are the sons of Ada.
And these are the sons of Reuel bar Esau: Rabba Nachath, Rabba Zarach, Rabba Shamma, Rabba Meza. These are the chiefs of Reuel in the land of Edom; these are the sons of Basemath, the wife of Esau.
And these are the sons of Ahalivama, the wife of Esau: Rabba Jehus, Rabba Jaalam, Rabba Korach. These are the chiefs of Ahalivama, the daughter of Ana the wife of Esau.
These are the sons of Esau, and these are their chieftains. He is Edom.
These are the sons of Seir, the Chorites, the inhabitants of the land, Lothan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Ana,
and Dishon, and Etser, and Dishan. These are the chieftains of the Choraai, the sons of Seir, in the land of Edom.
And the sons of Loti were Hori and Hemaim, and the sister of Lotan was Timna.
And these are the Beni Shobal, Alvan, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shephi, and Onam.
And these are the sons of Zebeon, Aya and Ana; he is Ana who found the giants in the desert while he tended the asses of his father Zibeon.
And these are the children of Ana, Dishon, and Ahalivania the daughter of Ana.
And these are the sons of Dishan: Hemdan, and Eshban, and Jethran, and Keran.
These are the sons of Etser: Bilan, and Zaavan, and Akan.
These are the sons of Dishan: Huts and Aran.
These are the chieftains of the Choraai: Rabba Lotan, Rabba Shobal, Rabba Zebeon, Rabba Ana,
Rabba Dishon, Rabba Etser, Rabba Dishan. These are the chieftains of the Choraai, according to their principalities in the land of Seir.
And these are the kings who reigned in the land of Edom, before that kings reigned among the sons of Israel:
Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom, and the name of his city was Dinhava.
And Bela died, and instead of him reigned Yobab the son of Zerah of Botsra.
And Yobab died, and instead of him reigned Husham, of the land of the south.
And Husham, died, and instead of him reigned Hadad, the son of Bedad, who slew the Medianae in the fields of Moab; and the name of his city was Avith.
And Hadad died, and in his stead reigned Simlah of Masereka.
And Simlah died, and in his stead reigned Shaul of Rechovoth, which is on the Ph’rat.
And Shaul died, and in his stead reigned Baal-Chanan bar Akbor.
And Baal-Chanan bar Akbor died, and in his stead reigned Hadar, and the name of his city was, Pau; and the name of his wife Mehetavel, the daughter of Matered, the daughter of a changer of gold.
And these are the names of the chieftains of Esau, after their kindreds, by their places, with their names: Rabba Timna, Rabba Alvah, Rabba Jetheth,
Rabba Ahalivama, Rabba Elah, Rabba Phinon,
Rabba Kenez, Rabba Teman, Rabba Mabzar,
Rabba Magdiel, Rabba Iram: these are the chieftains of Edom, after their habitations in the land of their possessions. He is Esau, the father of the Edomites.
And Jakob dwelt in the land of the habitation of his father, in the land of Kenaan.
These are the generations of Jakob. Joseph was a son of seventeen years; he kept the flock with his brothers; and he had been brought up with the sons of Bilhah, and with the sons of Zilpha, the wives of his father; and Joseph brought their evil report to his father.
But Israel loved Joseph more than all his sons, because he had in him a wise son, and he made him a variegated robe.
And his brothers saw that their father loved him better than all his brethren, and they hated him, and were not willing to speak with him peaceably.
And Joseph dreamed a dream, and showed it to his brothers, and they hated him the more.
And he said to them, Hear now this dream which I have dreamed:
Behold, we were binding sheaves in the midst of the field, and lo! My sheaf arose and became upright, and, behold, your sheaves stood around and worshipped my sheaf.
And his brothers said to him, Is it thy fancy reigning to reign over us? Or a shultan, dost thou think to govern us? And they added yet to hate him for his dreams and for his words.
And he dreamed yet another dream, and described it to his brothers, saying, Behold, I have dreamed a dream again; and lo, the sun, and the moon, and eleven stars worshipped me.
And he described it to his father and to his brethren; and his father rebuked him and said to him, What dream is this that thou hast dreamed? Am I and thy mother and thy brothers to come and worship thee on the earth?
And his brothers envied him; but his father kept the word.
And his brothers went to tend the flock of their father in Shekem.
And Israel said to Joseph, Do not thy brothers tend the flock in Shekem? Come, I will send thee to them. And he said. Behold me.
And he said to him, Go now, and see the welfare of your brothers and the welfare of the flock, and return me word. And he sent him from the vale of Hebron, and he came to Shekem.
And a man found him, and, behold, he wandered in the field. And the man inquired of him, saying, Whom seekest thou?
And he said, I look for my brothers: show me, I beseech thee, where they feed.
And the man said, They have gone hence; for I heard them say, We will go to Dothan. And Joseph went after his brethren, and found them in Dothan.
And they saw him from afar; and before he came nigh, they devised against him to kill him.
And they said, a man to his brother, Behold, this master of dreams cometh.
And now, come, we will kill him, and cast him into one of the pits; and will say an evil beast hath devoured him, and we shall see what will be the end of his dreams.
And Reuben heard, and delivered him out of their hands, and said, Let us not slay his life.
And Reuben said, Do not shed blood; cast him into this pit in the wilderness, but stretch not forth a hand against him, that he might deliver him from their hands to bring him back to his father.
And it was when Joseph had come to his brethren that they took off his robe, the variegated robe which was upon him,
And they took him and cast him into the pit; but the pit was empty, no water was in it.
And they reclined to eat bread. And they lifted up their eyes and looked, and, behold, a band of Arabaee were coming from Gilead, with their camels bearing spices, and resin, and myrrh, to go down to Mizraim.
And Jehuda said to his brethren, What gain should we have by killing our brother and covering his blood?
Come, and we will sell him to the Arabaee, and our hand shall not be upon him; for he is our brother, our flesh. And his brethren hearkened to him.
And there passed by Midianite men, (gabree Mid-ya-naee,) merchants, and they drew and lifted up Joseph from the pit, and sold Joseph to the Arabaee for twenty of silver; and they brought Joseph into Mizraim.
And Reuben returned to the pit, and, behold, Joseph was not in the pit. And he rent his clothes,
And returned to his brethren, and said, The youth is not; and I, whither shall I go?
But they took Joseph’s robe, and killed a kid of the goats, and dabbled the robe in the blood.
And they sent the variegated robe, and they brought to their father, and said, This have we found; know now whether it is the robe of thy son, or not.
And he knew it, and said, It is my son’s robe; an evil beast hath devoured him: slain, slain is Joseph!
And Jakob rent his clothes, and wrapped sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his son many days.
And all his sons, and all his house, arose to comfort him; but he refused to take comfort, and said, For I will go down unto my son, mourning into Sheol. And his father wept for him.
And the Midianites sold him in Mizraim to Potiphar, a prince of Pharoh, chief of the killers.
And it was at that time that Jehuda went down from his brethren, and turned aside to an Adulamite man whose name was Hira.
And Jehuda saw there the daughter of a merchant man whose name was Shuva, and he took her and went in with her;
And she conceived and bare a son, and he called his name Her;
And she conceived again, and bare a son, and called his name Onan.
And she added again, and bare a son, and called his name Shelah; and he was in Kezib when she bare him.
And Jehuda took a wife for Her his firstborn, and her name was Tamar.
And Her the firstborn of Jehuda was evil before the Lord, and the Lord caused him to die.
And Jehuda said to Onan, Go in with the wife of thy brother, and associate with her, and raise up seed to thy brother.
And Onan knew that after his name the seed would not be called; and it was that when he went in with the wife of his brother, he corrupted his way upon the earth that he might not raise up seed unto his brother;
And what he did was evil before the Lord, and he caused him also to die.
And Jehuda said to Tamar his daughter-in-law, Remain a widow in thy father’s house until Shelah my son be grown up. For he said, Lest he also die like his brothers: and Tamar went and dwelt in her father’s house.
And after many days the daughter of Shuva, Jehuda’s wife, died: and Jehuda was comforted; and he went up to the shearers of his sheep, he and Hira the Adulamite his friend unto Timnath.
And it was shown to Tamar, saying, Behold, thy father-in-law cometh to Timnath to shear his sheep.
And she laid aside the dress of her widowhood, and covered herself with a mantle (or a large veil), and adorned herself, and sat in the dividing of Aynin which is in the way to Timnath. For she saw that Shelah had grown up, and she had not been given to him for a wife.
And Jehuda saw her, and thought that she was an outcast, because she had covered her face.
And he declined to her by the way, and said, Give me now to go in unto thee; for he did not know that she was his daughter-in-law. And she said, What wilt thou give me, that thou mayest come to me?
And he said, I will send thee a kid of the goats from the flock. And she said, If thou wilt give me a pledge until thou send.
And he said, What is the pledge that I shall give thee? And she said, Thy seal-ring, and thy scarf, and thy staff that is in thy hand. And he gave to her, and went in to her, and she conceived by him.
And she arose, and went, and put off the veil from her, and dressed herself in the dress of her widowhood.
And Jehuda sent the kid of the goats, by the hand of his friend the Adulamite, to receive the pledge from the hand of the woman; but he could not find her.
And he inquired of the men of the place, saying, Where is the harlot who was in Aynin upon the way? And they said to him, There is no harlot here.
And he returned to Jehuda, and said, I could not find her; the men of the place also said there is no harlot there.
And Jehuda said, Let her take it to her, lest we be in contempt: behold, I sent this kid, and thou hast not found her.
And it was three months, and it was showed to Jehuda, saying, Tamar thy daughter-in-law hath committed fornication, and, behold, she is with child by fornication. And Jehuda said, Bring her out, and let her be burned.
And she was brought out. And she sent to her father-in-law, saying, By the man to whom these belong I am with child. And she said, Acknowledge now, whose are these, the seal, the scarf, and the staff?
And Jehuda acknowledged and said, She is justified in having conceived from me, because I have not given her Shelah my son. And he added not again to know her.
And it was the time of her giving birth, and, behold, twins were in her womb.
And it was in giving birth that one of them put forth a hand; and the midwife took and tied scarlet upon his hand, saying, This came the first.
And it was when he had drawn back his hand that his brother came forth: and she said, How much greater strength is with thee, that thou hast prevailed! And she called his name Pharets.
And afterwards came forth his brother who had the crimson on his hand, and she called his name Zarah.
But Joseph was brought down into Mizraim, and Potiphar, a chief of Pharoh, a chief of the killers, a Mizraite man, bought him from the hand of the Arabaee who had brought him down thither.
And the Word of the Lord was the helper of Joseph, and he became a prosperous man, and was in the house of his Mizraite master.
And his master saw that the Word of the Lord was his helper, and that all that he did the Lord prospered in his hand.
And Joseph found favour in his eyes, and he served him. And he appointed him over his house, and all that he had he delivered into his hand.
And it was from the time that he appointed him over his house, and over all that he had, that the Lord blessed the house of the Mizraite for Joseph’s sake, and the blessing of the Lord was upon all that he had, in the house and in the field.
And he left all that belonged to him in the hand of Joseph; and he knew of nothing that was with him, except the bread which he ate. Now Joseph was of goodly appearance, beautiful in aspect.
And it was after these things that the wife of his master lifted up her eyes to Joseph, and said, Lie with me.
But be refused, and said to his master’s wife, Behold, my master knoweth not what is with me in the house, and all that he hath he hath delivered unto my hand;
There is no one in this housegreater than I, and be hath not prohibited anything from me but thyself, because thou art his wife: and how can I do this great wickedness and become guilty before the Lord?
And it was when she spake with Joseph daily that he would not hearken to her to lie with her, or be with her.
And it was about this day that he came into the house to examine the writings of his affairs, and no man of the men of the house was there in the house.
And she laid hold of his garments, saying, Lie with me. But he left his garment in her hand, and fled, and went forth into the street.
[no translation]
And she called to the men of her house, and spake to them, saying, See, he brought us a Hebrew man to mock at us. He came in to me to lie with me; and I cried with a high voice.
And it was when he heard that I lifted up my voice and cried, he left his robe with me, and fled and went forth into the street.
And she let his robe remain with her until his master came into his house.
And she spake with him these words, saying, The Hebrew servant whom thou broughtest us came in to me to mock at me.
And it was when I lifted up my voice and cried, he left his robe with me and fled into the street.
And when his master heard the words of his wife which she spake with him, saying, According to these things hath thy servant done to me, his anger waxed strong,
And his master took Joseph, and delivered him to the house of the bound, where the prisoners of the king were bound; and he was there in the house of the bound.
But the Word of the Lord was the helper of Joseph, and showed him mercy, and gave him favour in the eyes of the captain of the prison.
And the captain of the prison gave into the hand of Joseph all the prisoners who were in the house of the bound, and all that they did there was done according to his word.
The captain of the prison saw no fault in his hand, because the Word of the Lord was his helper, and that which he did the Lord made to prosper.
And after these things the cupbearer and the baker of the king of Mizraim offended their master, the king of Mizraim.
And Pharoh was angry with two of his chiefs, with the chief of the cupbearers and with the chief of the bakers.
And he gave them into ward in the house of the captain of the executioners (killers) in the house of the prison, the place where Joseph was confined.
And the captain of the executioners appointed Joseph with them, and he ministered to them, and they were certain days inward.
And they dreamed a dream, both of them, each man his dream in one night, each man according to the interpretation of his dream, the cupbearer and the baker of the king of Mizraim, who were confined in the house of the bound.
And Joseph came to them in the morning, and saw them, and, behold, they were melancholy.
And he asked the chiefs of Pharoh who were with him inward, in his master’s house, saying, Why are your faces evil today?
And they said to him, We have dreamed a dream, and there is no interpreter of it. And Joseph said to them, Are not interpretations from before the Lord? Relate it now to me.
And the chief of the cupbearers related his dream to Joseph, and said to him, In my dream, behold, a vine was before me,
and in the vine were three branches: and it was, as it sprouted, it produced buds, and, having flowered, ripened clusters of grapes.
And the cup of Pharoh was in my hand; and I took grapes and expressed them into Pharohs cup, and gave the cup into Pharoh’s hand.
And Joseph said to him, This is the interpretation: the three branches are three days.
At the end of three days, Pharoh will remember thee and restore thee to thy service, and thou wilt give the cup into Pharoh’s hand, according to thy former custom when thou wast cupbearer to him.
But let remembrance of me be with thee when it shall be well with thee, and do me favour, I beseech thee, and remember me before Pharoh, and deliver me from this prison.
For I was verily taken by fraud from the land of the Hivraee, and here have I done nothing evil that I should be imprisoned.
And when the master of the bakers saw that he had interpreted pleasantly, he said to Joseph, I also (was) in my dream, and, behold, three baskets of confectionery were upon my head,
and in the upper basket were all (sorts of) food for Pharoh, the work of the baker; and the birds ate them from the basket that was on my head.
And Joseph answered and said, This is the interpretation of it: The three baskets are three days;
At the end of three days will Pharoh remove thy head from off thee, and will hang thee upon a gibbet, and the birds will eat thy flesh from off thee.
And it was on the third day, the day of the nativity of Pharoh, that he made a feast for all his servants and he took the, head of the chief cupbearer and the head of the chief of the bakers in the midst of his servants.
And he restored the cupbearer to his office, and he gave the cup into Pharoh’s hand.
And the chief of the bakers he hanged, as Joseph had interpreted to them.
Yet the chief cupbearer did not remember Joseph, but forgat him.
And it was at the end of two years that Pharoh dreamed, and, behold, he stood by the River.
And, behold, there came up from the River seven oxen, goodly in appearance, and fat-fleshed; and they grazed in the meadow.
And, behold, seven other oxen came up from the river after them, evil in appearance, and leanfleshed; and they stood beside them by the bank of the river.
And the evil-looking and lean-fleshed oxen ate up the seven well-looking and fat ones: and Pharoh awoke.
And he slept, and dreamed a second (time); and, behold, seven ears rose up from one stalk, large and good,
and, behold, seven ears, thin, and blighted (with the) east (wind), sprang up after them.
And the seven wasted ears devoured the seven large and full ears. And Pharoh awoke, and, behold, a dream.
And when it was morning his spirit was troubled, and he sent and called all the magicians of Mizraim, and all the wise men; and Pharoh related the dreams to them, but they could not interpret them to Pharoh.
And the chief of the cupbearers spake to Pharoh, saying, My faults I do remember this day.
Pharoh was displeased with his servants, and gave me into custody at the house of the chief executioner, and the chief baker with me.
And we dreamed a dream in one night, I and he, each man according to the interpretation of his dream, we dreamed.
And with us there was a Hebrew youth, a servant of the chief executioner; and we recounted to him, and he explained to us our dreams, to each man according to his dream be explained;
And according as he had explained to us, so it was: me he restored to my service, and him he hanged.
And Pharoh sent, and called Joseph, and made him hasten from the prison; and he dressed his hair, and changed his garments, and came unto Pharoh.
And Pharoh said to Joseph, I have dreamed a dream, and there is no one to interpret it. And I have heard of thee, saying, that thou hearest a dream, and dost interpret it.
And Joseph answered Pharoh, saying, Not from my wisdom, but from before the Lord, will there be an answer of peace unto Pharoh.
And Pharoh spake with Joseph, saying, In my dream, behold, I stood upon the bank of the River;
and, behold, from the River rose up seven oxen, fat-fleshed and goodly in appearance, and they grazed in the meadow.
And, behold, seven other oxen came up after them, lean and most evil in appearance, so wanting in flesh, that their like I have not seen in all the land of Mizraim for badness.
And the lean oxen and evil ones ate up the seven first fat oxen.
And they entered into their stomachs; but it could not be known that they had entered into their stomachs, for their appearance was bad as before; and I awoke.
I saw in my dream, and, behold, seven ears of corn arose on one stalk, full and good.
And, behold, seven (other) ears, hard, thin, and blasted (with the) east (wind), sprang up after them.
And the thin ears devoured the seven good ears. And I told it to the magicians, but there was no one who could show it to me.
And Joseph answered Pharoh, The dream of Pharoh is one. That which the Lord is about to do He hath showed to Pharoh.
The seven good oxen are seven years; and the seven good ears of corn are seven years; the dream is one.
And the seven lean and evil oxen which came up after them are seven years; and the seven ears, thin, and blasted with the east wind, are seven years of famine.
This is the word which I have spoken to Pharoh. What the Lord is about to do, He hath showed to Pharoh.
Behold, there come seven years of great plenty in all the land of Mizraim.
And after them will arise seven years of famine, and all the plenty in the land of Mizraim will be forgotten, and the famine will consume the people of the land.
And plenty will not be known in the land for that famine which will be afterward; for it will be very mighty.
And forasmuch as the dream was repeated to Pharoh twice, it is a confirmed thing before the Lord, and the Lord will hasten to do it.
And now let Pharoh look out a prudent and wise man, and appoint him over the land of Mizraim.
Let Pharoh do this, and appoint officers (faithful men) over the land, and let them sow the land of Mizraim in the seven years of plenty,
And collect all the produce of those good years that come, and lay up provision under the hand of Pharoh’s officers, and preserve it in the cities:
And it will be provision for the people of the land in the seven years of famine that are coming in the land of Mizraim, that the people of the land may not be consumed by the famine.
And the thing was good in the eyes of Pharoh, and in the eyes of all his servants.
And Pharoh said to his servants, Can we find a man like this, in whom is the spirit of prophecy from the Lord?
And Pharoh said to Joseph, Since the Lord hath made all this known to thee, there is none more prudent or wise than thou;
Thou shalt be appointed over my house, and by thy word shall all my people be governed; only in the throne of this kingdom will I be more honorable than thou.
And Pharoh said to Joseph, See, I have appointed thee over all the land of Mizraim.
And Pharoh took off his ring from his hand, and set it upon Joseph’s hand, and clothed him in a robe of lawn, and put a chain of gold upon his neck.
And he made him ride in his own second chariot, and they proclaimed before him, This is the father of the king; and he appointed him over all the land of Mizraim.
And Pharoh said to Joseph, I am Pharoh; and without thy word shall no man lift up his hand to hold a weapon, nor his foot to mount a horse, in all the land of Mizraim.
And Pharoh called the name of Joseph, The man to whom mysteries are revealed. And he gave him Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera, prince of On, to be his wife; and Joseph went forth ruling over the land of Mizraim.
And Joseph was a son of thirty years when he stood before Pharoh, king of Mizraim. And Joseph went out from before Pharoh, and passed through all the land of Mizraim.
And the inhabitants of the land collected in the seven years of plenty the provision into granaries.
And he collected all the provision of the seven years which was in the land of Mizraim, and laid up the provision in cities, in the midst of each city the provision of the land surrounding it.
And Joseph gathered provision as the sand of the sea, exceeding much, until he ceased to number, for it was without number.
And unto Joseph were born two sons, (before the year of famine came,) which Asenath, daughter of Potiphera, prince of On, bare to him.
And Joseph called the name of the firstborn Menasheh; because the Lord hath made me to forget all my labour and all my father’s house.
And the name of the second he called Ephraim; because the Lord hath made me to increase in the land of my servitude.
And the seven years of plenty which were in the land of Mizraim were completed.
And the seven years of famine began to come, as Joseph had said; and the famine was in all the lands, but in all the land of Mizraim there was bread.
Yet all the land of Mizraim was famished, and the people cried before Pharoh for bread: and Pharoh said to all the Mizraee, Go unto Joseph, and what he shall say to you, do.
And the famine was over all the face of the land; and Joseph opened all the granaries in which was the corn, and sold to the Mizraee, and the famine became mighty in the land of Mizraim.
And all the inhabitants of the earth came into Mizraim to buy corn of Joseph, because the famine was mighty in all the earth.
And Jakob saw that corn was sold in Mizraim, and Jakob said to his sons, Why look you (on each other)?
And he said, Behold, I have heard that corn is sold in Mizraim: go down thither, and buy us from thence, and we shall live, and not die.
And the ten brothers of Joseph went down to buy corn from Mizraim;
But Benjamin, the brother of Joseph, Jakob sent not with his brethren; for he said, Lest death should befall him.
And the sons of Israel came to buy corn among them who came; for the famine was in the land of Kenaan.
And Joseph, who was ruler over the land, was he who sold the corn to all the people of the earth. And the brothers of Joseph came, and bowed before him with their faces upon the ground.
And Joseph saw his brothers, and knew them, and considered what he should say to them. And he spake with them severely, and said to them, Whence come you? And they said, From the land of Kenaan, to buy corn.
And Joseph knew his brothers, but they did not know him.
And Joseph remembered the dreams which he had dreamed of them; and he said to them, You are spies; to see the ruin of the land are you come.
And they said, No, my lord, (ribboni,) thy servants are come to buy corn.
We are all the sons of one man. Right are we; thy servants are not spies.
But he said to them, No, but you are come to see the ruin of the land.
And they said, Thy servants are twelve brothers, the sons of one man, in the land of Kenaan; and, behold, the youngest is with our father today, and one is not!
And Joseph said to them, That is what I have told you, saying, You are spies;
By this you shall be proved: by the life of Pharoh you shall not go hence, until your youngest brother be come hither.
Send one of you, and bring your brother; but you shall be bound, and your words shall be proved, whether you have spoken the truth; if not, by the life of Pharoh, you are spies.
And he put them in the house of custody three days.
And Joseph said to them the third day, This do, and live; for I fear before the Lord.
If you be true, let one of your brethren be bound in the prison; and go you, carry the provision which is needed in your house,
and bring your youngest brother to me, and your words will be verified, and you shall not die. And they did so.
And they said, a man to his brother, We are verily guilty concerning our brother; that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he implored us, and we would not hearken to him: therefore is this distress come upon us.
And Reuben answered them, saying, Did not I tell you, saying, Do not sin against the youth? But you, would not hearken. Thus, behold, his blood is required.
But they knew not that Joseph heard; for there was an interpreter between them.
And he turned himself away from them, and wept. And he returned and spake to them, and took Shemeon from them, and bound him before their eyes.
And Joseph commanded to fill their vessels with corn, and return their money (that of each) man in his sack, and give them food in the way. And he did so by them.
And they laid their corn upon their asses, and went thence.
And one opened his sack to give provender to his ass at the house of lodging, and saw his money, and, behold, it was in the mouth of his package;
And he said to his brothers, My money is returned, and, behold, it is in my package. And the knowledge of their hearts failed, and they were each of them confounded, saying, What is this which the Lord hath done to us?
And they came to Jakob their father in the land of Kenaan, and showed him all that had happened to them, saying,
The man, the lord of the country, spoke hardly with us, and dealt with us as spies of the land.
And we told him, We are true men, not spies:
We are twelve brothers, sons of one father: one is not, and the youngest is today with our father in the land of Kenaan.
And the man, the lord of the country, said to us, By this I shall know that you are true men. Leave one of your brethren with me, and take the corn which is needed in your house, and go,
And bring your youngest brother to me, and I shall know that you are not spies: and when you (will be proved to) be true men, I will give up your brother to you, and you shall trade in the land.
And it was, as they emptied their sacks, behold, each man’s money was bound up in his sack; and when they and their father saw the envelopes of their money, they were afraid.
And Jakob their father said to them, Me have you made desolate; Joseph is not, and Shemeon is not (here), and Benjamin you would take away; upon me are all these!
And Reuben spake with his father, saying, Thou shalt put my two children to death if I do not bring him back to thee. Deliver him into my hand, and I will return him to thee.
But he said, My son shall not go down with you; for his brother is dead, and he alone remains; and if death should befall him in the way in which you will go, you will bring down my grey hairs with mourning unto Sheol.
But the famine prevailed in the land.
And it was when they had ended to eat the corn which they had brought from Mizraim, that their father said to them, Return, and buy for us a little corn.
And Jehuda spake to him, saying, The man attesting attested to us, saying, You shall not see my face unless your brother be with you.
If thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down and buy thee corn;
But if thou wilt not send, we will not go down: for the man told us, You shall not see my face unless your brother be with you.
And Israel said, Why did you do me this evil, in showing the man that you have a brother?
And they said, The man asking asked us concerning our family, saying, Is your father yet alive? Have you a brother? And we showed him according to the word of these things: knowing could we know that be would say, Bring your brother to me?
And Jehuda said to Israel his father, Send the youth with me, and let us arise and go, that we may live and not die, we, and thou, and our little ones.
I will be the pledge for him; of my hand shalt thou require him; if I do not bring him back to thee, and set him before thee, let mine be the sin with thee all the days.
For except we had delayed in this, we might now have returned twice.
And Israel their father said to them, If then it is to be, do this: take of what is praiseworthy in the land in your vessels, and carry down to the man an offering; a little gum, and a little honey, storax and ladanum, nuts and almonds; and silver,
two for one take in your hands, even the silver which was returned in the mouth of your bags take back in your hands; perhaps it was an oversight.
And take your brother, and arise, return to the man;
And God the Almighty give you favour before the man, that he may release to you your other brother and Benjamin. And I, when desolated, shall be desolate!
And the men took that offering, and the money two for one took they in their hands; and they took Benjamin, and arose, and went down into Mizraim, and stood before Joseph.
And Joseph saw Benjamin with them; and he said to him who was appointed over his house, Bring the men into the house, and kill a killing and prepare; for the men shall eat with me at dinner.
And the man did as Joseph had said; and the man brought the men into Joseph’s house.
And the men were afraid because they were brought into the, house of Joseph; and said, It is on account of the money that was returned in our baggage at first, that we are brought in, that he might domineer over us, and find occasion against us, and take possession of us as slaves, and seize upon our asses.
And they drew near the man who was set over Joseph’s house,
and spake with him at the gate of the house, and said, We entreat my lord (to hear us). Descending we came down at first to buy corn.
And it was while we were at the resting-place, we opened our baggage, and, behold, a man’s silver was in the mouth of the bag; the silver in its weight. But we have returned it in our hand.
And other silver have we brought in our hand to buy corn. We knew not who put the silver in our baggage.
And he said, Peace be to you: fear not; your God, and the God of your father, gave you treasure in, your bags; your money came to me. And he brought out Shemeon to them.
And the man brought the men into Joseph’s house, and gave water, and they washed their feet, and he gave provender for their asses.
And they made ready the offering against the entrance of Joseph to dinner: for they had heard that there they were to eat bread.
And Joseph entered the house, and they brought to him the offering which was in their hands into the house; and they bowed to him upon the ground.
And he saluted them, and said, Is your father well, the old man you spake of? Is he yet alive?
And they said, It is well with thy servant our father, he is yet alive; and they bowed and worshipped.
And he lifted up his eyes, and saw Benjamin his brother, the son of his mother; and he said, Is this your youngest brother of whom you spake to me? And he said, Mercy from the Lord be upon thee, my son
And Joseph made haste, for his bowels were commoved over his brother, and he sought (where) to weep; and he entered into the chamber, the place of sleeping, and wept there.
And he washed his face, and came out, and was comforted, and said, Put on bread;
And they set for him alone, and for them alone, and for the Mizraee who ate with him, alone. For the Mizraee might not eat bread with the Hivraee, because the animals that the Mizraee worshipped the Hivraee did eat.
And they reclined before him, the chief according to his chiefship, and the less according to his minority; and the men wondered, each man at his companion.
And portions were brought from him, and set before them, and greater was Benjamin’s portion than the portions of them all five portions. And they drank and were merry with him.
And Joseph commanded the steward of his house, saying, Fill the men’s bags with corn as much as they can carry, and put each man’s money in the mouth of his baggage.
And put my cup, the silver cup, in the mouth of the youngest one’s baggage, and his purchase-money. And he did according to Joseph’s word which he spake.
The morning lightened, and the men were sent away, they and their asses.
They had not gone far from the city, when Joseph said to him who was set over his house, Arise, follow after the men, and overtake them, and say to them, Why have you rendered evil for good?
Is it not this from which my lord drinketh, and, behold, by which inquiring he inquireth? You have done the thing that is evil.
And he overtook them, and spake with them these words.
And they said, Why does my lord speak these words? Be it far from thy servants to do according to this thing!
Behold, the money which we found in the mouth of our baggages we brought to thee again from the land of Kenaan; how then should we steal from the house of thy lord vessels of silver, or vessels of gold?
With whomsoever of thy servants it is found, let him die; and we also will be servants to my lord.
And he said, According to your words, so let it be. With whomsoever it is found, he shall be my servant, but you will be acquitted.
And they made haste, and brought down every man his baggage to the ground; and every man opened his baggage.
And he searched, beginning with the greatest and finishing with the least; and the chalice was found in the baggage of Benjamin.
And they rent their clothes, and laded every man his ass, and returned to the city.
And Jehuda entered and his brothers into Joseph’s house, for he was still there; and they fell before him on the ground.
And Joseph said to them, What work is this which you have done? Did you not know that a man like me divining can divine?
And Jehuda said to him, What shall we say to my lord? What shall we speak? How shall we be justified? Before the lord there is sin found in thy servants. Behold, we are the servants of my lord; we also and he in whose hand the chalice hath been found.
But he said, Far be it from me to do so: the man in whose hand the chalice has been found shall be my servant; but go you up in peace to your father.
And Jehuda came near to him and said, We beseech my lord, let thy servant speak a word before my lord, and let not thine anger be great with thy servant; for as Pharoh so art thou.
My lord asked his servants, saying, Have you a father or a brother?
And we told my lord, We have an aged father, and the youngest (son) is the son of his old age; his brother is dead; and he only remains of his mother, and his father loves him.
And thou saidst to thy servants, Bring him down to me, and let me set mine eyes upon him.
And we told my lord, His father cannot part with the youth; for if our father should part with him, he would die.
And thou saidst to thy servants, If your youngest brother come not down with you, you shall not see my face again.
And it was when we had gone up to our father, we told him these words of my lord.
And our father said to us, Return, and buy us a little corn.
And we said, We cannot go down: if our youngest brother go down with us, we will go down; for we shall not be able to see the man’s face unless our youngest brother go down with us.
And thy servant our father said to us, You know that my wife bare me two (sons).
One went forth from me, and I have said, Dying he is dead; and I have not beheld him since.
And if you take this one also from me, and death happen to him, you will bring down my age with evil unto sheol.
And now, when I come to thy servant my father, and the youth be not with us, and his soul loveth him as his (own) soul;
When he seeth that the youth is not with us, he will die; and thy servant will have brought down the age of thy servant our father with mourning unto Sheol.
For thy servant was surety for the youth with our father, saying, If I bring him not to thee, let my father hold me guilty all the days.
And now let thy servant remain instead of the youth, as the servant of my lord, and let the youth go up with his brothers.
For how can I go up to my father, and the youth be not with me? Lest I should see the evil that will come upon my father!
And Joseph was not able to sustain all that was being upon him; and he cried, Let every man go out from me; and no man stood with him, while Joseph made himself known to his brethren.
And he gave forth his voice with weeping; and the Mizraee heard, and a man of Pharoh’s house heard.
And Joseph said to his brothers, I am Joseph! Is my father yet living? And his brethren were not able to answer him a word, for they were confounded before him.
And Joseph said to his brothers, Come near now to me. And they came near. And he said, I am Joseph your brother, whom you sold into Mizraim.
And now do not be troubled, and let it not be afflictive in your eyes that you sold me hither; for to sustain life did the Lord send me before you.
For these two years hath famine been in the land, and there are yet five years in which there will be neither seed nor harvest.
And the Lord sent me before you to set a remnant in the earth, and to keep you alive by a great deliverance.
And now, it was not you who sent me hither, but (it was) from before the Lord, who hath set me to be a father unto Pharoh, and to rule all the men of his house, holding power over all the land of Mizraim.
Hasten, (then,) and go up to my father, and say to him, Thus saith thy son Joseph, The Lord hath set me ruler over the Mizraim: come down to me, delay not,
And thou shalt dwell in the land of Goshen, and be near me, thou, and thy sons, and thy sons’ children, and thy sheep and thy oxen, and all that thou hast.
And I will nourish thee there; for there are yet five years of famine, lest thou, and the men of thy house, and all that thou hast, be wasted away.
And, behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that in your language I speak with you.
And you will show my father all my glory in Mizraim, and all that you see; and make haste, and bring down my father hither.
And he fell upon the neck of Benjamin his brother, and wept; and Benjamin wept upon his neck.
And he kissed all his brothers, and wept over them; and afterward his brothers discoursed with him.
And a voice was heard in the house of Pharoh, saying, The brothers of Joseph are come. And it was pleasing in the eyes of Pharoh, and in the eyes of his servants.
And Pharoh said to Joseph, Tell my brethren, Do this; lade your beasts and go; carry into the land of Kenaan;
and take your father and the men of your house and come to me, and I will give you the good of the land of Mizraim, and you shall eat the good of the land.
And (now) thou art commanded, this do. Take to you out of the land of Mizraim waggons for your children, and your wives; and bring your father, and come.
And let not your eye look wistfully upon your furniture; for the good of all the land of Mizraim is your own.
And the sons of Israel did so; and Joseph gave them waggons, according to the word of Pharoh, and he gave them provisions for the way.
And he gave to everyone of them vestments for wearing; and to Benjamin gave he three hundred shekels of silver, and five vestments for wearing.
And to his father he sent ten asses laden with the good things of Mizraim, and ten she-asses laden with corn, and bread and provisions for the way.
And he dismissed his brethren, and they went, and he said to them, Do not contend by the way.
And they went up from Mizraim and came into the land of Kenaan, unto Jakob their father.
And they showed him, saying, Joseph is yet alive, and he ruleth over all the land of Mizraim! And these words were uncertain upon his heart, because he did not believe them.
And they told him all the words of Joseph which he had spoken with them; and he saw the waggons that Joseph had sent to fetch him; and the Holy Spirit rested upon Jakob their father.
And Israel said, Great to me is the joy! Joseph my son is yet alive; I will go, and behold him before I die.
And Israel journeyed, and all that he had, and came to Beer Shava; and he offered sacrifices to the God of his father Izhak.
And the Lord spake to Israel in a vision of the night, and said, Jakob, Jakob. And he said, Behold, I am.
And He said, I am God, the God of thy father: fear not to go down into Mizraim; for a great people will I make thee there.
I will go down with thee into Mizraim, and will surely bring thee up; but Joseph shall lay his hand upon thine eyes.
And Jakob arose from Beer Shava. And the sons of Israel carried Jakob their father, and their children, and their wives, in the waggons which Pharoh had sent to fetch them.
And they took their flocks and their substance which they had gotten in the land of Kenaan, and came to Mizraim, Jakob and all his sons with him.
His sons, and his son’s sons with him, his daughters, and the daughters of his sons, and all his seed, he brought with him into Mizraim.
And these are the names of the sons of Israel which came into Mizraim, Jakob and his sons. The firstborn of Jakob, Reuben.
And the sons of Reuben. Hanuk and Phallu, Hesron and Karmi.
And the sons of Sheemon, Jemuel, and Janin, and Ahad, and Jakin, and Zochar, and Shaul, the son of a Kenaanitha.
And the sons of Levi, Gershon, Kehath, and Merari.
And the sons of Jehuda, Er, and Onan, and Shelah, and Pharets, and Zarach. But Er and Onan had died in the land of Kenaan And the sons of Pharets, Heshron and Chamul.
And the sons of Issakar, Tola, and Pheua, and Job, and Semeron.
And the sons of Zabulon, Sered, and Elon, and Jahleel.
These are the sons of Leah, which she bare to Jakob in Padan Aram, and Dinah his daughter; all the souls, his sons and his daughters, thirty and three.
And the children of Gad, Sephyon and Haggi, Shuni and Ezbon, Eri, and Arodi, and Areli.
And the sons of Asher, Jemna, and Jesva, and Jesvi, and Beriah, and Serach, their sister. And the sons of Beriah, Heber and Malchiel.
These are the sons of Zilpha, whom Laban gave to Leah his daughter; and she bare these unto Jakob, sixteen souls.
The sons of Rahel, the wife of Jakob, Joseph and Benjamin.
And to Joseph were born in the land of Mizraim Menashe and Ephraim, whom Asenath, daughter of Potiphera, prince of On, bare unto him.
And the sons of Benjamin, Bela, and Bekor, and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, Achi, and Rosh, Muppim, and Huphim, and Arede.
These are the sons of Rahel which were born to Jakob; all the souls fourteen.
And the sons of Dan, Hushim:
And the sons of Naphtali, Jahziel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shilem.
These are the children of Billah, whom Laban gave to Rahel his daughter, and she bare them to Jakob; all the souls seven.
All the souls which went with Jakob into Mizraim, which came forth from his loins, besides the wives of Jakob’s sons, all the souls, sixty and six.
And the sons of Joseph, which were born to him in Mizraim, two souls. All the souls of the house of Jakob which went into Mizraim were seventy.
And he sent Jehuda before him to Joseph, to make the way clear before him at Goshen, and he came to the land of Goshen.
And Joseph arrayed his chariot, and went up to meet Israel his father in Goshen. And he saw him, and fell upon his neck, and wept. And he wept still upon his neck!
And Israel said to Joseph, I could-die at this time! I have consolation now that I have seen thy face; for thou art yet alive.
And Joseph said to his brothers, and to the house of his father, I will go up and show Pharoh, and will tell him, My brethren and the house of my father, who were in the land of Kenaan, have come to me.
But the men are shepherds of sheep: for the men are masters of flocks, and their sheep and oxen and all that they have they have brought.
And it shall be when Pharoh calleth you, and shall ask you, What is your employment?
You will say, Thy servants have been men, the masters of flocks from our youth until now; both we and our fathers: that you may dwell in the land of Goshen; because the Mizraee keep at a distance all shepherds of flocks.
And Joseph came and showed Pharoh, and said, My father and my brethren, and their sheep and their oxen, and all that they have, are come from the land of Kenaan, and, behold, they are in the land of Goshen.
And of the extreme of his brethren he took five men, and made them stand before Pharoh.
And Pharoh said to his brethren, What are your employments? And they said to Pharoh, thy servants are shepherds; both we and our fathers.
And they said to Pharoh, To dwell in the land are we come for there is no pasture for thy servants’ flocks; for the famine prevails in the land of Kenaan, and we pray thee let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen.
And Pharoh spake to Joseph, saying, Thy father and thy brethren are come to thee;
The land of Mizraim is before thee in the best of it let thy father and thy brethren dwell, (even) in the land of Goshen: and if thou know any of them to be men of ability, appoint them to be chiefs over my flocks.
And Joseph brought Jakob his father, and presented him before Pharoh: and Jakob blessed Pharoh.
And Pharoh said to Jakob, How many are the days of the years of thy life?
And Jakob said to Pharoh, The days of the years of my pilgrimage are a hundred and thirty years. Few and evil have been the days of the years of my life, and I have not attained to the days of the years of the life of my fathers, in the days of their pilgrimage.
And Jakob blessed Pharoh, and went out from before Pharoh.
And Joseph made his father and his brethren to dwell, and gave them a possession in the land of Mizraim, in the best of the land, in the land of Ramesis, as Pharoh had commanded.
And Joseph sustained his father and his brethren, and all the house of his father, with bread, according to the mouth of the family (of each).
And there was no bread in all the land; for the famine prevailed greatly, and the people of the land of Mizraim and the people of the land of Kenaan failed before the famine.
And Joseph collected all the money which was found in the land of Mizraim and in the land of Kenaan, for the corn which they bought. And Joseph brought the money into the house of Pharoh.
And the money was finished from the land of Mizraim and from the land of Kenaan; and all the Mizraee came to Joseph, saying, Give us bread: for why should we die before thee? For the money is finished.
And Joseph said, Bring your cattle, and I will give you provision, if your money is finished.
And they brought their cattle to Joseph, and Joseph gave them bread for their horses, and for their flocks of sheep, and for their herds of oxen, and for their asses, and for all their cattle; he fed them with bread for that year.
And that year was completed; and they came to him in the second year, and said to him, We will not conceal it from our lord, but the money is ended, and (we have delivered up) our cattle to our lord, and there is nothing left before our lord but our bodies and our land.
Why should we perish before thee, both we and our land? Buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land will be servants to Pharoh, and give us seed corn, that we may live and not die, and the land may not be desolate.
And Joseph acquired all the land of Mizraim for Pharoh; for the Mizraee sold every man his portion, because the famine prevailed over them, and the land became Pharoh’s.
And the people he made him to pass from city to city, from one end of the limit of Mizraim to the other.
Only the land of the priests he did not buy; for a portion (was given) by Pharoh to the priests: and they ate their portion which Pharoh gave them; therefore they sold not their land.
And Joseph said to the people, Behold, I have bought you this day and your land for Pharoh. Behold, (I give) you seed corn, that you may sow the land.
And it shall be, when it bringeth forth produce, that you shall give one in five to Pharoh, and four parts shall be yours, of the corn of the field, that you and the men of your house may eat, and your little ones have food.
And they said, Thou hast preserved us; may we find grace in the eyes of my lord, and we will be the servants of Pharoh.
And Joseph made it a statute unto this day over the land of Mizraim, that one of five should be given to Pharoh; only the land of the priests alone was not Pharoh’s.
And Israel dwelt in the land of Mizraim in the land of Goshen, and possessed it: and they increased and multiplied greatly.
And Jakob lived in the land of Mizraim seventeen years. And the days of the years of the life of Jakob were a hundred and forty and seven years.
And the days of Israel drew near to die. And he called to his son, to Joseph, and said to him, If now I have found favour in thine eyes, put, I beseech thee, thine hand under my thigh, and deal with me in goodness and truth; nor bury me, I beseech thee, in Mizraim;
But I will sleep with my fathers; and thou shalt carry me from Mizraim, and bury me in their sepulchre. And he said, I will do according to thy word.
And he said, Swear to me; and he sware to him. And Israel worshipped upon the pillow of the bed.
And it was after these words that it was said to Joseph, Behold, thy father is ill. And he took his two sons with him, Menashe and Ephraim.
And it was shown to Jakob, and told (him,) Behold, thy son Joseph cometh to thee. And Israel was strengthened, and he sat upon the bed.
And Jakob said to Joseph, El Shadai revealed Himself to me in Luz, in the land of Kenaan, and blessed me;
And He said to me, Behold, I will multiply thee, and make thee great, and will set thee for an assembly of tribes, and will give this land to thy sons after thee for an everlasting inheritance.
And now thy two sons which were born to thee in the land of Mizraim, before my coming to thee into Mizraim, are mine; Ephraim and Menashe shall be as Reuben and Shimeon before me.
And the children whom thou mayest beget after them, who shall be thine, after the name of their brethren they shall be called in their inheritance.
And I, in my coming from Padan, Rahel died by me in the land of Kenaan, in the way, while as yet there was a space of ground to come unto Ephrath. And I buried her there, by the way to Ephrath, which is Bethlehem.
And Israel saw the sons of Joseph, and said, Who are these?
And Joseph said to his father, They are my sons whom the Lord hath given me here. And he said, Bring them now near to me, that I may bless them.
But the eyes of Israel were heavy from age, and he could not discern. And he brought them near to him, and he kissed them, and embraced them.
And Israel said to Joseph, I had not hoped to see thy face, and, behold, the Lord hath showed me thy sons also.
And Joseph led them from before him, and worshipped with his face on the earth.
And Joseph took both of them, Ephraim in his right hand, on the left of Israel, and Menashe in his left hand, on the right of Israel, and brought them to him.
And Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it on the head of Ephraim, who was the younger; and his left hand on the head of Menashe, using his hands designingly; (or, instructing his hands;) for Menashe was the first-born.
And he blessed Joseph, and said, The Lord, before whom my fathers Abraham and Izhak did serve; the Lord, who fed me from my coming unto this day;
The Angel who redeemed me from all evil, bless the youths; and let my name be called upon them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Izhak; and as the fish of the sea may they multiply among the children of men upon the earth!
And Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim; and it was evil in his eyes. And he uplifted his father’s hand, to remove it from Ephraim’s head, that it might rest on the head of Menashe.
And Joseph said to his father, Not so, my father; for this is the first-born: lay thy right hand on his head.
But his father willed not, and said, I know, my son, I know: he also shall be for a people, and he also shall be great; yet his younger brother will be greater than he, and his sons shall have dominion among the nations.
And he blessed them in that day, saying, By thee shall Israel bless, saying, The Lord set thee as Ephraim and as Menashe. And he set Ephraim before Menashe.
And Israel said to Joseph, Behold, I die; but the Word of the Lord will be your Helper, and restore you to the land of your fathers.
And I will give thee one portion more than thy brethren, which I took from the band of the Amoraah by my prayer and by my deprecation.
And Jacob called his sons, and said, Gather together, and I will show you what will befall you in the end of the days;
Assemble, and hearken, O sons of Jakob, and receive instruction from Israel your father.
Reuben, thou art my first-born, my strength, and the beginning of my power. Thine should it have been taking to take the three portions, the birthright, the priesthood, and the kingdom: but because thou hast proceeded perversely,
Behold, as water outpoured thou wilt not prosper, neither wilt thou receive the excellent portion; because thou wentest up to thy father’s place of sleep: then, my son, didst thou become profane, when thou wentest up to my bed.
Shimeon and Levi are brothers; mighty men in the land of their sojourning, they did mightily.
My soul was not in their secret; into their company to come I would not have descended from mine honour. For in their anger they slew a slaughter, and in their wilfulness they razed the wall of their enemy.
Accursed was their anger, for it was strong, and their wrath, for it was relentless. I will divide them in Jakob, and I will scatter them in Israel.
Jehuda, thou art praise and not shame; thy brethren shall praise thee; thy hand shall prevail against thine adversaries, thine enemies shall be dispersed; they will be turned backward before thee, and the sons of thy father will come before thee with salutations. The dominion shall be (thine) in the beginning, and in the end the kingdom shall be increased from the house of Jehuda, because from the judgment of death, my son, hast thou withdrawn.
He shall repose, and abide in strength as a lion, and as a lioness, there shall be no king that may cut him off.
He who exerciseth dominion shall not pass away from the house of Jehuda, nor the saphra from his children’s children forever, until the Meshiha come, whose is the kingdom, and unto whom shall be the obedience of the nations (or, whom the peoples shall obey).
Israel shall pass round about in his cities; the people shall build his temple, they will be righteous round about him, and be doers of the law through his doctrine. Of goodly purple will be his raiment, and his vesture of crimson wool with colours.
His mountains shall be red with his vineyards, and his hills be dropping with wine; his valleys shall be white with corn, and with flocks of sheep.
Zebulon will dwell nigh the haven of the sea; he will subdue provinces with ships, and will eat the good of the sea, and his boundary shall come unto Sidon.
Issakar, rich in substance, will have his heritage between the boundaries;
And he, seeing his portion that it is good, and the land that it is fruit-bearing, will subdue the provinces of the people, and disperse their inhabitants, and they who remain of them will become servants to him and bringers of tribute.
From the house of Dan will be chosen and will arise a man in whose days his people shall be delivered, and in whose years the tribes of Israel have rest together.
A chosen man will arise from the house of Dan, the terror of whom shall fall upon the peoples; (a man) who will smite the Philistines with strength, as the serpent, the deadly serpent, lurking by the way, be will slay the mighty of the Philistines host, the horsemen with the foot; he will weaken (loosen) the horses and chariots, and throw their riders backward.
For thy salvation have I waited, O Lord!
From the house of Gad will armed hosts go over the Jardena before their brethren to the battle; and with much substance will they return unto their land.
The land of Asher will be good; and he shall be nourished with the dainties of kings.
In a good land will the lot of Naphtali be cast, and his inheritance be fruitful; over them will they give praise and benediction.
Joseph is my son who shall increase, my son who shall be blessed, as a vine planted by a fountain of waters. Two tribes will come forth from his sons, and they shall receive a portion and inheritance.
The mighty men, the men of division, were bitter against him; they afflicted him and sorely grieved him
And his prophecy shall be fulfilled in them, because he was faithful to the law in secret, and set his confidence firmly. Therefore was gold laid upon his arm, and the kingdom was strengthened and confirmed. This was to him from the mighty God of Jacob, who by His Word pastureth the fathers and the children of the seed of Israel.
The Word of the God of thy father shall be thy Helper, and the All-Sufficient shall bless thee, with the blessings of the dew that descends from the heavens above, with the blessings that spring from the depths of the earth beneath, with the blessings of thy father and of thy mother.
The blessing of thy father shall be added upon the blessing with which my fathers blessed me; which the princes who are of the world have desired: all of them shall be upon the head of Joseph, and upon the man who was separated from his brethren.
Benjamin: in his land will dwell the Shekina, and in his possession will the sanctuary be builded. In the morning and evening will the priests offer the oblation, and at eventime divide the remaining portions of the residue of the sacred things.
All these the tribes of Israel are twelve; and this it is which their father spake to them, and blessed them; according to the blessing of each man, blessed he them.
And he commanded them, and said to them, I am to be gathered unto my people; bury me with my fathers in the cavern which is in the field of Ephron the Hitaah;
In the cavern which is in the double field over against Mamre, in the land of Kenaan, which field Abraham bought of Ephron the Hitaah for an inheritancesepulchre.
There buried they Abraham and Sarah his wife; there buried they Izhak and Revekah his wife; and there buried I Leah.
The field, and the cavern that is in it, purchased of the sons of Hitaah.
And Jakob ceased to instruct his sons, and drew his feet together in the bed, and died, and was gathered unto his people.
And Joseph fell upon his father’s face, and wept over him, and kissed him.
And Joseph commanded his servants, the physicians, to embalm his father; and the physicians embalmed Israel.
And forty days were completed to him; for so are completed the days of the embalmed; and the Mizraee mourned for him seventy days.
And the days of his mourning passed: and Joseph spake with the house of Pharoh, saying, If now I have found favour in your eyes, speak, I pray, before Pharoh, saying
My father adjured me, saying, Behold, I die; in my sepulchre which I have prepared for me in the land of Kenaan, there shalt thou bury me. And now let me go up, I pray, and I will bury my father and return.
And Pharoh said, Go up and bury thy father, as he adjured thee.
And Joseph went up to bury his father; and all the servants of Pharoh, the elders of his house, and all the elders of the land of Mizraim,
Went up with him; and all the house of Joseph, and his brethren, and the house of his father: only the children, and the flocks, and the cattle, they left in the land of Goshen.
And with him went up, also, chariots and horsemen; and there was a very great host.
And they came to the threshing-floor of Atad, which is beyond Jardena, and lamented there with lamentations great and very strong. And he made a mourning for his father seven days.
And the inhabitants of the land of Kenaan saw the mourning at the threshing-floor of Atad, and said, This is a mighty mourning of the Mizraee; therefore its name is called Abel Mizraim; which is beyond Jardena.
And his sons did as he had commanded them.
And his sons carried him into the land of Kenaan, and buried him in the cavern of the Double Field, which Abraham bought for an inheritancesepulchre of Ephron the Hitaah, before Mamre.
And Joseph returned into Mizraim, he and his brethren, and all who went up with him to bury his father, after he had buried his father.
And the brethren of Joseph saw that their father was dead; and they said, Perhaps Joseph will retain enmity against us, and requiting will requite us all the evil which we did him.
And they made visitation to Joseph, saying, Thy father commanded before his death, saying,
Thus shall you speak to Joseph, I pray you to forgive the guilt of thy brethren and their sin wherewith they did evil against thee. And now forgive, I beseech thee, the guilt of the servants of the God of thy father. And Joseph wept when they spake with him.
And his brethren came and fell before him, and said, Behold, we are thy servants.
And Joseph said to them, Fear not, for I fear the Lord.
When you thought evil against me, before the Lord it was intended for good, to be done, as at this day, for the preservation of much people.
And now do not fear; I will sustain you and your children. And he consoled them, and spake consolation to their heart.
And Joseph dwelt in Mizraim, he and his father’s house. And Joseph lived an hundred and ten years.
And Joseph saw of Ephraim three sons; also the sons of Makir, the son of Menashe, were born, whom Joseph brought up.
And Joseph said to his brethren, I die; but the Lord remembering will remember you, and bring you up from, this land to the land of which He sware to Abraham, to Izhak, and to Jakob.
And Joseph adjured the sons of Israel, saying, The Lord remembering will remember you, and you shall carry my bones up from hence.
And Joseph died, the son of a hundred and ten years, and they embalmed him, and laid him in an ark in Mizraim.
And these are the names of the sons of Israel who came into Mizraim with Jakob; (each) man with the men of his house they came in:
Reuben, Shimeon, Levi and Jehudah,
Issakar, Zebulon and Benyamin,
Dan and Naphtali, Gad and Asher.
And all the souls that came forth from the thigh of Jakob were seventy souls, with Joseph who was in Mizraim.
And Joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation;
But the sons of Israel increased and propagated, and became great and very mighty, and the land was filled with them.
But a new king arose over Mizraim who did not hold valid (or confirm) the decree of Joseph.
And he said to his people, Behold, the people of the sons of Israel are more numerous and stronger than we:
Come, let us deal wisely by them, lest they multiply, and it be that should war happen to us they join themselves with our enemies, and break forth in the war against us, and go up from the land.
And they appointed over them evildoing governors (shiltonin) to afflict them in their labours. And they builded cities of treasure houses for Pharoh, Pithom, and Raamsas.
But by as much as they afflicted them, so they increased and waxed strong, and the Mizraee had vexation on account of the sons of Israel;
And the Mizraee made the sons of Israel serve with rigour,
and embittered their lives with hard labour, in clay and in brick, and in all labour of the field, all the work which they wrought, they made them do with hardship.
And the king of Mizraim spake to the midwives of Jewesses, (Yehuditha,) of whom the name of the one was Shiphra, and the name of the second Puvah;
And he said, When you do the office of the midwife among the Jewish women, and you look upon the childbirth, if it be a son, you shall kill him; but if a daughter, let her live.
But the midwives feared before the Lord, and did not act as the king of Mizraim had bidden them, but preserved the sons alive.
And the king of Mizraim called
The midwives said to Pharoh, It is because the Jewesses are unlike the Mizraite women; they are cunning, and give birth before the midwives come to them.
And the Lord did good to the midwives; and the people multiplied and became strong.
And because the midwives feared before the Lord He made for them houses.
But Pharoh commanded all his people, saying, Every son who is born to the Jews you shall throw into the river, and every daughter you shall keep alive.
And a man of the house of Levi went and took a daughter of Levi (to wife).
And the woman conceived, and bare a son; and she saw that he was good, and concealed him three months.
But not being able to hide him longer, she took an ark of reed, and covered it with bitumen and pitch, and laid the child within it, and set it in the river upon the brink of the stream.
And his sister stationed herself at a distance, to know what would be done to him.
And the daughter of Pharoh came down to wash at the river, and her damsels walked on the river’s bank; and she saw the ark in the flood, and reached out her arm and took it.
And opening, she saw the child; and, behold, the infant wept. And she had compassion on him and said, This is one of the children of the Jehudaee.
Then spake his sister to the daughter of Pharoh, Shall I go and call a nurse-woman of the Jehudaee who will suckle the child for thee?
And the daughter of Pharoh said to her, Go; and the maiden went, and called the child’s mother.
And Pharoh’s daughter said to her, Take this child and nurse it for me, and I will give thee they recompense. And the woman took the child and suckled him.
And the child grew, and she brought him to Pharoh’s daughter, and he became to her a son, and she called his name Mosheh, saying, Because I drew him out from the water.
And it was in those days when Mosheh had grown that he went out to his brethren and beheld their servitude. And he saw a Mizraite man smite a man, a Jehudai, (one) of his brethren.
And he turned this way and that, and saw that there was no man; and smote the Mizraite, and buried him in the sand.
And he went out the second day, and, behold, two men, Jehudaeen contended. And he said to the guilty one, Why did you strike your companion?
But he said, Who set you a chief man and judge over us? Will you who speak so kill me, as you killed the Mizraya? And Mosheh was afraid, and said, Surely the thing is known.
And Pharoh heard that thing, and sought to kill Mosheh; and Mosheh fled from before Pharoh, and dwelt in the land of Midian. And he sat by a well;
And the prince (rabba) of Midian had seven daughters; and they came and drew and filled the troughs to water their father’s flock.
But the shepherds came and drave them away; and Mosheh arose and rescued them, and watered the flock.
And they came to Reuel their father; and he said, What is this, that ye have come so quickly today?
And they said, A man, a Mizraya, delivered us from the hand of the shepherds, and also drew for us and watered the flock.
And he said to his daughters, And where is he? Wherefore have you left the man? Call him, that he may eat bread.
And Mosheh was willing to dwell with the man; and he gave Zipporah his daughter unto Mosheh.
And she bare a son; and he called his name Gershom; for, said he, I am a stranger in a foreign land.
And it was in many of those days: and the king of Mizraim died. And the sons of Israel groaned with the hard service which was upon them; and the cry rose up before the presence of the Lord, form their labour.
And their appeal was heard before the Lord; and the Lord remembered His covenant with Abraham, with Izhak, and with Jakob.
And the servitude of the sons of Israel was know before the Lord, and the Lord said in His Word, that He would deliver them.
And Mosheh tended the flock of Jethro his father-in-law, the rabba of Midian, and he led the flock to the place of the best pastures of the wilderness, and came to the mountain on which was revealed the glory of the Lord, unto Horeb.
And the Angel of the Lord appeared to him in a flame of fire in the midst of a bush. And he gazed, and, behold, the bush burned with fire, but the bush was not consumed.
And Mosheh said, I will now turn and see this great sight, why the bush is not burned up.
And the Lord saw that he turned to see, and the Lord called to him from the midst of the bush, and said, Mosheh, Mosheh! And he said, Behold me.
And He said, Approach not hither; loose the sandal from thy foot, for the place where thou standest is holy.
And He said, I am the God of thy fathers; the God of Abraham, the God of Izhak, and the God of Jakob. And Mosheh bowed with his face; for he was afraid to look up to the glory of the Lord.
And the Lord said, The bondage of My people who is in Mizraim is verily disclosed before Me, and before Me is heard their cry on account of their toils; for their afflictions are disclosed before me;
And I have appeared to deliver them from the hand of the Mizraee, and to bring them up from that land, unto a land good and large, a land producing milk and honey, unto the place of the Kenaanaee, an the Hittaee, and the Amoraee, and the Perizaee, and the Hivaee, and the Yevusaee.
And now, behold, the cry of the sons of Israel ascendeth before Me, and the affliction is also revealed before Me wherewith the Mizraee afflict them.
And now, come, I will send thee to Pharoh, and will bring forth the sons of Israel form Mizraim.
And Mosheh said before the Lord, Who am I, that I should go unto Pharoh to bring forth the sons of Israel from Mizraim?
And He said, Because My Word shall be thy helper: and this shall be the sign that I have sent thee: In thy leading forth of the people from Mizraim you shall do service before the Lord upon this mountain.
And Mosheh said before the Lord, Behold, when I am come to the sons of Israel, and say to them, The God of your fathers hath sent me to you, and they say to me, What is His name? What shall I say to them?
And the Lord said unto Mosheh, EHEYEH ASHER EHEYEH. And he said, Thus shalt thou speak to the sons of Israel, EHEYEH hath sent me unto you.
The Lord said moreover to Mosheh, Thus shalt thou speak to the sons of Israel, The Lord, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Izhak, and the God of Jakob, hath sent me unto you. This is My Name forever, and this is My Memorial in every generation and generation.
Go and assemble the elders of Israel and say to them, The Lord, the God of your fathers, hath revealed Himself to me, the God of Abraham, Izhak, and Jakob, saying, Remembering I have remembered you, and that which hath been done to you in Mizraim;
And I have said that I would bring you up from the bondage of Mizraim to the land of the Kenaanaee, and Hittaee, and Emoraee, and the Pherizaee, and Hivaee, and Jebusaee, to a land producing milk and honey.
And they will be obedient to thee, and thou shalt go, thou and the elders of Israel, to the king of Mizraim, and say to him, The Lord, the God of the Jehudaee, hath called us; and now let us go, as (for) a journey of three days into the desert, that we may sacrifice before the Lord our God.
But it is manifest before Me that the king of Mizraim will not release you, that you may go, not even on account of Him whose power is mighty.
But I will send forth the stroke of My power, and will smite the Mizraee with all My miracles which I will perform among them, and afterward they will send you away.
And I will give this people to become favourites in the eyes of the Mizraee, and it shall be that when you go you shall not go empty.
But you shall demand, a woman of her neighbour and the inmates of her house, articles of silver and of gold and vestments, and put them upon you sons and upon your daughters, and shall make the Mizraee empty.
And Mosheh answered and said, But, behold, they will not believe me nor hearken to me: for they will say, The Lord hath no been revealed to thee.
And the Lord said to him, What is that which is in thy hand? And he said, A rod.
And He said, Cast it to the ground; and he cast it upon the ground, and it became a serpent, and Mosheh fled from before it.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Stretch forth thy hand and seize it by its tail; and he put forth his hand and grasped it, and it became a rod in his hand.
That they may believe that the Lord god of their fathers hath been revealed to thee, that God of Abraham, the God of Izhak, and the God of Jakob.
And the Lord said yet to him, Put now thy hand into thy bosom. And he put his hand into his bosom, and drew it out; and, behold, his hand was white as snow.
And He said, Return thy hand into thy bosom. And he returned his hand into his bosom, and drew it out form his bosom, and, behold, it had turned to be as his own flesh.
And it shall be, if they will not believe thee nor receive the voice of the first sign, that they shall believe the voice of the latter sign.
But if they will not believe either of these two signs, nor receive from thee, take of the water that is in the river, and pour it upon the ground; and the water which thou takest form the river shall become blood upon the ground.
And Mosheh said before the Lord, In entreating, I am not a man who is (well) spoken, neither yesterday nor the day before, and from the time that thou spakest with Thy servant: for I am heavy of speech and of a deep tongue.
But the Lord said to him, Who hath appointed the mouth of man, and who hath appointed the mute, or the deaf, or the open-sighted, or the blind? Have not I, the Lord?
And now go, and My Word shall be with thy mouth, and I will teach thee what to say.
And he said, I beseech the Lord to send by the hand of one who is fit to be sent.
And the displeasure of the Lord was kindled against Mosheh; and He said, Is not Aharon the Levite, thy brother, known before Me as one who speaking can speak? And also, behold, he cometh forth to anticipate thee, and will see thee, and rejoice in his heart.
And thou shalt speak with him, and put the words in his mouth; and My Word will be with thy mouth and with his mouth, and I will teach you what to do.
And he shall speak for thee with the people, and shall be thy interpreter, and thou shalt be to him a rab;
And this staff thou shalt take in thy hand wherewith to work the signs.
And Mosheh went, and returned to Jether his father-in-law, and said to him, I will now go and return to my brethren who are in Mizraim, and see if they still live. And Jether said to Mosheh, Go in peace.
And the Lord said to Mosheh in Midian, Go, return to Mizraim; for all the men who sought to kill thee are dead.
And Mosheh took his wife and his sons, and made them ride upon the ass, and returned to the land of Mizraim. And Mosheh took the staff with which the miracles had been done before the Lord in his hand.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, In thy going to return to Mizraim look to all the wonders that I have appointed by thy hand, and do them before the Pharoh. But I will obdurate his heart, and he will not send the people away.
And thou shalt say unto Pharoh, Thus said the Lord; Israel is My son, My firstborn.
And I say unto thee, Let My son go, that he may serve before Me; and if thou refuse to send him away, behold, I will kill thy son, thy firstborn.
And it was in the way, at the place of lodging, that the Angel of the Lord met him, and sought to kill him.
And Zipporah took a stone, and circumcised the foreskin of her son, and approached before him, and said, On account of the blood of this circumcision let my husband be given (back) to me.
And when he had desisted from him, she said, But for the blood of this circumcision my husband would have been condemned to die.
And the Lord said to Aharon, Go thou to meet Mosheh in the desert. And he went, and met him at the mountain on which was revealed the glory of the Lord, and he kissed him.
And Mosheh showed Aharon all the words with which the Lord had sent him, and all the signs which he had commanded.
And Mosheh and Aharon went and assembled all the elders of the sons of Israel;
And Aharon told all the words which the Lord had spoken with Mosheh, and did the signs in the eyes of the people.
And the people believed, and understood (heard) that the Lord had remembered the sons of Israel, and that heir slavery was manifest before him; and they bowed, and adored.
And afterward Mosheh and Aharon went in, and said to Pharoh: Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, Let My people go, to solemnize a feast (yechagun) before Me in the desert.
And Pharoh said, The name of the Lord is not know to me, that I should hearken to His word to send Israel away. The name of the Lord is not revealed to me, and Israel I shall not release.
And they said, The God of the Jehudaee hath revealed Himself to us; let us now go three days’ journey into the desert to sacrifice before the Lord our God, lest He come upon us with death or with slaughter.
And the king of Mizraim said to them, Why, Mosheh and Aharon, do you hinder the people from their works? Go to your employment.
And Pharoh said, Behold now, the people of the land are many, and you make them relax from their employment.
And Pharoh that day commanded the masters of the people and the overseers, saying,
You shall not continue (add) to give straw to the people to cast bricks, as heretofore; let them go and collect straw for themselves;
Yet the number of bricks which they have made heretofore you shall still lay upon them and not diminish; for they are idle, and therefore cry, saying, We will go and sacrifice before our God.
Make labour heavy upon the men: let them be occupied with it, and not with vain words.
And the masters of the people and the overseers went forth and spake to the people, saying, Thus saith Pharoh, I will not give you straw;
You shall go and gather up straw for yourselves wheresoever you can find it; though from you work there shall be mother diminished.
And the people were scattered abroad over all the country of Mizraim to gather stubble for straw.
And the masters were urgent, saying, Fulfil your work, the matter of a day in a day, as you did when straw was given to you.
And the masters whom Pharoh set over the sons of Israel smote them, saying, Why do you not fulfil your requirement to cast bricks as heretofore, as yesterday, so also today?
And the overseers of the sons of Israel came and complained before Pharoh, saying, Why hast thou done thus with thy servants?
Thou hast not given thy servants straw, yet they say to us, Make bricks; and, behold, thy servants are beaten, and thy people sin against us.
But he said, You are idle: therefore you say, We will go and sacrifice before the Lord.
And now go, work: but straw I will not give you; yet the number of bricks you shall render.
And the overseers of the sons of Israel perceived that they were in evil: for they said to them, You shall not diminish form your bricks the matter of a day, in a day.
And they met Mosheh and Aharon standing before them in their coming out from being with Pharoh.
And they said to them, May the Lord manifest Himself to you and adjudge; because you have made our savour evil in the eyes of Pharoh, and in the eyes of his servants, and have put a sword into their hands to kill us!
And Mosheh returned before the Lord and said, O Lord, why hast Thou done evil unto this people, and wherefore didst Thou send me?
And from the time that I went in to Pharoh to speak in Thy name he hath done evil to this people, but liberating Thou hast not liberated Thy people.
But the Lord said to Mosheh, Now shalt thou see what I will do to Pharoh: for with a strong hand shall he send them away, and with a strong hand drive them from his land.
And the Lord spake to Mosheh and said to him, I am the Lord;
And I appeared unto Abraham and to Izhak and to Jakob by (the name) EI-Shaddai, but by My name Jehovah I was not known to them.
And also I have confirmed My covenant with them to give them the land of Kenaan, the land of their sojournings in which they sojourned.
And before Me hath been heard the cry of the sons of Israel whom the Mizraee make to labour for them; and I have remembered My covenant.
Therefore, say thou to the sons of Israel, I am the Lord, and I will bring you out from the midst of the sore labour for the Mizraee, and will deliver you from their servitude, and redeem you with a lofty arm and with great judgments.
And I will bring you nigh before Me to be a people, and I will be unto you a God; and you shall know that I am the Lord your God who bringeth you out from the sore Mizrean bondage.
And I will lead you into the land which I have sworn in My Word to give to Abraham, to Izhak, and to Jakob; and to you will I give it for an inheritance; I am the Lord.
And Mosheh so spake with the sons of Israel: but they received not from Mosheh through anguish of spirit, and from the labour which was hard upon them.
And the Lord spake to Mosheh, saying,
Go in, speak with Pharoh king of Mizraim, that he send away the sons of Israel from his land.
And Mosheh spake before the Lord, saying, Behold, the sons of Israel have not received from me, and how then will Pharoh receive, and I (so) heavy of speech?
And the Lord spake to Mosheh and Aharon, and gave them commandment to the sons of Israel and unto Pharoh king of Mizraim for the going forth of the sons of Israel from the land of Mizraim.
These are the heads of the house of their fathers. The sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel, Hanuk and Phalli, Hetsron and Karmi; these are the progeny of Reuben.
And the sons of Shimeon, Yemuel and Yamin and Achad and Yakin and Zochar and Shaul the son of a Kenaanitha; these are the progeny of Shimeon.
And these are the names of the sons of Levi, according to their generations: Gershon and Kehath and Merari. And the years of the life of Levi were a hundred and thirty and seven years.
The sons of Gerson, Libni and Shimei, after their progenies.
And the sons of Kehath. Amram and Izhar and Hebron and Uzziel. And the years of the life of Kehath, a hundred and thirty and three years.
And the sons of Merari, Maheli and Mushi. These are the progenies of Levi, after their generations.
And Amram took Yokebed the sister of his father unto him to wife, and she bare him Aharon and Mosheh. And the years of the life of Amram were an hundred and thirty and seven years.
And the sons of Izhar, Korah and Nepheg and Zikri.
And the sons of Uzziel, Mishael and Elzaphan and Sithri.
And Aharon took Elisheba the daughter of Aminadab the sister of Nachshon to him to wife; and she bare him Nadab and Abihu, Elazar and Ithamar.
And the sons of Korah, Asir and Elkanah and Abiasaph: these are the progeny of Korah.
And Elazar the son of Aharon took (one) of the daughters of Phutiel to himself to wife, and she bare him Pinhas. These are the chiefs of the fathers of the Levaee, according to their generations.
It is Aharon and Mosheh, to whom the Lord had said, Bring forth the sons of Israel from the land of Mizraim by their armies.
These are they who spake with Pharoh king of Mizraim to let the sons of Israel go forth from Mizraim: it is Mosheh and Aharon.
And it was in the day when the Lord spake with Mosheh in the land of Mizraim,
That the Lord spake unto Mosheh, saying, I am the Lord: Speak with Pharoh king of Mizraim all that I have said to thee.
But Mosheh said before the Lord, Behold, I am heavy of speech, and how will Pharoh receive from me?
But the Lord said to Mosheh, See, I have appointed thee a Master (rab) with Pharoh, and Aharon shall be thy interpreter (methurgeman).
Thou shalt speak all that I have commanded thee, and Aharon thy brother shall speak with Pharoh to send away the sons of Israel from his land.
And I will harden the heart of Pharoh, and will multiply My signs and wonders in the land of Mizraim.
But Pharoh will not receive from you; and I will give forth the stroke of My power upon Mizraim, and will bring out My host, My people, the sons of Israel, from the land of Mizraim by great judgments.
And the Mizraee shall know that I am the Lord when I uplift the stroke of My power upon Mizraim, and bring forth the sons of Israel from among them.
And Mosheh and Aharon did as the Lord commanded them, so did they.
And Mosheh was the son of eighty years, and Aharon the son of eighty and three years, in their speaking with Pharoh.
And the Lord spake to Mosheh and Aharon, saying,
When Pharoh shall speak to you, saying, Produce a sign, thou shalt say to Aharon, Take thy rod, and throw it down before Pharoh. And it shall become a serpent (tanina, Heb tanin, a long creature, whether serpent or crocodile).
And Mosheh and Aharon went in unto Pharoh, and did as the Lord had commanded them. Aharon threw down his rod before Pharoh and before his servants, and it became a serpent.
And Pharoh called for the wise men and the magicians; and they also, the Mizraite magicians, did so by their enchantments.
They cast down every man his rod, and they became serpents; but the rod of Aharon swallowed up their rods.
And Pharoh’s heart was hardened, and be would not hearken to them, as the Lord had said.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, The heart of Pharoh is obdurate (heavy): he is unwilling to send the people away.
Go unto Pharoh in the morning; behold, he goeth forth to the waters, and stand to meet him on the bank of the river, and the rod that was turned to a serpent (hevja, Heb, nachash) take in thy hand;
And say to him, The Lord God of the Jehudaee hath sent me to thee, saying, Release My people, that they may serve before Me in the desert; and, behold, thou hast not yet acceded.
Thus saith the Lord, By this thou shalt know that I am the Lord: Behold, with the rod that is in my hand I smite the water of the river, and it shall be turned to blood:
And the fish which are in the river shall die, and the river become putrid, and the Mizraee try in vain to drink the water from the river.
And the Lord spake to Mosheh, Say to Aharon, Take thy rod, and lift up thy hand over the waters of the Mizraee, upon their rivers, upon their canals, and upon their lakes, and upon all their reservoirs of water, that they may become blood; and there shall be blood in all the land of Mizraim, and in vessels of wood and in vessels of stone.
And Mosheh and Aharon did so, as the Lord commanded; and he lifted the rod, and struck the waters of the river, in the sight of Pharoh, and in the eyes of his servants, and all the waters of the river were turned into blood.
And the fish of the river died, and the river became putrid; and the Mizraee could not drink of the water of the river, and there was blood in all the land of Mizraim.
And the magicians did so with their enchantments; and Pharoh’s heart was hardened, and he would not hearken to them, as the Lord had said.
And Pharoh turned and entered into his house; neither did he set his heart also unto this.
And all the Mizraee digged by the bending of the river for water to drink; for the water which was in the river they could not drink.
And seven days were fulfilled after that the Lord had struck the river;
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Go in unto Pharoh and say to him, Thus saith the Lord: Send away My people, that they may serve before me.
But if thou refuse to send them away, behold, I will smite all thy borders with frogs,
And the river shall multiply frogs; and they shall come up and enter into thy house, and into thy chamber the place of sleep, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and among thy people, and into thy ovens and thy kneading pans;
And upon thee and upon thy people and upon all thy servants shall the frogs come up.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Say to Aharon, Uplift thy hand with thy staff upon the streams, upon the rivulets, and upon the lakes; and the frogs shall come up on the land of Mizraim.
And Aharon lifted up his hand over the waters of the Mizraee, and the frogs came up and covered the land of Mizraim.
And the magicians did so with their enchantments, and made frogs to come up on the land of Mizraim.
And Pharoh called Mosheh and Aharon, and said, Pray before the Lord that the frogs may be removed from me and from my people; and I will release the people, that they may sacrifice before the Lord.
And Mosheh said to Pharoh, Demand for thyself a miracle, and appoint me a time when I shall pray for thee, and for thy servants and thy people, that the frogs may be finished from thee and from thy house, and remain only in the river.
And he said, Tomorrow. And he said, According to thy word; that thou mayest know that there is none as the Lord our God.
And the frogs shall be removed from thee and from thy house and thy servants and thy people; in the river only shall they remain.
And Mosheh and Aharon went out from Pharoh; and Mosheh prayed before the Lord concerning the frogs which he had appointed unto Pharoh.
And the Lord did according to the words of Mosheh; and the frogs died from the houses, and from the courts, and from the fields.
And they gathered them in heaps (upon) heaps, and they corrupted upon the ground.
And Pharoh saw that there was relief; and hardened his heart, and would not hearken to them, as the Lord had said.
And the Lord spake to Mosheh, Say unto Aharon, Lift up thy rod and smite the dust of the earth, and it shall become, insects, in all the land of Mizraim.
And they did so. And Aharon lifted up his hand with the rod and smote the dust of the earth, and it became insects on man and on cattle; all the dust of the earth became insects in all the land of Mizraim.
And the magicians wrought so with their enchantments to produce the insects, but were not able; and there were insects on man and on beast.
And the magicians said to Pharoh, This is a plague from before the Lord. Yet Pharoh’s heart was hardened, and he would not hearken to them, as the Lord had said.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Arise in the morning and stand before Pharoh; behold, he goeth out to the waters; and say to him, Thus saith the Lord, Send My people away, that they may serve before Me.
For if thou wilt not send My people away, behold, I will send on thee, and on thy servants, and on thy people, and upon thy houses, the aroba; I and they shall fill the houses of the Mizraee with the aroba; and also the ground on which they are.
But I will make a distinction in that day with the land of Goshen where My people dwell, that the aroba shall not be there; so that thou mayest know that I the Lord do rule in the midst of the earth.
And I will ordain redemption to My people, but upon thy people shall be the plague. Tomorrow shall this sign be.
And the Lord did so; and the aroba came with strength into the house of Pharoh, and into the house of his servants, and into all the land of Mizraim; and the land was destroyed before the aroba.
And Pharoh called for Mosheh and Aharon, and said, Go, sacrifice before your God in the land.
But Mosheh said, It will not be fitting to do so; because the animals which the Mizraee worship we shall take to sacrifice before the Lord our God. Behold, should we immolate the animal which the Mizraee worship, would they not stone us when they saw it?
A journey of three days will we go into the desert, and sacrifice before the Lord our God, as He hath told us.
And Pharoh said, I will send you away, that you may sacrifice before the Lord your God in the desert; only you shall not go farther and farther: pray also for me.
And Mosheh said, Behold I will go out from being with thee, and will pray before the Lord, and He will remove the aroba from Pharoh, and from his servants, and his people, tomorrow; only let Pharoh no more be false in not sending away the people to sacrifice unto the Lord.
And Mosheh went out from before Pharoh, and prayed before the Lord.
And the Lord did according to the word of Mosheh, and removed the aroba from. Pharoh and his servants, and his people; not one remained.
But Pharoh hardened his heart this time also, and would not dismiss the people.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Go in unto Pharoh and say to him: Thus saith the Lord, the God of the Jehudaee; Send My people away, that they may serve before Me:
For if thou refuse to send them away, and thou hast kept them until now,
behold, a plague from before the Lord shall be upon thy cattle which are in the field; upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and upon the sheep, a very great death.
But the Lord will make distinction between the cattle of Israel and the cattle of the Mizraee; and of all that the children of Israel possess not one shall die.
And the Lord set a time, saying, Tomorrow will the Lord do this thing in the land.
And the Lord did that thing on the following day, and all the cattle of the Mizraee died; but of the cattle of the sons of Israel died not one.
And Pharoh sent, and, behold, not one of the cattle of the sons of Israel had died. And Pharoh’s heart was hardened, and he would not send the people away.
And the Lord said to Mosheh and Aharon, Take you handfuls of dust of the furnace, and let Mosheh scatter it towards the heavens in the presence of Pharoh;
And it will be like fine powder upon all the land of Mizraim, and it shall be upon man and beast an inflammation growing into ulcers in all the land of Mizraim.
And they took the dust of the furnace and stood before Pharoh; and Mosheh scattered it towards the heavens, and it became an inflammation of ulcers multiplying on man and beast.
And the magicians could not stand before Mosheh, on account of the disease; for the disease was upon the magicians and upon all the Mizraee.
And the Lord obdurated the heart of Pharoh, and he would not hearken to them, as the Lord had said to Mosheh.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Rise up in the morn-ing and stand before Pharoh, and say to him, Thus saith the Lord, the God of the Jehudaee Send My people away, that they may serve before Me:
For at this time I will send all My plagues upon thy heart, and upon thy servants and thy people, that thou mayest know that there is no one like Me, the Ruler in all the earth.
For now it is nigh before Me to send indeed My strong plagues, and smite thee and thy people with death, and cut thee off from the earth.
For therefore have I raised thee up, that I may show thee My power, and that they may acknowledge the might of My name in all the earth.
Until now hast thou kept My people down, that thou mayest not release them.
Behold, I will cause to come down, as at this time tomorrow, hail most mighty, the like of which hath never been in Mizraim from the day that it was founded until now.
And now, send, gather in thy cattle and all that thou hast in the field; for upon every man and beast that may be found in the field not gathered into the house the hail will fall, and they shall die.
Who feared the word of the Lord among the servants of Pharoh collected his servants and his cattle unto the houses;
But he who did not set his heart upon the word of the Lord, left his servants and his cattle in the field.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Uplift thy hand towards the heavens, and there shall be hail in all the land of Mizraim upon man, and beast, and every herb of the field throughout the land of Mizraim.
And Mosheh lifted up the rod towards the heavens, and the Lord sent thunders, (voices,) and hail, and fire going upon the ground: and the Lord rained hail upon the land of Mizraim,
And there was hail, and fire flaming among the hail, very mighty, such as the like of had not been in all the land of Mizraim since the time it had been for a people.
And the hail smote in all the land of Mizraim all that was in the field from man to cattle, and every herb of the field the hail struck, and every tree of the field it brake.
Only in the land of Goshen, where the sons of Israel were, there was no hail.
And Pharoh sent and called for Mosheh and Aharon, and said to them, I have sinned this time; the Lord is righteous, and I and my people are guilty.
Pray before the Lord that relief may be multiplied before Him, so that there may be upon us no more thunders of malediction like these before the Lord, nor hail; and I will send you away, and will not continue to detain you.
And Mosheh said to him, When I shall have gone out of the city, I will spread forth my hands in prayer before the Lord, and the thunders shall cease, and there shall be no more hail, that you may know that the earth is the Lord’s.
But (as for) thee and thy servants, I know that as yet ye are not humbled before the Lord God.
And the flax and the barley were smitten, because the barley was earing and the flax was in flower:
But the wheat and the spelt were not smitten, for they were later.
And Mosheh went out of the city from Pharoh, and spread forth his hands in prayer before the Lord, and the thunders ceased, and the hail and the rain which had descended came not (more) upon the earth.
And Pharoh saw that the rain had ceased, and the hail and the thunders, and he added yet to sin, and hardened his heart, he and his servants.
And the heart of Pharoh was hardened, and he would not send away the sons of Israel, as the Lord had spoken by the hand of Mosheh.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Go in unto Pharoh; for I have hardened his heart. And the heart of his servants, to set these My signs among them;
and that thou mayest relate before thy son and the son of thy son the miracles which I wrought in Mizraim and the signs that I did set among them, that ye may know that I am the Lord.
And Mosheh and Aharon entered unto Pharoh, and said to him, Thus saith the Lord the God of the Jehudaee, Until now thou hast obstinately refused to humble thyself before Me; send My people away, that they may serve Me.
For if thou refuse to release My people, behold, tomorrow I will bring the locust into thy borders,
And he shall cover the eye of the sun of the earth, (or, shall hide the sun (which is) the eye of the earth,) so that it will not be possible to see the ground; and he will devour the residue which hath been spared (saved) and that hath been reserved to you from the hail, and will devour every tree which groweth up for you from the field;
and they shall fill thy house, and the houses of thy servants, and the houses of all the Mizraee, which thy fathers have not seen, nor the fathers of thy fathers, from the day they were upon the earth until this day. And he turned and went out from Pharoh.
And the servants of Pharoh said to him, How long shall this man be an injury (stumbling-block) to us? Send the men away, that they may serve before the Lord their God. Knowest thou not yet that Mizraim hath perished?
And Mosheh and Aharon were made to return unto Pharoh; and he said to them; Go, serve before the Lord your God: (but) who and who shall go?
And Mosheh said, With our young ones and with our old men will we go; with our sons and with our daughters, with our sheep and with our oxen, will we go; for we have a feast before the Lord.
And he said to them, So be the Word of the Lord in your help when I send you away and your little ones: beware, for the evil that you are thinking to do will be turned against your faces.
Not so: but let the men go and serve before the Lord; for it was that which you demanded. And they were driven from before Pharoh.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Lift up thy hand over the land of Mizraim, that the locusts may come, and go up on the land of Mizraim, and devour every herb of the earth, even all which the hail hath left.
And Mosheh stretched forth his rod upon the land of Mizraim, and the Lord led an east wind upon the land all that day and all the night; at morn the east wind bare the locust.
And the locust came up on all the land of Mizraim, and abode in all the boundary of Mizraim exceedingly strong. Before him the locust had never been like him nor afterward will he be so;
And he covered the eye of the sun of all the earth, and the earth was darkened; and he devoured every herb of the ground, and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left; and there did not remain any green on the trees nor herbage of the field in all the land of Mizraim.
And Pharoh made haste to call Mosheh and Aharon, and said, I have sinned before the Lord your God, and you.
And now, forgive my sin only this time, and intercede before the Lord your God, that He may remove from me only this death.
And they went out from Pharoh, and prayed before the Lord.
And the Lord turned a west wind exceedingly strong, and it carried the locust and drave him into the sea of Suph, nor did one locust remain in all the border of Mizraim.
Yet the heart of Pharoh was hardened, and he would not send the sons of Israel away.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Uplift thy hand towards heaven, and there shall be darkness upon the land of Mizraim after the darkness of the night hath passed away.
And Mosheh lifted up his hand towards heaven, and there was darkness of darkness in all the land of Mizraim three days:
A man saw not his brother, nor did any man rise up from his place, three days. Yet, all the sons of Israel had light in their dwellings.
And Pharoh called Mosheh and said, Go, serve before the Lord; only leave your sheep and your oxen, your little ones also may go with you.
But Mosheh said, Thou must give into our hands also the holy victims and holocausts, that we may serve before the Lord our God.
Our cattle too shall go with us, and there shall not remain any thereof; for of it we must take to serve the Lord our God, and we know not with what we have to do service before Him until we come thither.
But the Lord hardened Pharoh’s heart, and he was not willing to send them away.
And Pharoh said to him, Go from me. Beware for thyself. See my face no more; for in the day that thou seest my face thou shalt die.
And Mosheh said, Thou hast spoken well. I will see thy face no more.
But the Lord said to Mosheh, Yet one plague will I bring upon Pharoh and upon Mizraim; after which he will send you hence. When sending away he thoroughly driving will drive you from hence.
Speak now before the people of Israel that a man shall require of his companion, and a woman of her companion, vessels of silver and vessels of gold.
And the Lord gave the people favour in the eyes of the Mizraee; also the man Mosheh was very great in the land of Mizraim, in the eyes of the servants of Pharoh and in the eyes of the people.
And Mosheh said, Thus saith the Lord, At the dividing of the night I will be revealed in the midst of Mizraim,
And all the firstborn in the land of Mizraim shall die; from the firstborn of Pharoh who would sit upon the throne of his kingdom, unto the firstborn of the womanservant who is behind the mills, and all the firstborn of cattle.
And there shall be a great cry in all the land of Mizraim, the like of which hath not been, nor will be the like of it again.
But anyone of the sons of Israel no dog will hurt even with his tongue by barking, from man and to beast, so that you shall know that the Lord hath distinguished between the Mizraee and Israel.
And all these thy servants shall come down to me, and beseech of me, saying, Go forth, thou and all thy people who are with thee: and after that I will go forth. And he went out from Pharoh with vehement anger.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Pharoh will not hearken to you; therefore will I multiply My wonders in the land of Mizraim.
And Mosheh and Aharon wrought all these wonders before Pharoh; but the Lord hardened Pharoh’s heart, that he would not send the children of Israel from his land.
And the Lord spake to Mosheh and Aharon in the land of Mizraim, saying,
This month shall be to you the beginning of the months; the first, it shall be to you, of the months of the year.
Speak with all the congregation of Israel, saying, In the tenth of this month they shall take to them every man a lamb for the house of a father, a lamb for the house.
And if the house be smaller than the numbering (required) for the lamb, let him take himself, and his neighbour who is nearest to his house, according to the number of the souls, every man according to the mouth of his eating shall you count over the lamb.
The lamb shall be perfect, a male, the son of a year; it shall be to you; from the sheep or from the goats you may take it.
And you shall have it in keeping till the fourteenth day of this month, and the whole church (kehala) of the congregation of Israel shall kill him between the suns.
And they shall take of the blood, and apply it upon the two posts and upon the lintel of the houses in which they eat him.
And they shall eat the flesh in that night roasted with fire, and (with) unleavened cake with bitters you shall eat him.
You shall not eat of it while living, neither boiled with boiling in water, but roasted with fire; his head with his feet and his inwards.
And you shall not leave of it till the morning; and that which remains of it till morning you shall burn in the fire.
And thus shall you eat it; with your loins girded, with your sandals on your feet, and your staves in your hands, and you shall eat it in haste; it is the Pascha before the Lord.
And I will appear in the land of Mizraim in that night, and will kill every firstborn in the land from man unto beast, and on all the idols of Mizraim I will execute judgment: I am the Lord.
And the blood shall be for you a sign upon the houses where you are; and I will see the blood, and will have mercy upon you, and there shall not be among you the destruction of death when I slay in the land of Mizraim.
And this day shall be to you for a memorial, and you shall solemnize it a festival before the Lord in your generations; an everlasting ordinance (covenant) shall you solemnize it.
[no translation]
And on the first day there shall be an holy congregation, and on the seventh day an holy congregation shall there be to you. Every kind of work may not be done in them; save what pertains to the eating of every soul, that only may be done by you.
And you shall keep the (feast of the) Unleavened; for on this very day shall I have brought your hosts out of the land of Mizraim, and you shall keep this day to all your generations forever.
In Nisan, on the fourteenth day of the month in the evening you shall eat unleavened, until the twenty and first of the mouth in the evening.
Seven days leaven shall not be found in your houses; for whosoever will eat of that which is leavened, that man shall perish from the congregation of Israel, of the stranger, or of the native of the land.
You shall eat no leavened (food), in all your dwellings you shall eat unleavened.
And Mosheh called for all the elders of Israel, and said to them, Draw out, and take to you from the sons of the flock for your families, and kill the pascha.
And you shall take a bundle of hyssop and dip it in the blood that is in the basin, and sprinkle upon the lintel and the two posts from the blood which is in the basin; and you shall not go forth from the door of your house until the morning.
For the Lord will be revealed to smite the Mizraee; and seeing the blood upon the lintel and upon the two posts, the Lord will be merciful upon the door, and will not suffer the Destroyer (or destruction) to enter your houses to smite.
And you shall observe the thing for an ordinance to thee and to thy sons forever.
And it shall be, when you have entered into the land which the Lord will give you as He hath said, that you shall (still) keep this service.
And it shall be, when your children say to you, What is this service to you?
You shall say, It is a sacrifice for compassion before the Lord, because He had compassion on the house of the sons of Israel in Mizraim, when He smote the Mizraee, but spared our houses. And the people bowed and worshipped.
And the sons of Israel went and did as the Lord had commanded Mosheh and Aharon, so did they.
And it came to pass at the dividing of the night that the Lord slew all the firstborn in the land of Mizraim; from the firstborn of Pharoh who should sit on the throne of his kingdom unto the firstborn of the captive in the house of the chained, and all the firstborn of cattle.
And Pharoh rose up in that night, and all his servants and all the Mizraee; and there was a great cry in Mizraim, because there was no house in which there was not the dead.
And he cried to Mosheh and to Aharon by night, and said, Arise, go out from among my people, you and the sons of Israel, and go and serve before the Lord, as you have said.
Your flocks and your herds take also, as you have spoken, and go, and pray also for me.
And the Mizraee were forcible on the people to hasten to send them away; for they said, All of us are dead.
And the people took their dough while not leavened, remaining in the kneading pans, bound with their clothes upon their shoulders.
And the children of Israel did according to the word of Mosheh, and demanded of the Mizraee vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and raiment.
And the Lord gave the people favour in the eyes of the Mizraee, and they demanded of them, and left the Mizraee empty.
And the children of Israel journeyed from Ramases to Succoth; about six hundred thousand men on foot, besides children (or families);
And a multitude of strangers also went up with them, and flocks and herds and very much cattle.
And they baked the dough which they had brought out from Mizraim (into) unleavened cakes; for it had not been leavened, because they had been driven out from Mizraim and could not stay, and they had not made provision.
And the dwelling of the sons of Israel in their abode in Mizraim (was) four hundred and thirty years.
And it was at the end of four hundred and thirty years, in that same day, that all the hosts of the Lord went forth from the land of Mizraim.
It is a night to be kept before the Lord for bringing them forth from the land of Mizraim: this is that night before the Lord kept by all the children of Israel in their generations.
And the Lord said to Mosheh and to Aharon, This is the rite of the Pascha. Every son of Israel who apostatizes shall not eat of it;
But every male servant bought with silver, and thou hast circumcised him, may eat thereof.
A sojourner and a hireling shall not eat thereof.
In one company it shall be eaten. You shall not carry any of the flesh from the house without, and a bone shall not be broken in him.
All the congregation of Israel shall do this.
And when the sojourner who sojourneth with thee will perform the pascha before the Lord, every male of his shall be circumcised, and he may then approach and perform it; he shall be as one born in the land, but none uncircumcised shall eat of it.
One law shall there be for the native and for the proselyte who sojourneth among you.
And all the children of Israel did as the Lord commanded Mosheh and Aharon, so did they.
And it was on the same day that the Lord led forth the sons of Israel from the land of Mizraim by their armies.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying,
Sanctify unto Me all the firstborn. Everyone which openeth the womb among the children of Israel, of man and of beast, that is Mine.
And Mosheh said to the people, Remember this day, in which you went forth from Mizraim from the house of servitude; for with a mighty hand hath the Lord brought you forth from thence; and you shall not eat what is leavened.
This day have you come out, in the month of Abiba.
And it shall be when the Lord hath led thee into the land of the Kenaanaee and Hittaee and Emoraee and Hivaee and Jebusaee, which He covenanted to thy fathers to give thee, a land producing milk and honey, that thou shalt perform this service in this month.
Seven days thou shalt eat the (phatira) unleavened cake, and in the seventh day solemnize a feast before the Lord.
The unleavened cake thou shalt eat seven days; that which is leavened shall not be seen with thee; the leavened thing shall not be seen with thee in all thy limits.
And thou shalt teach thy son on that day, saying, (It is) on account of that which the Lord did for me in bringing me out of Mizraim.
And it shall be a sign to thee on thy hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, that the Law of the Lord may be in thy mouth, for that with a mighty hand did the Lord bring thee forth from Mizraim:
And thou shalt keep this ordinance in its season from time to time.
And it shall be, when the Lord hath brought thee into the land of the Kenaanaee, as He sware to thee and to thy fathers, and hath given it to thee,
that thou shalt make over whatsoever openeth the womb before the Lord; among the cattle which thou hast the male shall be consecrate before the Lord.
And every firstling of an ass thou shalt ransom with a lamb; but if thou wilt not ransom it, thou shalt destroy it; and every firstborn of man among thy children thou shalt ransom.
And it shall be, when thy son shall ask thee tomorrow, saying, Why is this? Thou shalt say to him, By a mighty hand the Lord brought us out of Mizraim from the house of servitude.
And it was when Pharoh was obdurate about letting us go away that the Lord slew all the firstborn in the land of Mizraim, from the firstborn of man to the firstborn of cattle: therefore I sacrifice before the Lord of all that openeth the womb, the males, and all the firstborn of my children I ransom.
And it shall be for a sign upon thy hand and for Tephillin between thine eyes, because with a mighty hand hath the Lord brought thee out of Mizraim.
And it was when Pharoh had sent the people away, that the Lord led them not by the way of the land of the Philistaee because it was the nearest: for the Lord said, Lest the people be terrified at the seeing of war, and return to Mizraim.
But the Lord led the people round by the way of the desert to the sea of Suph; and harnessed (or girded) went the sons of Israel up out of the land of Mizraim.
And Mosheh brought up the bones of Joseph with him; for he had adjured the sons of Israel with an oath, saying, Remembering, the Lord will remember you, and you shall carry up my bones from hence.
And they journeyed from Sukkoth, and encamped in Etham, which is beside the desert.
And the Lord went before them by day in the column of the cloud to lead them in the way, and by night in the column of fire to enlighten them, that they might go in the day and in the night.
The column of the cloud by day, nor the column of the fire by night, departed not before the people.
And the Lord spake to Mosheh, saying,
Speak with the sons of Israel that they return and encamp before Pum-Hiratha, between Migdol and the sea, before Beel Zephon: you shall encamp before it by the sea.
And Pharoh will say of the children of Israel, They are bewildered in the land, the desert hath got hold of them:
And I will harden Pharoh’s heart, and he will pursue them; and I will be glorified in Pharoh and in all his host; and the Mizraee shall know that I am the Lord. And they did so.
And it was seen by the king of Mizraim that the people had gone. And the heart of Pharoh and of his servants was turned to the people; and they said, What is this that we have done, that we have sent Israel away from serving us?
And he set his chariot in order, and took his people with him.
He took also six hundred select chariots, and all the chariots of the Mizraee, and appointed strong men over them.
And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharoh king of Mizraim, and he pursued after the children of Israel. But the children of Israel went forth with uncovered head.
And the Mizraee followed after them, and overtook them while encamping by the sea; all the chariot horses of Pharoh, and his horsemen, and his army, by Pum-Hiratha which is before Beel Zephon.
And Pharoh drew nigh, and the sons of Israel lifted up their eyes, and, behold, the Mizraee were coming after them: and they were greatly afraid, and the children of Israel cried before the Lord.
But to Mosheh they said, Was it because there were no graves in Mizraim that thou hast taken us to die in the wilderness? What is this that thou hast done to bring us out of Mizraim?
Was not this the word which we spake with thee in Mizraim, saying, Let us alone, and we will serve the Mizraee? For better would it have been for us to serve the Mizraee, than to die in the wilderness.
And Mosheh said to the people, Fear not, stand still (or, be ready) and see the Lord’s deliverance which He will work for you this day; for as you have seen the Mizraee this day, you will see them no more forever:
The Lord will fight for you the fight, and you shall be quiet.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, I have heard thy prayer. Speak to the children of Israel that they go onward:
And thou, take thy rod and stretch forth thy hand over the sea, and divide it, and the children of Israel shall go in the midst of the sea on dry ground.
And I, behold, I will harden the hearts of the Mizraee, and they will go in after them; and I will be glorified by Pharoh and by all his army, by his chariots and his horsemen;
And the Mizraee shall know that I am the Lord, when I have been glorified by Pharoh and his chariots and his horsemen.
And the angel of the Lord who went before the camp of Israel passed by and came behind them; and the column of the cloud passed from before them and abode behind them.
And it entered between the camp of the Mizraee and the camp of Israel; and was a cloud and darkness to the Mizraee, but unto Israel a light all the night: and that came not near to this all the night.
And Mosheh stretched forth his hand over the sea; and the Lord drave the sea by a mighty east wind all the night, and caused the sea to be dry, and the waters were disparted;
And the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon dry ground; and the waters were to them a wall on their right hand and on their left.
And the Mizraee followed and entered in after them, all the horses of Pharoh, and his chariots and horsemen, into the midst of the sea.
And it was in the morning watch that the Lord looked upon the host of the Mizraee from the column of fire and cloud, and perturbed the host of the Mizraee.
And he removed the wheels of the chariots, so that they drave them by strength; and the Mizraee said, Let us flee from before Israel; for this is the power of the Lord which hath done battle for them against Mizraim.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Stretch forth thy hand over the sea, and the waters shall return upon the Mizraee, upon their chariots and their horsemen.
And Mosheh stretched out his hand over the sea, and the sea returned, at the time of the morning, unto its strength; and the Mizraee fled before it; and the Lord drowned the Mizraee in the midst of the sea.
And the waters returned and covered the chariots and horsemen and all the host of Pharoh who had gone after them into the sea, and there remained of them not one.
But the children of Israel walked on dry land in the midst of the sea; and the waters were a wall to them on their right hand and on their left.
And the Lord delivered Israel that day from the Mizraee, and Israel saw the Mizraee dead upon the shore of the sea.
And Israel saw the Power of the Great Hand which the Lord had made (to appear) in Mizraim; and the people feared before the Lord, and believed in the Word of the Lord, and in the prophetic (work) of Mosheh His servant.
Then sang Mosheh and the children of Israel this hymn before the Lord; and they spake, saying, We will sing and give thanks before the Lord, because He is magnified upon the mighty, and the power is His own; the horse and his rider hath He cast into the sea.
My strength and my song is the terrible Lord; He hath said by His Word that He will be mine to redeem This is my God, and I will build Him a sanctuary; the God of my fathers, and I will worship before Him.
The Lord is the Lord of Victory in battles, the Lord is His Name.
The chariots of Pharoh and his horses He hath cast into the sea, his chosen warriors are drowned in the sea of Suph.
The depths covered them over, they went down to the bottom as a stone.
Thy right hand, O Lord, is illustrious in power; Thy right hand, O Lord, shattereth the adversary;
And in the greatness of Thy might Thou hast broken down them who arose against Thy people. Thou didst send forth Thy wrath, and it consumed them as stubble in the flame,
and by the word of Thy mouth the waters, (as if) wise, stood up like a wall; the depths were congealed in the heart of the sea.
The adversary said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil; my soul shall be satisfied upon them; I will draw my sword, and my hand shall destroy them.
Thou didst speak by Thy Word, the sea covered them over, they sank like lead in the mighty waters.
There is none beside Thee, 0 God, (who art) glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders.
Thou didst uplift Thy right hand, the earth swallowed them up.
Thou hast led forth in goodness Thy people whom Thou hast redeemed; Thou wilt bring them by Thy strength to the dwelling of Thy holiness.
The nations will hear it, and be moved; terror will seize on the inhabiters of Pelasheth;
Then will the princes of Edom be alarmed, the strong ones of Moab will be seized with trembling and they who dwell in Kenaan will be broken down.
Fear and dread will fall upon them, by the greatness of Thy power they will be silent as a stone, until Thy people, O Lord, pass over Arnona, until Thy people whom Thou hast redeemed pass over Jardena.
Thou wilt bring them in, and cause them to dwell in the mountain of Thine inheritance, in the place which Thou hast ordained for the house of Thy Shekina, the sanctuary which Thy hands, O Lord, have prepared.
The kingdom of the Lord endureth forever, and forever, evermore!
Because, when the horses of Pharoh with his chariots and his horsemen had entered into the sea, the Lord caused the waters of the sea to return upon them, and the children of Israel walked upon dry land in the midst of the sea.
And Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aharon, took the timbrel in her hand, and all the women went out after her with timbrels and choruses.
And Miriam answered them: Sing and give thanks before the Lord, for He hath magnified Himself upon the proud: and the majesty belongeth (only) unto Him; the horse and his rider hath He cast into the sea.
And Mosheh caused Israel to remove from the sea of Suph, and they went forth into the desert of Chagra, and went three days in the desert, but found no water.
And they came to Marah, and could not drink the waters of Marah because they were bitter; therefore he called the name of it Marah.
And the people were fretful against Mosheh, saying, What shall we drink?
And he prayed before the Lord; and the Lord instructed him (in the properties of) a tree, and he cast it into the waters, and the waters became sweet. There decreed He a statute, and a judgment, and there He tried him.
And He said, If hearkening thou wilt hearken unto the Word of the Lord thy God, and wilt do what is right in His eyes, and wilt listen to His precepts and keep all His statutes, none of the maladies which I have set upon Mizraim will I put upon thee; for I am the Lord thy Healer.
And they came to Elim, and there were twelve wells of water and seventy palm trees; and they encamped there before the waters.
And they journeyed from Elim, and came, the whole assembly of the sons of Israel, to the desert of Sir, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month from their outgoing from the land of Mizraim.
And all the congregation of the children of Israel were troublous against Mosheh and against Aharon in the desert;
And the children of Israel said to them,
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Behold, I will cause bread to come down to you from heaven; and the people shall go out and collect the matter of the day for the day; that I may prove them whether they will walk in My law, or not.
And in the sixth day, when they prepare that which they bring in, it shall be two for one upon what they collect from day to day.
And Mosheh and Aharon said to all the children of Israel, In the evening you shall know that the Lord brought you out of the land of Mizraim,
And in the morning shall you see the Glory of the Lord; for your tumults are heard before the Lord: and we what, that you are restive against us?
And Mosheh said, When the Lord will give you at evening flesh to eat, and bread in the morning to satisfy, while are heard before the Lord your tumults against Him! For what are we? Your tumults are not against us, but against the Word of the Lord.
And Mosheh said to Aharon, Bid all the congregation of the sons of Israel to come together before the Lord; for your tumult is heard before the Lord.
And it was, while Aharon was speaking with all the congregation of the sons of Israel, that they turned towards the desert, and, behold, the glory of the Lord was revealed in the cloud.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying,
The tumult of the children of Israel is heard before Me. Speak with them to say, Between the evenings you shall eat flesh, and in the morning be satisfied with bread, and you shall know that I am the Lord your God.
And it was in the evening that the quails came up and covered the camp; and in the morning a dew descended round about the camp;
And when the dew which had fallen had gone up, behold, upon the face of the desert, a small (substance) without covering, small like hoar frost, heaped on the earth.
And the sons of Israel saw, and said, a man to his brother, Mana-hu! For they knew not what it was. And Mosheh said to them, This is the bread which the Lord will give you to eat.
This is the word that the Lord hath commanded: Let every man gather of it according to his eating an omera for every head according to the number of your souls, a man for those of his tent shall you take.
And the sons of Israel did so, and gathered, some more, (others) less;
And they measured with an omera, and he who had (gathered) much had not more, and he who had (gathered) little had not less; every man according to his eating they gathered.
And Mosheh said to them, No man must leave of it for the morning.
But they hearkened not to Mosheh, but some left for the morning, and it swarmed worms and corrupted. And Mosheh was angry with them.
And they gathered it from morning to morning a man according to his eating; and when the sun grew hot on that which remained upon the face of the field, it melted.
And it was that on the sixth day they gathered a double (quantity) of bread, two omers for one: and all the chiefs of the congregation came and showed Mosheh.
And be said to them, Tomorrow is the rest of the holy Shabbath before the Lord. That which you prepare by baking, bake, and that which you prepare by boiling, boil, and all the remainder lay up to you, a store for the morning.
And they laid it up till the morning, as Mosheh had instructed; and it did not corrupt, neither were there worms in it.
And Mosheh said, Eat that today, for this day is Shabbath before the Lord; this day you would not find it in the field.
Six days you shall collect it; but on the seventh day, the Shabbath, there will be none.
And it was on the seventh day that some of the people went out to gather, but they found it not.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, How long will you be unwilling to keep My commandments and My laws?
See, because the Lord hath given you the Shabbath He hath therefore given you on the sixth day the bread for two days; let every man dwell in his resting, and not go out from his place on the seventh day.
And the people reposed on the seventh day.
And the house of Israel called the name of it Manna; and it was as the seed of Gida white, and its taste was like cake broiled with honey.
And Mosheh said, This is the word which the Lord hath commanded. Fill an omera of it to be kept for your generations, that they may see the bread which I made you eat in the desert when I brought you forth from the land of Mizraim.
And Mosheh said to Aharon, Take one vase, and put therein an omera full of manna, and lay it up before the Lord to be preserved for your generations.
As the Lord commanded, so did Mosheh; and Aharon laid it up before the Testimony, to keep.
And the children of Israel ate the manna forty years, until they came to the land inhabited; they did eat the manna till they came to the confines of the land of Kenaan.
And one omera is the tenth of three seahs.
And all the congregation of the children of Israel journeyed from the desert of Sin, according to their itinerations by the Word of the Lord; and they encamped in Rephidim: but the people had no water to drink;
and the people were contentious with Mosheh, and said, Give us water that we may drink. And Mosheh said, Why do you contend with me? Why do you tempt before the Lord?
But the people thirsted there for water, and the people were turbulent against Mosheh, and said, Why is this, to have brought us from Mizraim, to kill me and my children and my cattle with thirst?
And Mosheh prayed before the Lord, saying, What shall I do with this people? Yet a little, and they will stone me!
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Pass over before the people, and take with thee of the elders of Israel, and thy rod wherewith thou didst smite the river take in thy hand, and go.
Behold, I will stand before thee there, upon the rock in Horeb, and thou shalt smite the rock, and water shall come out of it, that the people may drink. And Mosheh did so in the eyes of the elders of Israel.
And he called the name of the place, Temptation and Strife, because of the striving of the sons of Israel, and because they tempted before the Lord, saying, Is the Majesty of the Lord among us, or not?
And Amaleq came, and warred battle with Israel in Rephidim.
And Mosheh said to Jehoshua, Choose for us men, and go forth and do battle with Amaleq. Tomorrow I will stand on the top of the hill, and the rod with which the miracles are wrought from before the Lord shall be in my hand.
And Jehoshua did as Mosheh had said to him, and he did battle with Amaleq. And Mosheh, Aharon, and Hur ascended to the top of the hill.
And it was that when Mosheh lifted up his hand, the house of Israel prevailed; and when he let down his hand, the house of Amaleq prevailed.
But the hands of Mosheh became heavy, and they took a stone and placed it under him, and he sat upon it, and Aharon and Hur held up his hands, here one, and there one; and thus were his hands stretched out in prayer until the going of the sun.
And Jehoshua shattered Amaleq and his people with the edge of the sword.
And the Lord said to Mosheh: Write this memorial in the Book, and set it before Jehoshua, That blotting, I will blot out the memorial of Amaleq from under the heavens.
And Mosheh builded an altar, and ministered upon it before the Lord who had wrought (such) miracles for him.
And he said, With an oath hath this been declared from before the Fearful One whose Shekinah is upon His glorious throne; that war shall be waged with the house of Amaleq, to destroy it from the generations of the world.
And Jethro, the rabba of Midian, the father-in-law of Mosheh, had heard of all that the Lord had done for Mosheh and for Israel His people, and that the Lord had brought Israel out of Mizraim.
And Jethro, Mosheh’s father-in-law, took Zipporah the wife of Mosheh, after he had let her go,
And his two sons, the name of the one Gershom; For, he said, I have been a sojourner in a strange land;
And the name of the other Eliezer; For (said he) the God of my fathers hath been my helper, and hath delivered me from the sword of Pharoh.
And Jethro the father-in-law of Mosheh came, and his sons, and his wife, to Mosheh in the desert where he had encamped at the mountain upon which was revealed the glory of the lord.
And he had told Mosheh, I, thy father-in-law Jethro, come to thee with thy wife, and her two sons with her.
And Mosheh went forth to meet his father-in-law, and bowed, and kissed him, and each saluted the other with peace; and they entered the tabernacle.
And Mosheh recounted to his father-in-law all that the Lord had done to Pharoh and to Mizraim for Israel’s sake; and all the tribulation that they had found upon the way, and how the Lord had delivered them.
And Jethro was glad over all the good which the Lord, who had saved him from the hand of Mizraim, had wrought for Israel.
And Jethro said, Blessed be the Lord, who hath delivered you out of the hand of the Mizraee, and out of the hand of Pharoh, and hath delivered the people from under the domination of the Mizraee.
Now know I that the Lord is great, and that there is no God but He for by the thing by which the Mizraee had thought to punish (judge) Israel, they themselves are punished.
And Jethro the father-in-law of Mosheh offered a burnt offering and sacrificed holy things before the Lord. And Aharon came, with all the elders of Israel, to eat bread with the father-in-law of Mosheh before the Lord.
And on the day after, Mosheh sat to judge the people, and the people stood about Mosheh from morn till evening;
And the father-in-law of Mosheh observed all that he did to the people. And he said, What thing is this that thou art doing to the people? Why dost thou sit alone, with all the people standing about thee from morn till evening?
And Mosheh said to his father-in-law, Because the people come to me to ask instruction from before the Lord.
When they have (a matter) for judgment they come to me, and I adjudicate between a man and his neighbour, and make them to know the statutes of the Lord, and His laws.
But the father-in-law of Mosheh said to him, The thing thou art doing is not right;
With weariness thou wilt be weary, thou and also this people who are with thee; for the thing is too weighty for thee, thou art not able to do it by thyself.
Now hearken to me, I will give thee counsel, and the Word of the Lord shall be thy helper. Be thou for the people the seeker of instruction from the presence of the Lord, to bring the matters before the Lord:
And thou shalt admonish them in the statutes and the laws, and make them know the way in which to walk, and the work that must be done.
And thou, look out from the whole people men of ability who fear the Lord, men of truth who abhor to take mammon; and superappoint them chiefs of thousands, and chiefs of hundreds, and chiefs of fifties, and chiefs of tens.
And they shall judge the people at any time, and every great matter they shall bring to thee, but every small thing they shall judge; and they will lighten it from thee, and bear it with thee.
If thou wilt do this, and the Lord teach thee, thou wilt be able to endure, and (of) all this people everyone will go to his place in peace.
And Mosheh hearkened to his father-in-law, and did all that he had said.
And Mosheh chose men of ability from all Israel, and appointed them heads over the people; chiefs of thousands, chiefs of hundreds, chiefs of fifties, and chiefs of tens;
And they judged the people at all times; a weighty thing they brought to Mosheh, and every minor thing they judged themselves.
And Mosheh sent his father-in-law away, and he went unto his land.
In the third month of the outgoing of the sons of Israel from the land of Mizraim, on that day came they to the desert of Sinai.
And they journeyed from Rephidim, and came to the desert of Sinai, and dwelt there by the side of the mountain.
And Mosheh ascended before the Lord. And the Lord called to him from the mount, saying, As thus thou shalt speak to the house of Jakob, and show to the sons of Israel:
You have seen what I did to the Mizraee, and how I bare you as on eagles’ wings, and brought you nigh to serve Me:
And now, if hearkening you will hearken to My Word, and will keep My covenant, you, before Me, shall be more beloved than all peoples; for all the earth is Mine.
And you, before Me, shall be kings (and) priests, a holy people. These are the words which thou shalt speak with the sons of Israel.
And Mosheh came, and called the elders of the people, and set all these words in order before them, as the Lord had instructed him.
And all the people responded together, and said, All that the Lord hath spoken we will do. And Mosheh brought back the words of the people before the Lord.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Behold, I will be revealed to thee in the darkness of the cloud, that the people may hear, in My speaking with thee, and also that they may confide in thee forever. And Mosheh showed the words of the people before the Lord.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Go unto the people and prepare them, today and tomorrow, and let them purify their clothing;
And be ready for the third day; for on the third day the Lord will be revealed in the eyes of all the people upon mount Sinai.
And thou shalt set a limit for the people round about, saying, Beware you of going up on the mountain, or of approaching the border of it. Whoever approaches the mountain, slain he shall be slain.
No hand shall touch him; for stoned he shall be stoned, or pierced he shall be pierced; whether beast or man, he shall not live. When the trumpet is prolonged they shall be allowed to go forward to the mount.
And Mosheh came down from the mountain unto the people, and prepared the people, and they made white their clothes.
And he said to the people, Be ready on the third day, approach not to a woman.
And it was the third day at morning; and there were voices, and lightnings, and mighty clouds upon the mountain, and the voice of the trumpet exceedingly strong; and all the people trembled who were in the camp.
And Mosheh led forth the people out of the camp to meet the Word of the Lord; and they stood at the lower parts of the mount.
And the mountain of Sinai was altogether fuming from before the revelation of the Lord upon it in fire; and the smoke went up as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount trembled greatly.
But when the voice of the trumpet went forth and became exceedingly strong, Mosheh spake, and from the presence of the Lord he was answered by a voice.
And the Lord was revealed upon mount Sinai, on the head of the mountain; and the Lord called Mosheh unto the head of the mount; and Mosheh went up.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Go down, warn the people lest they break through before the Lord to see, and many of them fall.
And let the priests also, who are to minister before the Lord, sanctify themselves, lest the Lord slay them.
And Mosheh spake before the Lord, The people are not able to come up to mount Sinai; for Thou hast warned us, saying, Set a boundary to the mountain, and sanctify it.
But the Lord said to him, Go, descend, and come up, thou and Aharon with thee; but let not the priests nor the people break through to come up before the Lord, lest He slay them.
And Mosheh went down to the people, and spake with them.
And the Lord spake all these words, saying,
I am the Lord thy God, who have brought thee out of the land of Mizraim, out of the house of servitude.
Thou shalt have no other God beside Me.
Thou shalt not make to thee image nor likeness of anything that is in the heavens above, nor in the earth beneath, nor in the waters under the earth:
Thou shalt not worship them nor serve them; for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God; visiting the sins of the fathers upon the rebellious children, unto the third generation and to the fourth generation of those who hate Me; while the children continue (or complete) to sin after their fathers;
But doing good to thousands of generations of those who love Me and keep My commandments.
Thou shalt not swear in the name of the Lord thy God vainly; for the Lord will not acquit him who sweareth in His Name with falsity.
Remember the day of Shabbatha to sanctify it.
Six days shalt thou do service and do all thy work;
but the seventh day is Shabbath before the Lord thy God. Thou shalt not do every work; thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy servant nor thy handmaid, nor thy cattle, nor thy sojourner who is in thy city.
For in six days the Lord made the heavens and the earth, the seas and all that is in them, and rested on the seventh day; wherefore the Lord blessed the day of Shabbath, and sanctified it.
Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be prolonged upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth to thee.
Thou shalt not kill life. Thou shalt not commit adultery. Thou shalt not steal. Thou shalt not testify against thy neighbour a testimony of falsehood.
Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s house; thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s wife, nor his servant, nor his handmaid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor anything that is thy neighbour’s.
And all the people saw the thunders, and the flames, and the voice of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking; and the people saw, and trembled, and stood afar off.
And they said to Mosheh, Speak thou with us, and we will hearken; but let it not be spoken to us from before the Lord, lest we die.
And Mosheh said to the people, Fear not; for that He may prove you He hath revealed to you the glory of the Lord, and that His fear may be before your face, that you may not sin.
And the people stood afar off, but Mosheh drew nigh to the darkness where was the glory of the Lord.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Thus shalt thou speak to the children of Israel; You have seen that I have spoken to you from the heavens.
You shall not make before Me idols of silver, neither idols of gold shall you make to you.
An altar of earth shalt thou make before Me, and shalt sacrifice upon it thy burnt offerings and thy sanctified victims, thy sheep and thy oxen. In every place where I may cause My Shekinah to dwell, thither will I send My blessing, and will bless thee.
And if thou wilt make Me an altar of stone before Me, thou shalt not build it with hewn stones lest thou lift up thy cutting-tool (lit. thy sword) upon it and profane it.
And thou shalt not ascend by steps to My altar, that thy nakedness may not be discerned upon it.



And these are the judgments which thou shalt set In order before them.
When thou dost purchase a servant, a son of Israel, six years he shall serve, and in the seventh go forth free, for nothing.
If he came in alone, he shall go out alone; if the husband of a wife, his wife shall go out with him.
If his master have given him a wife, and she have borne him sons or daughters, the wife and the children are the master’s, and he shall go out alone.
But if the servant saying shall say, I love my master, my wife and my children, I will not go out free;
His master shall bring him before the judges, and shall take him to the door, even to the post, and his master shall bore his ear with an awl; and he shall be to him a working servant forever.
And when a man selleth his daughter to be a handmaid, she shall not go out as at the outgoing of the men servants.
If she be evil in the eyes of the master who had covenanted with her to be his, then shall he make her free; to another man he shall not have ability to sell her to domineer over her.
And if he hath covenanted her to his son, after the custom of the daughters of Israel shall he act towards her.
And if he take another to him, her food, her raiment, and her marriage due he shall not restrain.
And if these three he doth not perform to her, he shall release her freely without money.
Whosoever striketh a man and killeth him, being killed he shall be killed.
But if it was not (done) covertly to him, but he was delivered into his hand from before the Lord, then I will appoint thee a place whither he may flee.
But when a wicked man acts toward his neighbour with deceitfulness to kill him, even from Mine altar thou shalt bring him away to put him to death.
Whosoever striketh his father or his mother shall be surely put to death.
And whosoever stealeth a soul of the house of Israel and selleth him, or if he be found in his hand, shall be surely put to death.
And he who curseth his father or his mother shall surely be put to death.
And when men contend, and a man smiteth his neighbour with a stone or with his fist, and he die not, but fall upon his bed;
If he rise (again) and walk about upon his staff, he who smote him shall be acquitted; only he shall make good his loss of labour, and defray the charge of the physician.
And when a man smiteth his servant or his handmaid with a staff, and he die under his hand, condemned he shall be condemned.
But if he survive one day, or two, he shall not be condemned, because he was his money.
If men contending strike a woman with child and she miscarry, but die not, fined he shall be fined, as the husband of the woman may set upon him, and he shall give according to the sentence of judgment.
But if death take place, thou shalt give life for life,
eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
burning for burning, wound for wound, bruise for bruise.
And if a man smite the eye of his servant or his handmaid and destroy it, he shall let him go free, for the sake of his eye.
Or if he beat out (cause to fall) a tooth of his servant or a tooth of his handmaid, he shall let him go free for the sake of his tooth.
If an ox gore a man or woman unto death, the ox being stoned shall be stoned, and his flesh must not be eaten; but the master of the ox shall be acquitted.
But if the ox had gored in time before (yesterday and the day before), and it had been attested to his master, and he not keeping him he hath killed man or woman, the ox shall be stoned and the owner be put to death.
If a fine of money (if mammon) be laid upon him, he may give redemption for his life according to all that is laid upon him.
If the ox gore a son or daughter of Israel, after this judgment shall it be done to him.
If an ox gore a man-servant or a maidservant, (the owner) shall give to his master thirty sileen of silver, and the ox shall be stoned.
And if a man open a pit, or dig a pit, and doth not cover it, and an ox or an ass fall therein,
The master of the pit shall pay: he shall give silver to his owner, and the carcass shall be his own.
And if the ox of one man hurt a neighbour’s ox that it die, they shall sell the living ox and divide the money; and that which is dead they shall also divide.
But if it be known that the ox gored in time past and his owner did not keep him in, paying he shall pay ox for ox, and the dead one shall be his.
If a man steal an ox or a lamb, and kill or sell it, he shall repay five oxen for the ox, and four sheep for the lamb.
If a thief be found breaking through, and he be smitten and die, there shall be no blood due to him.
If the eyes of witnesses fall upon him, blood shall be due to him, paying he shall pay. If he have nothing, he shall be sold for his robbery.
If the thing stolen, from an ox to an ass, be found in his possession, they being alive, he shall restore two for one.
If a man make waste a field or vineyard, or send his cattle to consume another’s field, the best of his field and the best of his vineyard he shall restore.
If fire breaks out, and it find thorns, so that sheaves or standing corn or the field be consumed, he who kindled the fire paying shall pay.
When a man giveth his neighbour silver or vessels to keep, and they be stolen from the man’s house; if the thief be found, he shall repay double.
If the thief be not found, the master of the house shall be brought before the judges (to make oath) that he hath not put forth his hand upon that which his neighbour had delivered to him.
Upon every matter of guiltiness about ox or ass or lamb, or raiment, or anything destroyed of which it may be said, This is it, the cause of both shall be brought before the judges, and he whom the judges shall condemn shall pay double to his neighbour.
If a man deliver to his neighbour an ass or an ox or a lamb or any cattle to keep, and it die, or be injured, or be carried away, no one seeing;
An oath of the Lord shall be between them that he bath not put forth his hand against that which his neighbour had delivered, and the owner shall accept the oath, and he shall not repay.
But if it be stolen from him, he shall repay its owner;
And if it be torn, and he bring witnesses that it was torn, he shall not repay.
And if a man borrow of his neighbour and it be injured or die, the owner of it not being with it, repaying he shall repay.
But if the owner be with it, he shall not repay. If it were hired, let it be (considered) for its hire.
And if a man seduce a virgin who is not betrothed and lie with her, he shall surely establish her to be his wife.
If her father be unwilling to give her to him, he shall weigh down silver according to the dowry of virgins.
An enchantress shall not live.
Whosoever lieth with a beast shall be surely put to death.
Whosoever sacrificeth to the idols of the Gentiles shall be put to death: but to the Name of the Lord alone.
And a stranger thou shalt not trouble nor oppress; for you were sojourners in the land of Mizraim.
Afflict not the widow or the orphan:
If you indeed afflict them, and they cry before Me, I will surely hearken to their cry;
And My displeasure shall be strong, and will kill you with the sword; and your wives shall be widows and your children fatherless.
If thou lend money to My people, to the poor who is with thee, thou shalt not be to him as an usurer, neither shalt thou inflict an injury upon him.
If, (as) a pledge, thou take thy neighbour’s garment, at the going away of the sun thou shalt return it unto him.
For it may be his only covering; for (then) it is the clothing for his skin: wherein shall he sleep? And it shall be that when he crieth before Me I will hearken; for I am merciful.
Thou shalt not revile the judges, nor curse the ruler of My people.
Thy firstfruits and thy tithes thou shalt not delay (to offer:) the firstborn of thy children thou shalt separate before Me;
so shalt thou do with thy oxen and with thy sheep. Seven days shall (the firstling) be with its mother; on the eighth day thou shalt separate it before Me.
And ye shall be holy men before Me; and the flesh torn from a living animal you may not eat; you shall cast it to the dogs.
Thou shalt not take up a false report, nor set thine hand with the wicked to be a false witness for him.
Thou shalt not follow the many to wickedness, neither shalt thou fail to teach that which in thine eyes is judgment; after the many (majority?) thou shalt fulfil judgment.
And upon the poor thou shalt not be pitiful in judging him.
If thou meet the ox of thy enemy, or his ass, wandering away, thou shalt surely bring it back to him.
When thou seest thine enemy’s ass prostrate beneath his burden, thou shalt forbear from forsaking him; thou shalt surely abandon what is in thy heart against him, and shalt deliver it unto him.
Thou shalt not warp the judgment of the poor man in his cause.
From a false matter keep distant; and him who has been acquitted and has come forth from judgment uncondemned thou shalt not kill; for I will not justify the guilty.
And thou art not to receive a bribe; for a bribe blinds the eyes of the wise, and perverts the words of the just.
And thou shalt not distress the sojourner; for you know the mind of a sojourner; for you were dwellers in the land of Mizraim.
Six years thou shalt sow the land and gather in its produce,
but the seventh year thou shalt let it alone and suffer it to rest, that the poor of thy people may eat, and what they leave the beast of the field may eat. So also shalt thou do with thy vineyard and with thy olive ground.
Six days shalt thou do thy work, and in the seventh day have rest, that thy ox and thy ass may rest, and the son of thine handmaid and thy sojourner may be quiet.
And of all that I have spoken to you be mindful, and the name of the idols of the Gentiles remember not; let it not be heard upon thy lips.
Three times thou shalt solemnize festival before Me in the year.
Thou shalt keep the festival of unleavened bread. Seven days shalt thou eat unleavened cake, as I have commanded thee, in the time of the moon of Abiba, for therein you went forth from Mizraim; and you shall not appear before Me empty.
And the festival of harvest, the firstfruits of thy labours which thou hast sowed in thy fields; and the festival of gathering, at the end of the year when thou gatherest in thy labours from the field.
Three times in the year shall all thy males appear before the Lord, the Ruler of the world.
Thou shalt not offer with unleavened bread the blood of My pascha, neither shall the fat of the sacrifice of the feast remain without on the altar until morning.
The beginning of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring into the sanctuary of the Lord thy God. Thou shalt not eat flesh with milk.
Behold, I send My Angel before thee, to protect thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared.
Take heed before Him, and hearken to His words; rebel not against Him, for He will not forgive your sins; for in My Name are His words.
For if thou wilt truly hearken to His words, and do all that I shall speak, I will be a foe to thy enemies, and will afflict them that afflict thee.
For My Angel shall go before thee, and bring thee in, to the Amoraee and Hittaee, and Perizaee and Kenaanaee, Hivaee and Jebusaee; and I will destroy them.
Thou shalt not worship their idols, nor serve them, nor do according to their doings, but shalt utterly demolish them, and break their images.
And you shall serve before the Lord your God, and He will bless thy food and thy drink, and will take away grievous evils from among thee.
There shall be none abortive or barren in thy land; the number of thy days will I complete.
I will send My terror before thee, and will perturb all the people among whom thou shalt come to fight against them, and I will make all thy adversaries turn their back before thee.
I will send the hornet before thee, and it shall drive out the Hivaee and Kenaanaee and the Hittaee from before thee.
I will not expel them before thee in one year, lest the land be made desolate, and the beasts of the field multiply against thee.
By little and little I will drive them out before thee, until thou shalt be increased and inherit the land.
And I will appoint thy boundary from the sea of Suph unto the sea of the Philistaee, and from the desert to the river; for I will deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hands, and thou shalt drive them out before thee.
Thou shalt strike no covenant with them nor with their idols.
They shall not dwell in thy land, lest they cause thee to commit sin before Me; for if thou serve their idols, it will be a stumbling-block to thee.
And He said to Mosheh, Come up before the Lord, thou and Aharon, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel; and they shall worship at a distance.
And Mosheh shall draw nigh alone before the Lord, but they shall not draw nigh, nor shall the people ascend with them.
And Mosheh came and recited to the people all the words of the Lord and all the judgments; and all the people answered with one voice and said, All the words that the Lord hath spoken will we do.
And Mosheh wrote all the words of the Lord. And he arose in the morning, and builded an altar at the lower part of the mountain, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel.
And he sent the firstborn sons of Israel, and they offered holocausts, and sacrificed oxen (as) consecrated victims before the Lord.
And Mosheh took half of the blood and set it in basins, and half the blood he sprinkled upon the altar.
And he took the Book of the Covenant, and read before the people; and they said, All that the Lord hath spoken we will do and obey.
And Mosheh took the blood and sprinkled it upon the altar to propitiate for the people, and said, Behold the Blood of the Covenant which the Lord hath ratified with you upon all these words.
And Mosheh and Aharon, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel went up.
And they saw the Glory of the God of Israel, and under the throne of His glory as the work of a precious stone, and as the face of heaven for its clearness.
Yet the princes of the sons of Israel were not hurt; and they saw the Glory of the Lord, and rejoiced in their sacrifices which were accepted with favour, as though they had eaten and drunk.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Come up into My Presence in the mountain, and be there, and I will give thee the tablets of stone, and the law and the precepts, as I have written (them), that thou mayest teach them.
And Mosheh arose and Jehoshua his minister, and Mosheh ascended the mountain on which was revealed the Glory of the Lord.
But to the elders he said, Wait for us here until we return to you: and, behold, Aharon and Hur are with you: whosoever hath a (matter for) judgment, let him bring it before them.
And Mosheh ascended the mountain, and the cloud covered the mountain;
And the glory of the Lord dwelt upon Mount Sinai, and the cloud enveloped it six days. And He called to Mosheh on the seventh day out of the midst of the cloud.
And the appearance of the Glory of the Lord was as the appearance of devouring fire on the summit of the mountain in the eyes of the sons of Israel.
And Mosheh entered into the midst of the cloud, and ascended the mount; and Mosheh was in the mount forty day and forty nights.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying,
Speak with the sons of Israel that they set apart before Me a separated portion: from every man who is willing in his heart thou shalt receive that which is set apart.
And this is the separation that thou shalt take of them: gold, and silver and brass;
And hyacinth, and purple and vermilion, (bright colour,) and fine linen, (butz,) and hair of goats,
And skins of rams made red, and skins of purple, and sittin woods;
Oil for the illuminators, aromatics for the anointing oil, and aromatics for the incense;
Burilla stones, and stones that may complete the insetting of the ephod and the breastplate.
And they shall make before me A SANCTUARY in which I will dwell among them.
Altogether as I show thee the pattern of the sanctuary, and the pattern of all its vessels, even so shalt thou make them.
And they shall make an ARK of sitta wood; two cubits and a half its length, and a cubit and a half its breadth, and a cubit and a half its height.
And thou shalt cover it with pure gold within and without, and thou shalt make a crown of gold upon it round about.
And thou shalt cast for it four rings of gold, and set them upon its four corners, two rings upon one side of it, and two rings upon its other side.
And thou shalt make staves of sittin woods, and cover them with gold,
and shalt insert the staves in the rings upon the sides of the ark, that the ark may be carried upon them.
In the rings of the ark shall be the staves, they shall not be removed therefrom.
And thou shalt place in the ark the Testimony that I will give thee.
And thou shalt make A PROPITIATORY Of pure gold; two cubits and a half its length, and a cubit and a half its breadth.
And thou shalt make two KERUBIN of gold, beaten (ductile) shalt thou make them, on the two sides of the propitiatory.
And thou shalt make one keruba on this side and one keruba on that side of the propitiatory; thou shalt make the kerubin on its two sides.
And the kerubin shall have their wings outspreading above, overshadowing the propitiatory with their wings; and their faces shall be opposite one to another, towards the propitiatory shall be the faces of the kerubin.
And thou shalt set the propitiatory upon the Ark over above, and within the ark shalt thou put the Testimony that I will give thee.
And I will appoint My Word (Memra) with thee there; and I will speak with thee from above the Propitiatory, from between the two kerubin that are upon the Ark of the Testimony, all that I may command thee for the sons of Israel.
And thou shalt Make A TABLE of sittin woods, two cubits the length of it, and a cubit its breadth, and a cubit and a half its height.
And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, and make for it a crown of gold round about.
And thou shalt make to it a border, a handbreadth high round about, and make a crown of gold to the border of it round about.
And thou shalt make for it four golden rings, and put the rings upon the four corners of its four feet.
Opposite to the border shall be the rings for the place of the staves for carrying the table.
And thou shalt make the staves of sittin woods, and cover them with gold, that they may carry the table upon them.
And thou shalt make its dishes and its vases, its vials and its chalices with which the libations are outpoured, of pure gold shalt thou make them.
And thou shalt set upon the table the PRESENCE BREAD continually before Me.
And thou shalt make A CANDELABRUM; of pure ductile gold shalt thou make the candelabrum; its base and its shaft, its cups, apples, and lilies, of the same shall they be.
And six branches shall come out from its sides, three branches of the candelabrum from one side, and three branches of the candelabrum on the second side.
Three cups (calyxes) figured on one branch with apple and lily, and three cups figured on one branch with apple and lily, so for the six branches that come out from the candelabrum.
And upon the candelabrum shall be four cups, figurated with apples and lilies;
An apple under the two branches of this, and an apple under the two branches of that, according to the six branches that come forth from the candelabrum.
Their apples and their branches shall be of it, all beaten of pure gold.
And thou shalt make its seven lights, and kindle its lights that they may shine towards its face.
And its snuffers and shovels (shall be made) of pure gold.
Of a talent of pure gold shall he make it and all these vessels.
And look thou, and make, according to their resemblance which was displayed in the mount.
And thou shalt make THE TABERNACLE (of) ten curtains of fine linen twined, and hyacinth, and purple, and vermilion, (and) figures of kerubin, the work of the artificer shalt thou make them.
The length of one curtain twenty and eight cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits; the measure of all the curtains shall be one.
Five curtains shall be conjoined one with another, and five curtains conjoined one with another.
And thou shalt make loops of hyacinth upon the edge of one curtain in the side on which it is joined, and so shalt thou do on the border of the second curtain in the side on which it is joined.
Fifty loops shalt thou make in the one curtain, and fifty loops shalt thou make in the side of the curtain which is in the place of the second coupling, that the loops, may answer one with another.
And thou shalt make fifty taches of gold, and loop the curtains one with another with the taches, that it may be one Tabernacle.
And thou shalt make curtains of goat’s (hair) to stretch over the tabernacle; eleven curtains thou shalt make them.
The length of one curtain shall be thirty cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits; of one measure shall be the eleven curtains.
And thou shalt loop five curtains together, and six curtains together, and fold the sixth curtain against the front of the tabernacle.
And thou shalt make fifty loops on the edge of the one curtain where it is conjoined, and fifty loops on the edge of the curtain at the place of the second conjoinment.
And thou shalt make fifty taches of brass, and introduce the taches into the loops, and conjoin the tabernacle that it may be one.
And the overplus which remaineth of the tabernacle curtains, the half curtain, (namely,) thou shalt stretch over the hinder side of the tabernacle.
And the cubit on this and the cubit on that (side) which remain in the length of the curtains of the tabernacle shall be spread over the sides of the tabernacle, here and there, to cover it.
And thou shalt make a covering for the tabernacle of rams’ skins dyed red, and a covering of purple skins above.
And thou shalt make the standing-boards of the tabernacle of sittin woods.
Ten cubits the length of one board, and a cubit and a half its breadth.
Two tenons (shall there be) to each board, fastened over against one another; so shalt thou make all the boards of the tabernacle.
And thou shalt make the boards for the tabernacle, twenty boards on the southern side.
And forty bases of silver shalt thou make under the twenty boards; two bases under one board for its two tenons, and two bases under one board for its two tenons.
And for the second side of the tabernacle, on the northern side, twenty boards
And their forty sockets of silver; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another.
And for the side of the tabernacle westward thou shalt make six boards.
And two boards thou shalt make at the corners of the tabernacle at their extremities;
And they shall be united below and likewise united at head with one ring; so shall it be with both of them for the two corners.
And they shall be eight boards, and their silver bases, sixteen bases; two bases under one board, and two bases under the other board.
And thou shalt make bars of sittin woods, five for the boards of one side of the tabernacle,
and five bars for the boards of the second side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the end side of the tabernacle toward the west.
And the middle bar in the midst of the boards shall pass from end to end.
And the boards thou shalt overlay with gold, and the rings make thou of gold, the place for the bars, and cover the bars with gold.
And thou shalt erect the tabernacle after the manner of it which hath been showed thee on the mount.
And thou shalt make A VEIL, of hyacinth, and purple, and vermilion, and fine linen twined with the work of the artificer, it shall be made, figured with kerubin.
And thou shalt set it upon four pillars of sittin covered with gold, and their hooks shall be of gold upon four bases of silver.
And thou shalt put the veil under the taches, and shalt bring in thither within the veil the Ark of the Testament; and the veil shall separate to you between the Holy and the Holy of Holies.
And thou shalt set the Mercy Seat upon the ark of the Testament in the Holy of Holies.
And place thou the table without the veil, and the candelabrum over against the table at the south side of the tabernacle, and the table place thou at the north side.
And thou shalt make a curtain for the door of the tabernacle of hyacinth, and purple, and vermilion, and fine linen twined, the work of the embroiderer;
And make for the curtain five pillars of sittin, and overlay them with gold, and their hooks shall be of gold; and shalt set them upon five bases of brass.
And thou shalt make THE ALTAR of sittin woods; five cubits the length and five cubits the breadth; square shall be the altar, and three cubits its height.
And thou shalt make its horns upon its four corners; of the same shall be its horns, and overlay it with brass.
And make its pots, to collect the ashes, and its fireshovels, and its basins, and its flesh-hooks, and its thuribles, all its vessels make thou of brass.
And make for it a grate, a work of netting of brass, and make upon the network four rings of brass upon its four sides,
And place it under the surrounding of the altar beneath, that the net may extend to the middle of the altar.
And make thou staves for the altar, staves of sittin wood, and overlay them with brass;
And he shall put the staves into the rings, and the staves shall be at the two sides of the altar to carry it.
Hollow (with) boards make thou it, according to what was showed thee in the mount, so do thou.
And thou shalt make THE COURT of the tabernacle on the side toward the south: curtains (shall there be) for the court of fine twined linen a hundred cubits in length on one side.
And its pillars twenty and their bases twenty of brass, the hooks of the pillars and their rods of silver.
And so for the north side in length (there shall be) curtains of a hundred cubits long, and their columns twenty and their bases twenty of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their rods shall be of silver.
And on the side of the court toward the west curtains of fifty cubits, their columns ten and their bases ten.
And the breadth of the court toward the east side eastward, fifty cubits,
And fifteen cubits the curtains on a side, their columns three and their bases three.
And on the second side fifteen curtains, their pillars three, and their bases three.
And for the door of the court shall be an hanging of twenty cubits, of hyacinth, and purple, and vermilion, and fine linen twined, the work of the embroiderer; their pillars four and their bases four.
All the pillars round about the court shall be (united) with rods of silver, their hooks shall be of silver and their bases of brass.
The length of the court, one hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty, and the height five cubits, of fine linen twined, and their bases of brass.
All the vessels of the tabernacle, and all its service, and all its utensils, and all the pins of the court shall be of brass.
And thou shalt instruct the sons of Israel to bring to thee the pure oil of olives, beaten, to illuminate, that the lamps may burn continually.
In the tabernacle of ordinance, without the veil that is before the testimony, Aharon and his sons shall set it in order from evening to morning before the Lord; a perpetual statute for the generations of the sons of Israel.
And thou, bring to thee Aharon thy brother and his sons with him from among the sons of Israel, that they may minister before Me; Aharou, Nadab and Abihu, Elazar and Ithamar, sons of Aharon.
And thou shalt make the holy vestments for Aharon thy brother for glory and for praise.
And speak thou with all the wise of heart whom I have filled with the Spirit of wisdom, that they make the vestments of Aharon to consecrate him to minister before Me.
And these are the vestments which they shall make; the breastplate, and the ephoda, and the robe, and the inwrought tunic, and the mitre, and the girdle; and they shall make holy vestments for Aharon thy brother and for his sons to minister before Me.
And they shall take the gold, and the hyacinth, and the vermilion, and the fine linen.
And shall make the EPHODA of gold, hyacinth, and vermilion, and fine linen twined, the work of the artificer.
Two shoulder-pieces doubled (or, conjoined) shall it have at the two sides conjoined.
And the adorned girdle thereof which is upon it shall be of the same work, and be of gold, hyacinth, vermilion, and fine linen twined.
And thou shalt take two stones of onyx (burilla); and engrave upon them the names of the sons of Israel.
Six of their names upon the one stone, and the six names which remain upon the second stone, according to their nativity.
By the work of the artificer in precious stone the writing shall be distinct; as the engraving of a ring, so shalt thou engrave the two stones with the names of the sons of Israel; inwrought in sockets of gold shalt thou make them.
And thou shalt put the two stones upon the shoulders of the ephod, stones of the memorial of the sons of Israel; and Aharon shall bear their names before the Lord upon his two shoulders for a memorial.
And thou shalt make sockets of gold;
And two chains of pure gold enwreathed shalt thou make of twisted work, and shalt set the twisted chains in the sockets.
And thou shalt make THE BREASTPLATE OF JUDGMENT with the work of the artificer, like the work of the ephod shalt thou make it, of gold, hyacinth, vermilion, and fine linen twined shalt thou make it.
Square shall it be; doubled; a span its length and a span its breadth;
And thou shalt fulfil in it the complement of stones: four rows of precious stones; the first row, the carnelian, topaz and smaragd, the first row;
The second row, the carbuncle, sapphire, and onyx;
And the third row, the jacinth, agate, and amethyst;
And the fourth row, the chrysolite, and beryl, and jasper: they shall be inset in gold in their completeness.
And the stones shall be according to the names of the sons of Israel, twelve according to their names; the writing distinct as the engraving of a ring; a man according to his name shall they be, after the twelve tribes.
And thou shalt make on the breastplate wreathed chains of twisted work of pure gold,
and upon the breastplate two golden rings, and shalt set the two rings upon the two sides of the breastplate.
And thou shalt put the two wreaths of gold into the two rings on the sides of the breastplate;
And the two wreaths which are upon its two sides thou shalt set in the two sockets, and put them upon the shoulders of the ephod over against its front.
And thou shalt make two rings of gold, and set them on the two sides of the breastplate at its edges on the side of the ephod within.
And thou shalt make two (other) rings of gold, and put them upon the two shoulders of the ephod beneath, over against its conjoinment above the girdle of the ephod.
And they shall unite the breastplate with its rings to the rings of the ephod with ribbon of hyacinth to be above the girdle of the ephod, that the breastplate be not separated from (being) upon the ephod.
And Aharon shall bear the names of the sons of Israel on the breastplate of judgment upon his heart in his going into the sanctuary, for a perpetual memorial before the Lord.
And thou shalt put in (or upon) the breastplate of judgment THE URAIA and THE THUMMAIA; and they shall be upon Aharon’s heart when he entereth before the Lord; and Aharon shall carry the judgment of the sons of Israel upon his heart before the Lord continually.
And thou shalt make the ROBE of the ephod of hyacinth altogether.
And the orifice thereof for the head shall be doubled inwardly; its opening shall be binded round about with the work of the sewer, as the opening of a coat of mail it shall be, that it be not torn.
And thou shalt make on the lower part of it pomegranates of hyacinth, and purple, and vermilion upon its lower part round about, with bells of gold between them round about.
A golden bell and a pomegranate; a golden bell and a pomegranate upon the lower part of the robe round about.
And it shall be upon Aharon to minister, and its voice shall be heard in his entering into this sanctuary before the Lord, and in his coming out, that he shall not have died.
And thou shalt make a DIADEM (or plate) of pure gold, and engrave upon it (in) distinct writing HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD;
And thou shalt set it upon a ribbon of hyacinth, that it may be upon the tiara; over the front of the tiara shall it be.
And it shall be upon Aharon’s forehead, that Aharon may bear the iniquity of the things which the sons of Israel may consecrate of all their consecrated gifts; and it shall be upon his fore-head continually for their acceptableness before the Lord.
And thou shalt weave the vesture of fine linen, and make the tiara of fine linen, and a girdle shalt thou make, the work of the embroiderer.
And for the sons of Aharon thou shalt make vestures, and make for them girdles, and mitres shalt thou make for them for honour and for praise.
And thou shalt dress them, Aharon thy brother and his sons with him, and shalt anoint them and offer oblations and consecrate them, that they may minister before Me.
And thou shalt make them coverings of fine linen to cover the flesh of their shame; from the loins to the thighs shall they be.
And they shall be upon Aharon and upon his sons in their entering into the tabernacle of ordinance, or in approaching to the altar to minister in the sanctuary, that they contract not guilt and die. (This shall be) an everlasting statute for him and for his sons after him.
And this is the thing which thou shalt do to them, to consecrate them to minister before Me: Take one bullock, the young of a bullock, and two rams unblemished;
And unleavened bread, and unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and wafers unleavened which are anointed with oil; of wheaten flour shalt thou make them.
And thou shalt put them on one basket, and bring them in the basket, and the bullock and the two rams,
And Aharon and his sons thou shalt bring to the door of the tabernacle of ordinance, and wash them with water.
And thou shalt take the vestments, and dress Aharon with the tunic and the robe of the ephod, and the ephod and the breastplate, and shalt ordain him with the girdle of the ephod.
And thou shalt set the tiara on his head, and put the diadem of Holiness upon the tiara.
And thou shalt take the oil of anointing, and pour upon his head to anoint him.
And thou shalt bring his sons near, and dress them in the tunics
And gird them with the girdles, Aharon and his sons; and thou shalt set on them the mitres, and it shall be to them a priesthood, by a perpetual statute. And thou shalt offer the oblation for Aharon and the oblation for his sons.
And the bullock shalt thou offer before the tabernacle of ordinance. And Aharon and his sons shall lay their hands upon the head of the bullock;
And thou shalt slay the bullock before the Lord at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance.
And thou shalt take of the blood of the bullock, and put it upon the horns of the altar with thy finger, and all the blood (that remains) thou shalt pour out at the base of the altar.
And thou shalt take all the fat which covereth the inwards, and the caul that is upon the liver, and the two kidneys and the fat that is upon them, and sacrifice them upon the altar.
And the flesh of the bullock, his skin, and his dung, burn thou with fire without the camp; it is a sin offering.
And thou shalt take the one ram, and Aharon and his sons shall lay their hands upon the head of the ram;
And thou shalt kill the ram, and take his blood, and sprinkle upon the altar round about.
And the ram thou shalt divide by his members, and shalt cleanse his inwards, and his legs, and put them upon his members, and upon his head,
and thou shalt sacrifice the ram at the altar; it is a holocaust before the Lord, to be accepted with favour, an oblation before the Lord.
And thou shalt take the second ram, and Aharon and his sons shall lay their hands upon the head of the ram.
And thou shalt kill the ram, and take of his blood, and put it on the tip of Aharon’s ear, and upon the tip of the right ear of his sons, and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the toe of their right foot; and thou shalt sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about.
And thou shalt take of the blood which is upon the altar, and of the oil of anointing, and drop it on Aharon and on his vestments, and on his sons, and on the vestments of his sons with him, and he shall be consecrated, he and his vestments, and his sons, and the vestments of his sons with him.
And thou shalt take of the ram, the fat, and the tall, and the fat which covereth the inwards, and the caul which is on the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat which is on them, and the right shoulder, for it is a ram for oblation;
And one loaf of bread, and one cake of bread (with) oil, and one wafer from the basket of the unleavened ones which is before the Lord:
And put thou all upon the hands of Aharon and upon the hands of his sons, and uplift them for an elevation before the Lord;
And take them from their hands, and offer them at the altar upon the burnt offering, that they may be received with acceptance before the Lord; it is an oblation before the Lord.
And thou shalt take the breast of the ram of Aharon’s oblations, and uplift it, an elevation before the Lord; and it shall be thy portion.
And thou shalt consecrate the breast of the elevation and the shoulder of separation which is uplifted and which is separated of the oblation-ram of Aharon and that of his sons;
And it shall be for Aharon and for his sons by a perpetual statute for the sons of Israel, because it is a thing separated. And a separation shall be (taken) from the sons of Israel of their consecrated sacrifices, (even) their separation before the Lord.
And the sacred garments of Aharon shall be his sons’ after him, to be anointed in them, (and) in them to offer their oblations.
Seven days shall the priest wear them, who of his sons (is to be anointed) instead of him, and who shall enter into the tabernacle of ordinance to minister in the sanctuary.
And the ram of the oblations thou shalt take, and boil his flesh in the holy place.
And Aharon and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram and the bread that is on the basket at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance.
And they may eat those things by which propitiation is made in offering them as oblations to consecrate them; but an alien may not eat, because they are sacred.
And if any (part) of the flesh of the oblations or of the bread remain until the morning, the remainder shall be burned with fire; it shall not be eaten, it is sacred.
And thou shalt do (thus) to Aharon and to his sons, according to all that I have prescribed to thee: seven days shalt thou offer their oblations.
A bullock that is a sin offering thou shalt perform daily for expiation, and thou shalt make purification upon the altar in making expiation upon it, and shalt anoint it, to sanctify it.
Seven days must thou make expiation on the altar to sanctify it, and the altar shall be most holy; whosoever shall touch the altar let him be sanctified.
And this is what thou shalt perform upon the altar: Two lambs, the offspring of the year, for the day continually.
The one lamb thou shalt perform in the morning, and the second lamb thou shalt perform between the evenings.
And a tenth of flour, sprinkled with the fourth of a hina of beaten oil, and a libation of the fourth of a hina of wine, to one lamb.
And the second lamb thou shalt perform between the evenings, as the oblation of the morning, and as its libation thou shalt perform it to be received with acceptance, an oblation before the Lord.
A perpetual holocaust unto your generations at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance before the Lord, where I have appointed My Word with you, to speak with you there.
And I will appoint My Word there unto the sons of Israel, and (with) My glory will I sanctify (it).
And I will sanctify the tabernacle of ordinance, and the altar, and Aharon, and his sons will I sanctify to minister before Me.
And I will cause My Shekinah to dwell in the midst of the sons of Israel, and I will be their God.
And they shall know that I am the Lord their God who brought them out from the land of Mizraim, that I may make My Shekinah to dwell among them. I am the Lord their God.
And thou shalt make an altar upon which to burn fragrant incense, of woods of sittin shalt thou make it.
A cubit its length, and a cubit its breadth, four-square shall it be, and two cubits its height. The horns of it shall be of the same.
And thou shalt cover it with fine gold, its top and its sides round about, and its horns. And thou shalt make to it a crown of gold round about,
And two rings of gold shalt thou make to it under its crown, upon its top corners, at its two sides and it shall be for the places of the staves by which to carry it.
And thou shalt make the staves of sittin woods, and cover them with gold.
And thou shalt place it before the veil which is over the ark of the testimony before the mercy seat which is over the testimony, where I will appoint My Word to be with thee.
And Aharon shall burn thereon fragrant incense from morning to morning, when he setteth the lamps in order he shall burn it.
And when Aharon kindleth the lamps between the evenings, he shall burn fragrant incense continually before the Lord in your generations.
You shall not offer upon it incense of strange perfumes, nor holocaust, nor mincha, nor pour any libation upon it.
And Aharon shall atone upon its horns once in the year with the blood of the sin offering of the atonement, once in the year shall he atone upon it, unto your generations. It is holy of holiness before the Lord.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying,
When thou takest the account of the sons of Israel according to their number, they shall give every man a ransom for his soul before the Lord, when thou numberest them, that there may not be death among them when thou numberest them.
This they shall give: everyone who cometh over to the adnumberment, a half shekel, of the shekel of the sanctuary, of twenty mayin the shekel, half a shekel shall be set apart before the Lord.
Everyone who cometh over to the adnumberment, from a son of twenty years and above, shall give the separation before the Lord.
He who is rich shall not increase (it), and he who is poor shall not diminish from the half shekel in presenting the separation before the Lord to propitiate for your souls.
And thou shalt take the silver of the propitiation from the sons of Israel, and appoint it for the service of the tabernacle of ordinance and it shall be to the sons of Israel for a memorial before the Lord to propitiate for your souls.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying,
Thou shalt make a LAVER of brass, and its foundation of brass for purifying; and set it between the tabernacle of ordinance and the altar, and put water therein.
And Aharon and his sons shall purify at it their hands and their feet.
In their entering into the tabernacle of ordinance they shall cleanse themselves with water, that they die not; or when they approach the altar to minister, to offer an oblation before the Lord;
And (thus) they shall purify their hands and their feet, that they may not die. And it shall be to them an everlasting statute, to him and to his sons unto their generations.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying,
Take thou also to thee choice (first or principal) aromatics: pure myrrh, five hundred (shekels’ weight); and sweet cinnamon, one half (as much), two hundred and fifty (shekels) weight; of sweet calamus, two hundred and fifty (shekels’) weight;
And cassia, five hundred (shekels) weight, of the shekels of the sanctuary; and olive oil, a hina full;
And make it a holy anointing oil, most fragrant, the work of the perfumer; it shall be the holy oil for anointing.
And thou shalt anoint therewith the tabernacle of ordinance and the ark of the testimony,
and the table and all its vessels, and the candelabrum and its vessels, and the altar of sweet incense,
and the altar of burnt offering and all its vessels, and the laver and its foundation,
And consecrate them. They shall be most holy; whoever approacheth them shall be sanctified.
And Aharon and his sons thou shalt anoint, and consecrate them to minister before Me.
And thou shalt speak to the sons of Israel, saying, A holy anointing oil shall thus be unto Me for your generations.
Upon the flesh of man it shall not be poured, nor the like to it be made; sacred is it, and sacred shall it be to you.
The man who compoundeth the like to it, or who putteth it upon an alien, shall be destroyed from his people.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Take thee spices, stachte and onycha, and galbanum spices, and pure frankincense, weight for weight shall they be;
And thou shalt make it a sweet incense, fragrant, the work of the, perfumer, mixed, pure, for consecration.
And thou shalt beat some of it and make it fine, and put thereof before the testimony in the tabernacle of ordinance, where I will appoint My Word to be with thee; to you it shall be most holy.
And of the sweet incense which thou shalt make you must not make the like for yourselves; it shall be sacred to thee before the Lord.
The man who maketh the like of it, to smell thereto, shall be destroyed from his people.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying,
Behold, I have named by name Bezalel bar Uri bar Hur, of the tribe of Jehudah,
And have fulfilled him with the spirit of prophecy from before the Lord, with wisdom and with intelligence, and with knowledge, and in all work (to excel),
To Instruct artificers to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass,
And in artisanship of precious stone, to fill in, and in carving of wood, to accomplish all the work.
And I, behold, have given with him Ahaliab bar Achisamak, of the tribe of Dan; and in the heart of all the wise of heart have I ingiven wisdom, that they may make all that I have commanded thee:
The tabernacle of ordinance, and the ark of the testimony, and the propitiatory that is upon it, and all the vessels of the tabernacle;
And the table and its vessels, and the pure candelabrum and all its vessels, and the altar of sweet incense,
and the altar of burnt offering and all its vessels, and the laver and its foundation.
And the vestments of ministration, and the holy vestments of Aharon the priest, and the vestments of his sons for ministry;
And the oil of anointing and the sweet incense for the sanctuary, according to all that I have commanded thee, they shall make.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying,
Speak thou also with the sons of Israel, saying, The days of My Sabbaths ye shall indeed keep; for it is a sign between My Word and you, unto your generations, that ye may know that I am the Lord who sanctifieth you.
And you shall keep the Sabbath, for it is holy unto you; whosoever profaneth it, dying, he shall die; for whosoever doeth work therein, that man shall be destroyed from among his people.
Six days shalt thou do work, and the seventh day is Sabbath, the Holy Sabbath before the Lord: whosoever doeth work on the day of the Sabbath, dying, he shall die.
And the sons of Israel shall keep the Sabbath to fulfil (perform) the Sabbath unto their generations, a statute forever.
Between My Word and the sons of Israel it is a sign forever for in six days the Lord made the heavens and the earth; and in the seventh day rested and was refreshed.
And He gave to Mosheh, when He had finished to speak with him on Mount Sinai, two tablets of the testimony, tablets of stone inscribed with the finger of the Lord.
But the people saw that Mosheh delayed to come down from the Mount; and the people gathered together unto Aharon, and said to him, Arise, make us gods (dachalan, pl. objects to be venerated) that may proceed before us; for this Mosheh, the man who brought us up from the land of Mizraim, we know not what hath been to him.
And Aharon said to them, Take off the golden ear-rings which are in the ears of your wives, your sons, and your daughters, and bring them to me.
And all the people took off the golden rings which were in their ears and brought them unto Aharon.
And he took them from their hands, and formed it with a graver, and made it a molten calf. And they said, These are thy gods, Israel, which brought thee up from the land of Mizraim.
And Aharon saw, and builded an altar before it; and Aharon proclaimed and said, A feast shall be held before the Lord tomorrow.
And they arose next day, and sacrificed burnt offerings and offered oblations; and the people sat around to eat and drink, and rose up to disport.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, Go, descend, for thy people whom thou broughtest up from the land of Mizraim have corrupted themselves;
They have quickly warped from the way which I had taught them; they have made a molten calf, and have worshipped it, and sacrificed unto it and have said, These are thy gods, Israel, which have brought thee up from the land of Mizraim.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, It is seen before Me that this people are hard-necked.
And now refrain from thy prayer before Me, and My anger shall prevail against them, and I will destroy them, and will make thee to a great people.
But Mosheh prayed before the Lord his God, and said, Why, Lord, is Thy anger strong against Thy people, whom Thou didst bring up from the land of Mizraim with great power and with might hand?
Wherefore should the Mizraee speak to say, With evil (purpose) He led them out to kill them among the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth? Turn from the strength of Thine anger, and revert from the evil which Thou hast threatened to do unto Thy people.
Remember Abraham, Izhak, and Israel, Thy servants to whom Thou hast sworn by Thy Word, and to whom Thou hast said, I will multiply your sons as the stars of the heavens, and all this land of which I have spoken I will give unto your sons, and they shall own it forever.
And the Lord did turn from the evil which He had threatened to do unto the people.
And Mosheh returned and went down from the Mount, and the two tablets of testimony were in his hand: the tablets were inscribed on their two sides, here and there were they inscribed.
And the tablets were the work of the Lord, and the writing was the writing of the Lord set forth distinctly upon the tablets.
And Jehoshua heard the voice of the people as they made outcry, and he said to Mosheh, The voice of war is in the camp.
But he said, It is not the voice of men who are victorious, nor is it the voice of the weak who are beaten, but it is the voice of revelers that I hear.
And it was that as he drew nigh the camp, and saw the calf and the dancing, that the anger of Mosheh grew strong, and he cast from his hands the tablets, and brake them at the declivity of the mountain.
And he took the calf which they had made, and burned it in fire, and ground it until it was powder, and spread it on the face of the water, and made the sons of Israel drink it.
And Mosheh said to Aharon, What did this people to thee, that thou hast brought upon them so great a sin?
And Aharon said, Let not my lord’s anger be violent: thou knowest the people, that it is prone to evil.
And they said to me, Make us gods that shall go before us: for this Mosheh, the man who brought us up form the land of Mizraim, we know not what hath been done to him.
And I said to them, Whoever hath gold let him deliver, and give it to me; and I cast it into the fire, and this calf came forth.
And Mosheh saw that the people were undone (or, made empty); for Aharon had undone them, to defile them with an evil name in their generations;
And Mosheh stood at the gate of the camp, and said, Let those who fear the Lord come to me. And all the sons of Levi gathered together to him.
And he said to them. Thus saith the Lord the God of Israel, Let every man put his sword upon his thigh, pass through, and return, from gate to gate in the camp, and slay, a man his brother, and a man his companion, and a man his neighbour.
And the sons of Levi did according to the word for Mosheh, and there fell of the people in that day as three thousand men.
And Mosheh said, Present your hands this day an offering before the Lord, every man with (or, on account of) his son and his brother, that you may bring blessings upon you this day.
And it was on the day following that Mosheh said to the people, You have sinned a great sin; but now I will go up before the Lord, if haply I may propitiate for your sin.
And Mosheh returned before the Lord, and said in his prayer, This people have sinned a great sin, for they have made to them gods of gold.
But now, if Thou wilt forgive their sin! But if not, blot me now out of the Book, which Thou hast written.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Him who hath sinned before Me, will I blot from My book.
But now, go, lead the people to the place that I have told thee of: behold, My Angel shall proceed before thee; and in the day that I visit, I will visit upon them their sin.
And the Lord smote the people because they had worshipped (or served) the calf which Aharon had made.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Go, descend from hence, thou and the people thou hast brought up from the land of Mizraim, unto the land which I have covenanted unto Abraham, to Izhak, and to Jakob, saying, To thy sons will I give it.
Arid I will send My Angel before thee, and will drive oat the Kenaanaee, the Amoraee, and Hittaee, and the Pherizaee, the Hivaee, and the Jebusaee;
to the land producing milk and honey: for My Shekinah shall not go up among you, because thou art a hard-necked people, lest I destroy thee in the way.
And the people heard these words of evil, and lamented, and no man put on his usual ornaments.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Say to the children of Israel, Ye are a hard-necked people; if one hour My Shekinah go up among thee, I should destroy thee. And now take off thy garnishing from thee, and it will appear before me what I shall do with thee.
Arid the children of Israel removed their usual ornaments (on their return) from the mount of Horeb.
Arid Mosheh took a tabernacle, and spread it for himself without the camp, at a distance from the camp, and called it the Tabernacle of the House of Instruction: and it was that everyone who sought instruction from before the Lord, went forth to the tabernacle of the house of instruction without the camp.
And it came to pass that when Mosheh went forth to the tabernacle, all the people rose up, and stood, every man at the door of his tent, and looked after Mosheh until he had entered into the tabernacle.
And it was when Mosheh had entered the tabernacle, the column of the Cloud descended and stood at the door of the tabernacle, and (He) spake with Mosheh.
And all the people saw the column of the Cloud standing at the door of the tabernacle, and all the people arose and worshipped, every man at the door of his tent.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh word with word, as a man speaketh with his companion. And he returned to the camp; but his minister, Jehoshua bar Nun, a young man, did not remove from the tabernacle.
And Mosheh said before the Lord, See, Thou hast said to me, Take this people up; but Thou hast not let me know whom Thou wilt send with me; yet Thou hast said, I have ordained thee by name, and thou hast found mercy before Me.
And if now I have found mercy before Thee, show me, I pray, Thy good way, that I may know Thy loving-kindness, and may find mercy before Thee, and make it manifest before Thee that this people is Thy people.
And He said, My Shekinah shall go, and I will give thee rest.
And he said before Him, If Thy Shekinah goeth not among us, let us not ascend from hence.
And in what shall it be known that I and Thy people have found mercy before Thee, if Thy Shekinah go not up with us, to make for us the distinction, and to distinguish me and Thy people from every people that is upon the face of the earth?
And the Lord said to Mosheh, This thing that thou hast spoken will I do, because thou hast found mercy before Me, and I have ordained thee by name.
And he said, Show me, I pray, Thy Glory!
And He said, I will make all My Goodness pass before thy face, and I will proclaim the Name of the Lord before thee, and I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and have mercy on whom I will have mercy.
And He said, Thou canst not see the Face of My Shekinah; for no man can see Me and abide alive.
And the Lord said, Behold, there is a place prepared before Me, and thou shalt stand upon the rock,
and it shall be, when My Glory passeth, I will put thee in a cavern of the rock, and My Word shall overshadow thee until I have passed;
And I will take away the Word (dibberath) of My Glory, and thou shalt see that which is after Me, but My Aspect shall not be seen.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Hew thee two tablets of stone as the first ones, and I will write upon the tablets the words that were upon the former tablets which thou hast broken.
And be ready in the morning, and go up at morn to Mount Sinai, and stand there before Me on the summit of the mountain.
Let no man ascend with thee; let no man be seen upon all the mountain, nor sheep nor oxen be grazing upon the mountain.
And hew two tablets of stone like the former ones. And Mosheh arose in the morning, and ascended Mount Sinai, as the Lord had commanded him, and took in his hand two tablets of stone.
And the Lord was revealed in the Cloud, and He stood with him there, and He proclaimed the Name of the Lord.
And the Lord made His Shekinah pass before his face; and he proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God, Merciful and Gracious, slow to anger, and making goodness and truth to abound;
Keeping goodness for thousands of generations; Forgiving iniquity and rebellion and guilt; Pardoning them who convert unto His law, but acquitting not them who convert not; Visiting the guilt of fathers upon the children and upon the children’s children of the rebellious, upon the third and upon the fourth generation.
And Mosheh made haste, and bowed upon the ground and worshipped.
And he said, If now I have found mercy before Thee, O Lord, let, I pray, the Shekinah of the Lord go among us; for it is a hard-necked people; but forgive Thou our guilty and our sin, and take possession of us.
And He said, Behold, I make a covenant before all thy people that I will do wonders which were never created upon all the earth, nor among any of the people; and all peoples among whom thou art shall see the work of the Lord; for terrible shall that be which I will do with thee.
Observe thou that which I command thee this day. Behold, I will drive out from before thee the Amoraee, and Kenaanaee, and Hittaee, and Pherizaee, and Hivaee, and Jebusaee.
Beware lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land upon which thou shalt enter, lest it become a stumbling-block in the midst of thee:
But their altars thou shalt destroy, and their statues break, and their groves cut down;
For thou shalt not worship the idols of the peoples; for the Lord, Zealous is His Name, a zealous God is He.
Lest thou strike a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and go erring after their idols, and to their idols offer sacrifices, and they invite thee, and thou eat of their sacrifices,
And thou take of their daughters for thy sons, and they make thy daughters go erring after their idols, and thy sons to go erring after their idols.
Molten gods thou shalt not make to thee.
The feast of the unleavened thou shalt keep. Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened (bread) as I have commanded thee, in the time of the month of Abiva; for in the month of Abiva thou didst come out of Mizraim.
All that openeth the womb is Mine; all males of cattle thou shalt sanctify, the first-born of oxen and of sheep.
But the firstling of an ass thou mayest redeem with a lamb; but if thou redeem him not, thou shalt cut him off. All the first-born of thy sons thou shalt redeem. And let none appear before Me empty.
Six days thou shalt labour, and on the seventh day rest; in sowing (time) and in reaping thou shalt rest.
And the feast of Weeks thou shalt make to thee, of the firsts of the wheat harvest, and the feast of ingathering in the cycle of the year.
Three times in the year shall all your males appear before the Master of the World, the Lord God of Israel.
For I will drive out the nations before thee, and enlarge thy borders, and no man shall covet thy land when thou goest up to appear before the Lord thy God three times in the year.
Thou shalt not sacrifice the blood of My Pascha with leaven, nor shall the fat of the sacrifices of the Paschal feast be left without the altar till the morning.
The chief of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring to the sanctuary of the Lord thy God. Thou shalt not eat flesh with milk.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Write for thee these words; for upon the expression of these words I make covenant with thee and with Israel.
And he was there before the Lord forty days and forty nights; bread he ate not, nor water did he drink; and he wrote upon the tablets the words of the covenant, the Ten Words.
And it was when Mosheh descended from the mountain of Sinai with the two tablets of the testimony in the hand of Mosheh, in his descending from the mount, that Mosheh knew not how great was the splendour of the glory of his countenance through His speaking with him.
And Aharon and all the sons of Israel saw Mosheh, and, behold, great was the splendour of the glory of his countenance, and they were afraid to approach him.
But Mosheh called to them, and Aharon and all the chiefs of the congregation returned to him, and Mosheh conversed with them.
And afterward all the sons of Israel drew near, and he taught them all that the Lord had said to him on Mount Sinai.
And when Mosheh had completed to speak with them, he put a veil upon his face.
But when Mosheh went in before the Lord to speak with Him, he removed the veil until he came out. And he went forth and spake with the sons of Israel of that which was commanded.
And the children of Israel saw the face of Mosheh, that the splendour of the glory of Mosheh’s face was great; and Mosheh put the veil again upon his face until he went in to speak with Him.
And Mosheli assembled all the congregation of the sons of Israel, and said to them, These are the things which the Lord hath commanded you to do.
Six days thou shalt do work, but the seventh day (is) a holy rest, the Sabbath before the Lord: everyone who doeth work thereon shall be put to death.
You may not kindle a fire in all your dwellings on the day of the Sabbath.
And Mosheh spake to all the congregation of the sons of Israel, saying,
Take from you a separation (aphrashutha) before the Lord of everyone whose heart may be willing; let him bring the separation before the Lord: gold, and silver, and brass,
And hyacinth, and crimson, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goat’s hair,
and ram’s skin dyed red, and purple skins, and sittin woods;
And oil for the illuminator, and aromatics for the anointing oil, and for the sweet perfumes;
And onyx stones and complete stones for insetting in the ephod and in the breastplate.
And all the wise-hearted among you shall come and make all that the Lord hath commanded:
The tabernacle, its tent and its coverings, its hasps, its boards, its bars, its pillars, and its bases.
The ark, and its staves, the mercy seat, and the veil that shall be spread;
The table, and its staves, and all its vessels; and the bread of the Presence,
and the candelabrum for light, and its vessels, and its lamps, and the oil for illumination.
And the altar of sweet incense, and its staves, and the oil of anointing, and the incense of perfumes, and the curtain of the door of the tabernacle.
The altar of burnt offering, and its brasen grate, its staves, and all its vessels; the laver and its base.
The curtains of the court, and its pillars, and its bases, and the hanging of the gate of the court.
The nails of the tabernacle, and the nails of the court and their cordings.
The vestments of ministration for ministering in the sanctuary, the holy vestments of Aharon the priest, and the vestments of his sons for ministration.
And all the congregation of the sons of Israel went forth from before Mosheh.
And they came, every man who was led by his heart, and everyone whose spirit was ample, and brought their separation before the Lord, for the work of the tabernacle of ordinance, and for all its service, and for the holy vestments.
And they came, the men with the women, everyone who was willing of heart, and brought chains, and bracelets, and rings, and bands, all of gold.
And every man who uplifted an offering of gold before the Lord, and every man with whom was found hyacinth, or purple, or crimson, or fine linen, or goats’ skins, or rams’ skins dyed red, or purpled skins, brought.
Everyone who would offer silver or brass, brought the separation before the Lord; and everyone with whom was found woods of sittin for any work of the service, brought.
And every woman wise in heart spun with her hands, and brought what was spun, the hyacinth, the purple, the crimson, and the fine linen.
And all the women with whom was willingness of heart with wisdom spun goat’s hair.
And the princes brought onyx stones and complete stones for the insetting of the ephod and the breastplate;
And the perfume, and oil for the light and for the oil of anointing, and incense of perfumes.
Every man and woman whose heart led them to bring for all the work which the Lord had commanded to make by Mosheh, did the children of Israel bring willingly before the Lord.
And Mosheh said to the sons of Israel, See, the Lord hath ordained by mane Bezalel bar Uri bar Hur, of the tribe of Jehudah,
And hath filled him with the spirit of prophecy from before the Lord, with wisdom, with intelligence, and with knowledge, for all handicraft,
And to teach the arts of working in gold, and in silver, and in brass,
And the skilful work of precious stones for enchasing, and the workmanship of wood to work in all the work of the artificer.
And be hath ingiven in his heart to teach also Ahaliab bar Achisamak, of the tribe of Dan,
And hath filled them with wisdom of heart to make all the work of the carpenter, and artificer, and embroiderer, in hyacinth, and in purple, and in scarlet, and in fine linen, and the weaver, of (such as) do any work, and who teach the arts.
And Bezalel and Ahaliab, with every man wise in heart, to whom the Lord had given wisdom and intelligence to know how to make each work for the service of the sanctuary, wrought (according) to all that the Lord had commanded.
And Mosheh called Bezalel and Ahaliab, and every man wise in heart, to whose heart the Lord had given wisdom, everyone whose heart was led to draw near and do the work itself.
And they took from Mosheh all the separation which the children of Israel had brought for the work of the service of the sanctuary to make it. And they still brought to him votive offerings from morning to morning.
And all the wise men who wrought all the work of the sanctuary came, each man from his work which they had wrought.
And they spake with Mosheh, saying, The people abound in bringing more than is needed for the work which the Lord hath commanded to make.
And Mosheh ordered, and they made publication in the camp, saying, Let no man or woman make any more work of the separation for the sanctuary: and the people ceased to bring.
For what had been done was sufficient for all the work to be wrought, and more than enough.
And all the wise-hearted of them who did the work of the tabernacle made ten curtains of fine linen, and hyacinth, and purple, and crimson, (with) forms of kerubin the work of the embroiderer he made them.
The length of one curtain twenty and eight cubits, and the breadth of the curtain four cubits; there was one measure for all the curtains.
And he conjoined five curtains one with another, and five curtains conjoined he one with another.
And he made loopings of hyacinth upon the border of one curtain at the edge of the place of conjunction; so made he upon the border of the other curtain at the edge of the second place of conjunction.
Fifty loopings he made on one curtain, and fifty loopings he made on the border of the second curtain at the place of conjunction: the loopings were arranged the one to correspond with the other.
And he made fifty taches of gold, and conjoined the curtains one with another by the taches, and the tabernacle became one.
And he made curtains of goat’s hair to spread over the tabernacle: eleven curtains made he them.
The length of one curtain thirty cubits, and four cubits the breadth of one curtain; one measure had the eleven curtains.
And he conjoined five curtains together, and six curtains together.
And he made fifty loops upon the border of the curtain on the side of the conjunction, and fifty loops made be upon the side of the second curtain at the place of conjuncture.
Arid he made fifty taches of brass to conjoin the tabernacle, that it might be one.
And be made the covering of the tabernacle of rams’ skins reddened, and a covering of purple skins above.
And he made the boards of the tabernacle of sittin wood, standing.
Ten cubits the length of a board, and a cubit and a half the breadth of one board.
Two tenons for one board corresponding one with the other; so made he for all the boards of the tabernacle.
And be made the boards of the tabernacle twenty boards on the side towards the south.
And forty sockets of silver made he under the twenty boards, two sockets under one board for its two tenons, and two sockets under one board for its two tenons.
And for the second side of the tabernacle toward the north he made twenty boards,
And their forty sockets of silver; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under one board.
And for the side of the tabernacle westward he made six boards;
And two boards made he at the corners of the tabernacle at their extremities.
And they were compacted in the lower part together, and compacted in their upper part by one ring; thus did he at both of the two corners.
And there were eight boards, and their sockets of silver, sixteen sockets, two and two, under each board.
And he made bars of sittin wood; five for the boards of one side of the tabernacle,
and five bars for the boards of the second side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the extremity of the tabernacle, westward.
And he made a middle bar to pass through, in the midst of the boards from end to end.
And the boards he overlaid with gold, and their rings made he of gold (to be) places for the bars, and be covered the bars with gold.
And he made the VEIL of hyacinth, and purple, and crimson, and fine linen; of the work of the embroiderer he made it, with forms of kerubin.
And he made for it four pillars of sittin, and covered (them) with gold, and their books of gold, and cast for them four sockets of silver.
And he made a curtain for the door of the tabernacle, of hyacinth, and purple, and crimson, and fine linen, the work of the embroiderer.
And its five pillars and their hooks; and he overlaid their capitals, and covered them and their joining rods with gold, and their five bases (made he) of brass.
And Bezalel made the ARK of sittin woods; two cubits and a half its length, and a cubit and a half its breadth, and a cubit and a half its height.
And he covered it with pure gold within and without, and made for it a wreath of gold round about.
And he cast for it four rings of gold upon its four corners, two rings on one of it, and two rings on the second side.
And he made staves of sittin wood, and covered them with gold.
And he introduced the staves into the rings on the sides of the ark, for carrying the ark.
And he made the MERCY SEAT of pure gold; two cubits and a half its length, and a cubit and a half its breadth.
And he made two kerubim, of beaten gold he made them, at the two sides of the mercy seat.
One keruba on this side, and one keruba on that side of the mercy seat; he made the kerubaia from its two sides.
And the kerubaia spread out their wings above, overshadowing the mercy seat with their wings; and their faces were one towards the other, over against the mercy seat were the faces of the kerubaia.
And he made the TABLE of sittin woods; two cubits its length, and a cubit its breadth, and a cubit and a half its height.
And he covered it with pure gold, and made for it a golden crown round about,
And made for it a rim its height a span, round about; and he made a crown of gold for its rim round about.
And he cast for it four golden rings, and set the rings upon the four corners of its four feet.
Over against the rim were the rings to be the place of the staves for carrying the table.
[no translation]
And he made the vessels which were to be upon the table; its dishes, and its vases, and its measures, and the cups with which (the libations) are outpoured, of pure gold.
And he made the CANDELABRUM of pure gold, beaten made he the candelabrum, its rest, its shaft, its cups, its apples, and its lilies were of the same.
And six branchlets proceeded from its sides; three branchlets of the candelabrum on one side, and three branchlets of the candelabrum on the second side.
Three cups figurated on one branchlet, an apple, and a lily: so the six branchlets which proceeded from the candelabrum.
And on the candelabrum four cups figurated, its apples and its lilies.
An apple under two branchlets of the same, and an apple under two branchlets of the same, and an apple under two branchlets of the same, for the six branchlets that proceeded from it.
Their apples and their branches were of the same, all of one beaten work of pure gold.
And he made its seven lamps, and its snuffers, and its receivers of pure gold;
of a talent of pure gold made he, it, and all its vessels.
And he made the ALTAR OF SWEET INCENSE of sittin wood; its length a cubit, and a cubit its breadth, foursquare. And two cubits the height of it; of the same were its horns.
And he overlaid it with pure gold, its top and its sides round about, and its horns: and he made for it a golden crown round about.
And two rings of gold made he for it under its crown, upon its two sides, the place for the staves by which to carry it.
And he made the staves of sittin wood, and overlaid them with gold.
And he made the oil for holy anointment, and the pure sweet incense, the work of the perfumer.
And be made the ALTAR OF BURNT OFFERING of sittin wood; five cubits its length, and five cubits its breadth, four-square, and three cubits its height.
And he made its horns upon its four corners, of the same were its horns, and he coated it with brass.
And he made all the vessels of the altar, the caldrons, and the cleaners, and the basins, and the fleshhooks, and the receivers; all its vessels made he of brass.
And he made for the altar a brasen grate of network, under its border beneath, (reaching) unto its middle.
And he cast four rings for the four corners of the brasen grate, the place for the staves.
And he made the staves of sittin wood, and overlaid them with brass.
And he put the staves into the rings upon the sides of the altar by which to carry it; hollow with boards he made it.
And be made the LAVER of brass, and its base of brass, of the mirrors of the women who come to pray at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance.
And he made the court, the southern side of which was of hangings for the court, of fine linen twined, of a hundred cubits;
Their pillars twenty, and their sockets twenty, of brass; the hooks, pillars, and their uniting rods of silver.
And for the northern side (hangings) of a hundred cubits, their pillars twenty, and their sockets twenty, of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their uniting rods of silver.
And for the western side, curtains, fifty cubits; their pillars ten, and their sockets ten; the hooks of the pillars and their uniting rods of silver.
And on the eastern side, eastward, fifty cubits.
The hangings fifteen cubits on (one) side (of the gate), their pillars three, and their bases three.
And on the second side of the gate of the court, here and there, hangings, fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their bases three.
All the hangings of the court round about were of fine linen twined.
And the bases of the pillars were of brass, the hooks, pillars, and their uniting rods of silver, and the overlaying of their heads was of silver, and there were uniting rods of silver for all the pillars of the court.
And the veil for the gate of the court was the work of the embroiderer, hyacinth, and purple, and crimson, and fine linen; and twenty cubits was its length, and the height, in the breadth five cubits, according (to the height of) the curtains of the court.
And their pillars four, and their bases four, of brass, and their hooks silver, and the overlaying of their head and their uniting rods, silver.
And all the pins of the tabernacle, and of the court round about, were of brass.
These are the admeasurements of the Tabernacle, the Tabernacle of the Testimony, as they were numbered upon the word of Mosheh: the service of the Levites by the hand of Ithamar bar Aharon the priest.
And Bezalel bar Uri bar Hur of the tribe of Jehudah made all that the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And with him Ahaliab bar Achisamak, of the tribe of Dan, a woodworker, and artificer, and embroiderer in hyacinth, and in purple, and in crimson, and in fine linen.
And all the gold which was used in making all the work of the sanctuary, and which had been a separation (thereunto), was twenty and nine talents, and seven hundred and thirty shekels, of the shekels of the sanctuary.
And the silver of the numbered ones of the congregation was a hundred talents, and a thousand and seven hundred and seventy and five shekels, in the shekels of the sanctuary.
The weight was (appointed) by capitation; a half shekel, in the shekel of the sanctuary, for everyone who passed to the adnumberments from twenty years (old) and upward, for six hundred and three thousand and five hundred and fifty men.
And the hundred talents of silver were for casting the bases of the sanctuary, and the bases of the veil (or tent), a hundred bases with a hundred talents, a talent for a base.
And with the thousand and seven hundred and seventy and five (shekels) he made the hooks for the pillars, and covered their capitals, and made their uniting rods.
And the brass of the oblation was seventy talents, and two thousand and four hundred shekels.
And with it he made the bases of the door of the Tabernacle of Ordinance, and the altar of brass, and the brasen grate which pertained to it, and all the vessels of the altar;
And the bases of the court round about, and the bases of the door of the court, and all the pins of the tabernacle, and all the pins of the court round about.
And of the hyacinth, and purple, and crimson, they made the vestments of ministration to minister in the sanctuary, and they made the holy vestments of Aharon, as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And he made the ephoda of gold, hyacinth, and purple, and crimson, and fine linen twined.
And they beat out the plates of gold, and cut (them) into threads, to insert into the hyacinth, and the purple, and the crimson, and the fine linen, the work of the artificer.
Shoulder-pieces made they for it, conjoined; at the two sides were they conjoined.
And the band of its fastening which is upon it was of the same according to its work, of gold, hyacinth, and purple, and crimson, and fine linen twined, as the Lord had commanded Mosheh.
And they wrought the onyx stones, inset in sockets of gold, engraven in distinct writing, with the names of the sons of Israel.
And he set them upon the shoulders of the ephoda, stones of memorial of the sons of Israel, as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And he made the BREASTPLATE (chushena), the work of the artificer, according to the work of the ephoda, of gold, hyacinth, and purple, and crimson, and fine linen twined.
Foursquare was it, doubled made they the breastplate; a span its length, and a span its breadth, doubled.
And they filled it with four rows of precious stones: the first row carnelian, topaz, and carbuncle, row one;
The second row, smaragud, sapphire, and emerald;
And the third row, jacinth, agate, and amethyst;
And the fourth row, chrysolite, beryl, and jasper: they were set in sockets of gold, in their infillings.
And the stones were according to the names of the sons of Israel, twelve, according to their names, written distinctly, as the engraving of a ring, each according to his name for the twelve tribes.
And they made upon the breastplate chains enwreathed, a work of braiding, of pure gold.
And they made two sockets of gold, and two golden rings, and put the two rings upon the two sides of the breastplate.
And they put the two golden wreaths upon the two rings upon the sides of the breastplate,
and the two wreaths which were upon the two sides they put upon the two sockets, and set them upon the shoulders of the ephoda towards its face.
And they made two rings of gold, and set them on the two sides of the breastplate, upon its edge which was on the side of the ephoda inward.
And they made two golden rings, and set them on the two shoulders of the ephoda underneath towards its front, toward the place of its conjoinment, above the band of the ephoda.
And they adunited the breastplate by its rings to the rings of the ephoda, by a ribbon of hyacinth, to be upon the band of the ephoda, that the breastplate might not be loosened from the ephoda, as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And he made the ROBE of the ephoda, the work of the embroiderer, altogether of hyacinth.
And the opening (mouth) of the robe in the middle of it like the opening of a corslet, with a binding going about its border, that it might not be torn.
And they made upon the hem of the robe pomegranates of hyacinth and purple and crimson inwoven.
And they made bells of pure gold, and set the bells among the pomegranates upon the hem of the robe round about among the pomegranates.
A bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate, upon the hem of the robe round about, to minister, as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And they made the tunics of fine linen, the work of the weaver, for Aharon and for his sons.
And the tiara of fine linen, and the mitres of beauty of fine linen; and the drawers of linen, of fine linen twined.
And the girdle of fine linen twined, and hyacinth and purple and crimson, the work of the embroiderer, as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And they made the plate of the diadem of holiness of pure gold, and wrote upon it as the engraving of a ring in distinct writing, HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD.
And they put upon it a ribbon of hyacinth, that it might be upon the tiara above, as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
Arid completed was all the work of the tabernacle, the tabernacle of ordinance; and the sons of Israel did according to all that the Lord had commanded Mosheh, so did they.
And they brought the tabernacle to Mosheh, the tabernacle and all its vessels, its taches, its boards, its bars, and its pillars, and its bases.
And the covering of rams’ skins reddened, and the covering of purple skins, and the veil for the hanging;
And the ark of the testimony and its staves, and the mercy seat;
The table and all its vessels, and the bread of the Presence;
The pure candelabrum and its lamps, the lamps of order, and all its vessels; and the oil for the light
And the golden altar, and the oil of consecration, and the sweet incense; and the hanging for the door of the tabernacle;
And the brasen altar and the brasen grate for it; its staves and all its vessels; and the laver and its base,
the hangings of the court, its pillars, and its sockets, and the veil for the gate of the court, its cords, and its pins, and all the vessels of the service of the tabernacle, for the tabernacle of ordinance;
The vestments of ministration to minister in the sanctuary, and the holy vestments of Aharon the priest, and the vestments of his sons to minister:
According to all that the Lord commanded Mosheh, so made the sons of Israel all the service.
And Mosheh surveyed all the work, and, behold, they had done it as the Lord had commanded, so had they done; and Mosheh blessed them.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying,
In the day of the first month, in the first of the month, thou shalt uprear the tabernacle, the tabernacle of ordinance.
And thou shalt set there the ark of the testimony, and outspread the veil before the ark;
And thou shalt bring in the table, and arrange the order thereof. And thou shalt bring in the candelabrum, and kindle its lamps.
And thou shalt put the golden altar of sweet incense before the ark of the testimony, and set the veil of the door of the tabernacle.
And thou shalt put the altar of burnt offering before the door of the tabernacle, the tabernacle of ordinance.
And thou shalt place the laver between the tabernacle of ordinance and the altar, and put water therein.
And thou shalt set the court round about, and put the hanging at the gate of the court.
And thou shalt take the oil of consecration, and anoint the tabernacle and all that is therein, and sanctify it, and all its vessels, and it shall be holy.
And thou shalt anoint the altar of burnt offering, and all its vessels, and sanctify the altar; and it shall be an altar most holy.
And thou shalt anoint the laver and its base, and sanctify it.
And thou shalt bring Aharon and his sons to the door of the tabernacle of ordinance, and lave them with water,
and shalt clothe Aharon with the holy vestments, and anoint him, and consecrate him, that he may minister before Me.
And thou shalt bring his sons and clothe them with the tunics,
And consecrate them, as thou didst consecrate their father, that they may minister before Me, and that it may be to them the consecration of a perpetual priesthood in their generations.
And Mosheh did according to all which the Lord commanded, so did he.
And it was in the first month, in the second year, on the first of the month, that the tabernacle was reared.
And Mosheh reared the tabernacle, and placed its bases, and set its boards, and fixed its bars, and reared its pillars;
Arid he spread the tent upon the tabernacle, and set the covering of the tabernacle over it, above, as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And he took and placed the testimony in the ark, and set the staves upon the ark, and placed the mercy seat upon the ark above.
And he brought the ark into the tabernacle, and placed the veil which was spread to overshadow the ark of the testimony, as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And he placed the table in the tabernacle of ordinance upon the side of the tabernacle northward without the veil.
And he set in order upon it the rows of bread before the Lord, as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And he set the candelabrum in the tabernacle of ordinance over against the table on the side of the tabernacle southward.
And he kindled the lamps before the Lord, as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And he set the golden altar in the tabernacle of ordinance before the veil,
and burned thereon sweet incense, as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And he set the hanging of the door of the tabernacle,
and the altar of burnt offering set he at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance, and offered upon it the burnt offering, and the oblation, (mincha,) as the Lord had commanded Mosheh.
And he set the laver between the tabernacle of ordinance and the altar, and put water therein for purifying.
And Mosheh and Aharon and his sons purified with it their hands and their feet.
In their going into the tabernacle of ordinance and in their approachment to the altar, they purified (themselves), as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And he set up the court, round about the tabernacle and the altar, and set the hanging of the gate of the court: and Mosheh completed the work.
And the Cloud covered the tabernacle of ordinance, and the Glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle.
And Mosheh was not able to enter into the tabernacle of ordinance, because the Cloud abode upon it, and the Glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle.
And when the Cloud ascended above the tabernacle, the sons of Israel went forward in all their journeys.
And if the Cloud did not ascend, they did not proceed, until the day of its uprising.
For the Cloud of the Glory of the Lord was upon the tabernacle by day, and the vision of fire was in it by night, in the eyes of all the house of Israel in all their journeys.
And the Lord called unto Mosheh, and the Lord spake with him from the tabernacle of ordinance, saying:
Speak with the sons of Israel, and say to them: When one of you will bring an offering before the Lord of the cattle, of oxen or of sheep, you shall offer your oblations.
If his oblation be a burnt offering of the oxen, (it shall be) a male, unblemished; he shall offer him at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance; he shall offer him for acceptance before the Lord.
And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the burnt offering, that it may be acceptable for him to propitiate on his behalf.
And he shall sacrifice the young bullock before the Lord; and the sons of Aharon the priest shall bring the blood, and sprinkle the blood round about upon the altar which is at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance.
And he shall take away (the skin) of the burnt offering, and divide it, by its members.
And the sons of Aharon the priest shall put fire upon the altar, and lay the wood in order upon the fire.
And the priests, the sons of Aharon, shall arrange the limbs and the head and the fat on the wood upon the fire which is on the altar.
But his inwards and his legs he shall wash with water; and the priest shall burn the whole upon the altar an entire burnt offering, an oblation to be received with acceptance before the Lord.
And if his oblation be from the flock, of the sheep or the young of the goats for a burnt offering, he shall bring a perfect male.
And he shall sacrifice him at the north side of the altar before the Lord; and the priests the sons of Aharon shall sprinkle his blood round about upon the altar.
And he shall divide him by his members, and his head and his feet; and the priest shall lay them upon the wood which is on the fire upon the altar.
But the inwards and the legs he shall wash with water, and the priest shall bring the whole and burn (it) upon the altar: it is a whole burnt offering, an oblation to be received with acceptance before the Lord.
But if the burnt offering of his oblation before the Lord be from fowl, he shall bring his oblation from the turtles or the young of a pigeon.
And the priest shall offer it upon the altar, and pour its blood by the side of the altar:
And he shall remove its crop with its food, and throw it on the east side of the altar, at the place where they empty the ashes.
And he shall cleave it through its wings, (but) divide (it) not; and the priest shall burn it at the altar upon the wood that is on the fire: it is a burnt offering, an oblation that shall be received with acceptance before the Lord.
But if a man bring an oblation of a mincha before the Lord, his oblation shall be of meal, and he shall pour oil upon it, and put frankincense thereon,
And bring it to the priests the sons of Aharon; and the priest shall take from it his handful of the meal with its oil, and all its frankincense, and burn the memorial of it at the altar; an oblation to be received with favour before the Lord.
And that which remaineth of the mincha shall be Aharon’s and his sons’; it is most holy among the oblations of the Lord.
And when thou bringest the oblation of a minch baked in the oven, it shall be of meal cake unleavened, mingled with oil, with unleavened wafers anointed with oil.
And if the mincha be (prepared) in a pan, thy oblation shall be of meal mingled with oil; unleavened shall it be.
And thou shalt break it in pieces, and pour oil thereon; it is a mincha.
But if thy oblation be a mincha from the gridiron, thou shalt make it of meal with oil.
And the mincha which is made of these thou shalt bring before the Lord, and present it to the priest, and he will offer it at the altar.
And the priest shall separate its memorial from the mincha, and burn upon the altar an oblation to be received with favour before the Lord.
And that which remaineth of the mincha shall be Aharon’s and his sons’: it is most holy among the oblations of the Lord.
No mincha which you offer before the Lord may be made with leaven; for no leaven or honey shall you burn with any oblation before the Lord.
In the oblation of firstfruits you may offer them before the Lord, but not burn them at the altar, that they may be accepted with favour.
And every offering of thy mincha thou shalt salt with salt; and thou mayest not withhold the slat of the covenant of thy God from upon thy mincha; upon every oblation thou shalt offer salt.
And when thou offerest the mincha of firstfruits before the Lord, green ears dried with fire, broken and soft, shalt thou offer as the mincha of thy firstfruits.
And thou shalt put oil on it, and lay frankincense thereon: it is a mincha;
And the priest shall burn its memorial of its broken grain and of its oil with all frankincense, an oblation before the Lord.
And if his oblation be a victim of the sanctified things; if from oxen, whether male or female, he shall offer it perfect before the Lord.
And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his oblation at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance; and the priests the sons of Aharon shall sprinkle the blood round about upon the altar.
And the oblation of the sacred victim the fat that covereth the inwards, even all the fat that is upon the inwards,
And the two kidneys and the fat which is upon them on the sides, and the caul that is upon the liver with the kidneys, he shall remove.
And the sons of Aharon shall burn it at the altar, with the burnt offering which is on the wood upon the fire, an oblation to be received with grace before the Lord.
But if his oblation of a consecrated victim before the Lord be from the flock, whether male or female, he shall offer it perfect.
If his oblation be a lamb, he shall present it before the Lord,
and lay his hand upon the head of his oblation, and slay it before the tabernacle of ordinance; and the sons of Aharon shall sprinkle its blood upon the altar round about.
And of his oblation of the consecrated victim before the Lord, its fat, the entire tail close by the backbone, he shall remove; the fat which covereth the inwards, even all the fat which is upon the inwards, and the two kidneys and the fat which is upon the inwards,
And the two kidneys and the fat which is upon them upon the sides, and the caul that is over the liver, with the kidneys, he shall take away;
And the priest shall burn it at the altar; it is the meat (lechem, bread) of an oblation before the Lord.
But if his oblation be from the young goats, he shall present it before the Lord,
and lay his hand upon its head, and slay it before the tabernacle of ordinance; and the sons of Aharon shall sprinkle its blood upon the altar round about.
And of his oblation he shall offer as an oblation before the Lord the fat which covereth the inwards, and all the fat which is upon the inwards,
And the two kidneys, and the fat which is upon them on the sides; but the caul that is over the liver with the kidneys he shall take away.
And the priest shall burn them at the altar: it is the meat of an oblation to be received with acceptance; all the fat (shall be offered) before the Lord.
It is an everlasting statute unto your generations, and in all your dwellings, that neither the fat nor the blood shall be eaten.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with the sons of Israel, saying: When a man sinneth through ignorance of any of the precepts of the Lord, as to that which should not be done, and acteth contrary to one of them:
If the high priest sin after the manner of the people’s sin, let him bring before the Lord for the sin that he hath sinned a young bullock without blemish for his sin.
And he shall bring the bullock to the door of the tabernacle of ordinance before the Lord, and lay his hand upon the bullock’s head, and slay the bullock before the Lord.
And the high priest shall take of the blood of the bullock and carry it into the tabernacle of ordinance.
And the priest shall dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle (some) of the blood seven times in the presence of the Lord before the veil of the sanctuary.
And the priest shall put some of the blood upon the horns of the altar of sweet incense before the Lord in the tabernacle of ordinance, and all the (remaining) blood of the bullock he shall pour out at the foundation of the altar of burnt sacrifice which is at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance.
And all the fat of the bullock of the sin offering he shall separate from it; the fat which covereth the inwards, and all the fat which is upon the inwards,
And the two kidneys, and the fat which is upon them that is by the flanks; and the caul that is upon the liver, together with the kidneys, he shall remove,
as it was separated from the bullock of the consecrated victims, and the priest shall offer it upon the altar of burnt sacrifice.
But the skin of the bullock and all his flesh, with his head, and with his legs, and his inwards, and his food,
he shall carry forth, even the whole bullock, without the camp unto a clean place, to a place for the pouring out of ashes, and burn him upon wood in the fire; at the place for the pouring out of ashes shall he be burned.
And if the whole congregation (kenishta) of Israel shall mistake, and the thing be hid form the eyes of the assembly, (kehala), and they shall have done (somewhat against) one of all the commandments of the Lord which it is not right to do, and have become guilty;
When the sin that they have sinned is known, the assembly shall offer a young bullock for a sin offering, and bring him before the tabernacle of ordinance.
And the elders of the congregation shall lay their hands upon the head of the bullock in the presence of the Lord, and kill the bullock before the Lord.
And the high priest shall bring of the blood of the bullock into the tabernacle of ordinance;
And the priest shall dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle seven times in the presence of the Lord before the veil.
And some of the blood he shall put upon the horns of the altar that is before the Lord in the tabernacle of ordinance, and all (the rest of the) blood he shall pour out at the foundation of the altar of burnt sacrifice which is at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance.
And all the fat he shall separate from him, and sacrifice at the altar.
And he shall do with the bullock as he did with the bullock of the sin offering, so shall he do with him; and the priest shall atone for them, and it shall be forgiven them.
And he shall carry forth the bullock without the camp, and burn him as he burned the former bullock: it is a sin offering for the congregation.
Should a ruler sin and do (contrary to) any of the commandments of the Lord his God what is not right to do, through ignorance, and be guilty;
When his sin becomes known to him in what he hath transgressed, he shall bring his oblation, a kid of the goats, a male, unblemished;
And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the goat, and kill him at the place where the burnt sacrifice is slain before the Lord; it is a sin offering.
And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt sacrifice, and pour out the blood at the foundation of the altar of burnt sacrifice.
And he shall burn all the fat at the altar, as the fat of the sanctified oblation (is burned); and the priest shall atone on his behalf for his sin, and it shall be forgiven him.
And if one of the people of the land inadvertently sin in doing contrary to any of the commandments of the Lord what is not right to do, and become guilty;
When his sin is known to him, in what he hath sinned, he shall bring his oblation, a female kid of the goats, unblemished, for the sin that he hath sinned.
And he shall lay his hand on the lead of the sin offering, and kill the sin offering at the place of burnt sacrifice;
And the priest shall take of the blood with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and pour out all the blood at the foundation of the altar.
And he shall remove all the fat, as he took away the fat from the consecrated offerings, and the priest shall burn it at the altar, to be received with acceptance before the Lord; and the priest shall atone for him, and it shall be forgiven him.
But if he present a lamb for his sin offering, he shall bring a female unblemished,
and lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering, and kill the sin offering at the place where the burnt sacrifice is killed.
And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt sacrifice, and pour out all the blood at the foundation of the altar.
And he shall remove all the fat, as he removed the fat of the lamb of the sanctified oblations, and the priest shall burn it at the altar with the oblations of the Lord; and the priest shall atone for him, for the sin that he hath sinned, and it shall be forgiven him.
And if a man sin, and (one) hear the voice (which demands) swearing that he is a witness, or that he hath seen or known, if he will not show it, he shall bear his sin.
Or if a man shall have touched anything unclean, whether the carcase of an unclean beast, or the carcase of unclean cattle, or the carcase of an unclean reptile, and it be hidden from him, he shall be defiled and guilty.
Or if he shall touch the uncleanness of a man, any uncleanness which defileth him, and it be hidden from him; but (afterwards) becometh aware of it and is guilty;
Or if a man swear, declaring with his lips, for evil or for good, according to whatever the man shall declare by oath, and (the truth) be hidden from him, and he (afterwards) have knowledge thereof, he is guilty of one of these.
And it shall be that when (he knoweth that) he is guilty in one of these (things) he shall confess that he hath sinned thereby;
And shall bring his sin offering before the Lord for the sin that he hath sinned; a she-lamb from the flock, or a kid of the goats, for a sin offering; and the priest shall atone for him and for his sin.
But if his hands be not sufficient to offer a lamb, let him bring for the sin that he hath sinned two turtle doves, or two young pigeons before the Lord, one for the sin offering, and one for the burnt sacrifice.
And he shall bring them to the priest, and he shall offer the sin offering first, and wring off its head near to the spine, but he shall not divide (the bird).
And he shall sprinkle the blood of the sin offering upon the side (wall) of the altar, and pour out the remainder of the blood at the base of the altar; it is a sin offering.
And the second he shall make a burnt sacrifice, according to the proper (rite); and the priest shall make atonement for the sin that he hath sinned, and it shall be forgiven him.
But if (neither) two turtle doves nor a pair of young pigeons pertain to him, he shall bring, as his oblation for the sin that he hath sinned, the tenth of three sein of flour for a sin offering; he shall not put oil upon it, nor put frankincense upon it, for it is a sin offering.
And he shall bring it to the priest, and the priest shall take a handful of it as the memorial thereof, and burn it at the altar with the oblations of the Lord: it is a sin offering.
And the priest shall make atonement for him, for the sin that he hath sinned in anyone of these (things), and it shall be forgiven him: and to the priest it shall be, as the mincha.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
When a man hath indeed falsified, but hath sinned inadvertently concerning things consecrated to the Lord, he shall bring for his trespass offering before the Lord a ram without blemish from the flock by its value in silver shekels, in the shekel of the sanctuary, for a trespass offering.
And that which he had defaulted of the holy thing he shall make good, and add a fifth thereupon, and give it to the priest; and the priest shall make atonement for him with the ram of the trespass offering, and it shall be forgiven him.
And if a man sin and do against any of the commandments of the Lord that which is not right to do, and know not, and sin, he shall bear his sin.
But he shall bring a lamb unblemished form the flock according to the estimation for a trespass offering (or according to the estimation of the trespass) unto the priest; and the priest shall atone for his error which he hath committed unwittingly, and it shall be forgiven him.
It is a trepass offering for the sin that he hath sinned; he shall offer the trespass offering before the Lord.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
If a man sin and falsify with falsehood before the Lord, and deal falsely with his neighbour in a thing deposited, or in fellowship of hands, or by rapine or violence against his neighbour;
Or if he have found that which had been lost and deny it, and swear falsely, by anyone of all these which a man doeth and sinneth therein;
It shall be that when he hath (so) transgressed and become guilty, he shall return what he hath robbed by robbery, or taken away by violence, or the deposit which was deposited with him, or the lost thing that he had found:
Or all that about which he had sworn falsely, he shall make it good in the capital, and add one fifth thereon; unto him to whom it belongeth shall he give it on the day of his (offering for) guilt.
And the trespass offering that he shall bring before the Lord (must be) a ram unblemished form the flock according to the estimation of the trespass, unto the priest.
And the priest shall make atonement for him before the Lord, and it shall be forgiven him for anyone of all (these) in which he may have acted to be guilty thereby.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Instruct Aharon and his sons, saying: This is the law of the Burnt Offering. It is burnt offering, because burned upon the altar all night until morning, and the fire of the altar shall be burning in it.
And the priest shall dress himself with the vestments of linen, and wear drawers of linen upon his flesh; and he shall separate the ashes which the fire hath consumed with the burnt offering upon the altar, and set them beside the altar.
And he shall take off his vestments, and dress himself with other garments, and carry forth the ashes without the camp unto a clean place.
But the fire upon the altar shall be burning on it, and never be extinguished; and the priest shall burn wood on it from morning to morning, and lay the burnt offering in order upon it, and burn upon it the fat of the sanctified oblations.
The fire shall be ever burning on the altar, it shall not be extinguished.
And this is the law of the Mincha which the sons of Aharon shall offer in the presence of the Lord before the altar.
And he shall separate therefrom his handful lof the flour of the mincha and of its oil, and all the frankincense that is upon the mincha, and burn it at the altar as its memorial to be accepted with favour before the Lord.
And the remainder of it may Aharon and his sons eat, unleavened shall it be eaten in the holy place, in the court of the tabernacle of ordinance shall they eat it.
It shall not be baked with leaven. I have given it as their portion of my oblations; it is most sacred, as the sin offering and as the trespass offering.
All the males of the children of Aharon may eat it. (This) is an everlasting statute for your generations concerning the oblations of the Lord: everyone who toucheth them shall be holy.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying,
This is the oblation of Aharon and his sons which they shall present before the Lord on the day when they anoint him. The tenth of three seahs of flour for a mincha perpetually, a half in the morning, and a half at eventide.
It shall be made in a pan with oil; while soft it shall be brought a baken mincha offered in pieces to be accepted with favour before the Lord.
And of his sons, the priest who shall be anointed in his stead shall perform it. (This is) an everlasting statute before the Lord:
It shall be burned entirely, and every mincha of the priest shall be entirely (burned); it is not to be eaten.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with Aharon and with his sons, saying, This is the law of the sin offering: In the place where the burnt offering is killed, there shall the sin offering be killed before the Lord; it is most sacred.
The priest who maketh atonement with its blood shall eat it; in the holy place it shall be eaten, in the court of the tabernacle of ordinance.
Everyone who toucheth the flesh thereof must be holy. And if he drop some of its blood upon a vestment, that which is bedropped shall be purified in the holy place.
But the earthen vessel in which it was sodden shall be broken; and if it be sodden in a vessel of brass, (that) shall be scoured and washed in water.
Any man of the priests may eat thereof: it is most sacred.
But no sin offering whose blood is brought into the tabernacle of ordinance to make atonement in the sanctuary may be eaten, but shall be burned with fire.
And this is the law of the Trespass Offering; it is most holy.
In the place where they kill the burnt offering, there shall they kill the trespass offering and sprinkle its blood round about;
And all the fat of it shall be offered, with the tail and the fat which covereth the inwards.
And the two kidneys and the fat which is upon them, upon the inwards, and the caul that is upon the liver, with the kidneys, he shall take away.
And the priest shall burn them at the altar, an oblation before the Lord; it is a trespass offering.
Every man of the priests may eat thereof in the holy place; it is most sacred.
As the sin offering, so the trespass offering; they have one law; to the priest who maketh atonement therewith shall it be.
And when the priest offereth a man’s burnt sacrifice, the skin of the sacrifice that he priest offereth shall be his.
And every mincha that is baken in the oven, or made in the pan, or upon the baking pan, to the priest who offereth it shall it belong.
And every mincha sprinkled with oil, and that which is not sprinkled, shall belong to all the sons of Aharon, to the one man as to his brother.
And this is the law of the Sanctified Oblations which he shall offer before the Lord.
If he present it as a thanksgiving, he shall offer as the sacrifice of the thanksgiving unleavened cakes sprinkled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil, and baken biscuits of flour sprinkled with oil.
With the cakes he may offer his oblation of leavened bread for his sanctified oblation of thanksgiving.
And of it he shall offer one of all the separated oblatons before the Lord: (the remainder) shall belong to the priest who sprinkleth the blood of the sanctified oblations.
And the flesh of his consecrated thank-offering shall be eaten on the day that it is offered, none of it shall be covered over till the morning.
But if the offering of his oblation be a vow, or a voluntary gift, it may be eaten (partly) on the day that his sacrifice is offered, and that which remaineth of it may be eaten on the day after it,
But what remaineth of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day shall be burned with fire.
If the flesh of his consecrated sacrifice be indeed eaten on the third day, it shall not be accepted form him who offered it, neither shall it be reckoned to him; it is an abomination, and the man who ate of it shall bear his sin.
And if flesh that is consecrated touch anything unclean, it shall not be eaten, but he burned with fire. Everyone who is clean by sanctification to eat the consecrated flesh may eat the flesh that is consecrated.
But the man who eateth of the flesh of sacrifices consecrated before the Lord with his uncleanness upon him, that man shall be destroyed from his people.
And the man who toucheth anything unclean, whether the uncleanness of man or the uncleanness of beast, or of any unclean reptile, and eateth of the flesh of sacrifices consecrated before the Lord, that man shall perish form his people.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with the sons of Israel, saying: You may not eat the fat of the ox or sheep or goat.
But the fat of a dead carcase and the fat of an animal torn by a wild beast may be used in any manner of work, but of it you shall not eat.
For whosoever eateth the fat of an animal that they offer as an oblation before the Lord, the man who eateth shall perish from his people.
Nor in any of your habitations may you eat the blood of fowl or of beast:
Every man who eateth any kind of blood, that man shall be destroyed from his people.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with the sons of Israel, saying: Whosoever offereth his sanctified victim before the Lord, let him bring the oblation of his sanctified victim (himself) before the Lord,
his own hands shall bring the oblations of the Lord: let him bring the fat with the breast, that the breast may be lifted up an uplifting before the Lord.
And the priest shall burn the fat at the altar; but the breast shall be for Aharon and his sons.
And the right shoulder (also) of your sanctified victims you shall give for a separation unto the priest.
He of Aharon’s sons who offereth the blood and the fat of the sanctified victims shall have the right shoulder for a portion.
For the uplifted breast and the shoulder of separation of the sacrifices of the Beni Israel I have given to Aharon the priest and to his sons by and everlasting statue form the sons of Israel.
This is the anointing of Aharon, and the anointing of his sons and of the Lord’s oblations, in the day that they that they present them to minister before the Lord,
which the Lord commanded to give them in the day that they consecrate them from the sons of Israel, an everlasting statute unto your generations.
This is the law of the burnt offering, of the mincha, nad of the sin offering, and of the trespass offering, and of the oblation of the sanctified victims
Which the Lord commanded the sons of Israel to offer their oblations before the Lord in the wilderness of Sinai.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Bring Aharon near, and his sons with him, with the vestments, and the oil of consecration, and the bullock for the sin offering, and the two rams, and the basket of unleavened (cakes);
And let all the congregation gather together at the gate of the tabernacle of ordinance.
And Mosheh did as the Lord commanded him, and the congregation was gathered together at the gate of the tabernacle of ordinance.
And Mosheh said to the congregation, This is the thing which the Lord hath commanded to be done.
And Mosheh brought Aharon and his sons near, and washed them with water;
And he put upon him the vestment, and girded him with the girdle, and dressed him with the robe, and set upon him the ephod, and bound him with the band of the ephod, and ordained him therewith;
And set upon him the breastplate, and put in the breastplate the uraia an the thummaia.
And he set the mitre upon his head, and place on the mitre, on the forehead of his face, the plate of gold, the diadem of Holiness, as the Lord had commanded Mosheh.
And Mosheh took the consecrating oil, and anointed the tabernacle and all that was in it, and sanctified them.
And he sprinkled of it upon the altar seven times, and anointed the altar and all its vessels, and the laver and its base, to sanctify them.
And he poured the oil of consecration upon Aharon’s head, and anointed him to consecrate him.
And Mosheh brought the sons of Aharon near, and dressed them in vestments, and girded them with girdles, and appointed them with mitres, as the Lord had commanded Mosheh.
And he brought the bullock near for the sin offering, and Aharon and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the bullock which was the sin offering.
And Mosheh took the blood, and put it upon the horns of the altar round about, with his finger, and purified the altar, and the blood he poured out at the base of the altar, and consecrated it to make atonement upon it.
And he took all the fat which was upon the inwards, and the caul of the liver, and the two kidneys with their fat; and Mosheh burned them at the altar.
But the bullock, with his skin, and his flesh, and his food, he burned with fire without the camp, as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And he brought the ram for the burnt offering, and Aharon and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram,
And he killed it, and Mosheh sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about.
And the ram he divided by his members; and Mosheh burned the head and the members with the fat.
And the inwards and the legs he washed with water: and Mosheh burned all the ram at the altar: it was a whole burnt offering before the Lord, as the Lord had commanded Mosheh.
And he brought the second ram of the oblations; and Aharon and his sons laid their hands on the head of the ram,
And he killed it; and Mosheh took of its blood, and put it upon the tip of Aharon’s right ear, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the toe of his right foot;
and Mosheh sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about.
And he took the fat and the tail, and all the fat which is upon the inwards, and the caul of the liver, and the two kidneys and their fat, and the right shoulder:
And from the basket of unleavened cakes that was before the Lord he took one unleavened cake, and one cake of bread (anointed with) oil, and one wafer, and set them upon the fat and upon the right shoulder,
and put the whole upon Aharon’s hands and upon the hands of his sons, and uplifted them, an elevation before the Lord.
And Mosheh took them form off their hands, and burned (them) at the altar upon the burnt offering: they were offerings to be received with acceptance, an oblation before the Lord.
And Mosheh took the breast, and uplifted it, an elevation before the Lord: of the ram of the oblations it was the portion of Mosheh, as the Lord had commanded Mosheh.
And Mosheh took of the oil of consecration, and of the blood that was upon the altar, and sprinkled upon Aharon, upon his vestments, and upon his sons, and upon his sons’ vestments with him, and sanctified Aharon and his garments, and his sons and his sons’ garments with him.
And Mosheh spake to Aharon and to his sons: Boil the flesh at the gate of the tabernacle of ordinance, and eat it there with the bread which is in the basket of oblations, as I was commanded, saying, Aharon and his sons shall eat it.
And that which remaineth of the flesh and of the bread, you shall burn in the fire.
And form the door of the tabernacle of ordinance ye shall not go forth (for) seven days, until the day that the days of your oblation be completed; for seven days shall your oblations be offered,
as hath been done this day, (as) the Lord commanded to be done to make atonement for you.
And at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance ye shall dwell seven days and nights, and watch the watches of the Word of the Lord, that you die not; for so am I commanded.
And Aharon and his sons did all the things which the Lord had commanded by the hand of Mosheh.
And on the eighth day Mosheh called Aharon and his sons and the elders of Israel.
And he said unto Aharon, Take to thee a calf, a young bullock from the herd, for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering unblemished, and offer before the Lord.
And with the sons of Israel he spake, saying, Take a kid of the goats for a sin offering, and a calf, and a lamb of the year, unblemished, for a burnt offering,
To sacrifice before the Lord; and a mincha of flour sprinkled with oil: for this day will the glory of the Lord be revealed to you.
And what Mosheh had commanded they brought before the tabernacle of ordinance, and all the congregation approached and stood before the Lord.
And Mosheh said, This is the thing that the Lord hath commanded to be done, and the glory of the Lord shall be revealed to you.
And Mosheh said to Aharon, Approach the altar, and make thy sin offering and thy burnt sacrifice, and make atonement for thyself and for the people, and perform the oblation of the people, and make atonement for them, as the Lord commanded.
And Aharon drew near to the altar, and slew the calf for the sin offering for himself.
And the sons of Aharon brought the blood to him, and he dipped his finger in the blood, and put it upon the horns of the altar, and poured out the blood at the base of the altar.
But the fat, and the kidneys, and the caul of the liver of the sin offering he burned at the altar, as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And the flesh and the skin he burned in the fire without the camp.
And he killed the whole burnt offering; and the sons of Aharon brought the blood to him, and he sprinkled it upon the altar round about.
And they brought to him the whole burnt offering by its members with the head, and he burned upon the altar.
And he washed the inwards and the legs, and burned with the offering at the altar.
And he brought the oblation of the people, and took the kid for the sin offering of the people, and killed it, and made atonement with its blood, as before.
And he brought the whole burnt offering, and performed in the manner proper.
And he took the mincha, and filled his hand with it, and burned it upon the altar beside the morning sacrifice.
And he slew the bullock and the ram for the hallowed oblations of the people; and the sons of Aharon brought the blood to him, and he sprinkled the blood round about.
Also the fats of the bullock and of the ram, the tail, and the covering of the inwards, with the kidneys, and the caul of the liver;
And they placed the fats upon the breast, and burned the fats at the altar.
And the breast with the right shoulder Aharon uplifted, an elevation before the Lord, as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And Aharon lifted up his hands over (to) the people and blessed them, and cane down from performing the sin offering, and the burnt sacrifice, and the hallowed oblations.
And Mosheh and Aharon entered the tabernacle of ordinance, and came forth and blessed the people; and the glory of the Lord was revealed unto all the people:
And fire came forth from before the Lord, and consumed upon the altar the burnt sacrifice and the fats: and all the people saw, and gave praise, and fell upon their faces.
But the sons of Aharon, Nadab and Abihu, took each man his censer and put fire in them, and put sweet incense upon it, and offered (or brought) before the Lord strange fire which He had not commanded them.
And fire came out from before the Lord and consumed them, and they died before the Lord.
And Mosheh said unto Aharon, This is that which the Lord spake, saying, In them who approacheth Me I will be sanctified, and in the face of all the people will I be glorified. And Aharon was silent.
And Mosheh called to Mishael and to Elzaphan, the sons of Uzziel the uncle of Aharon, and said to them, Come nigh, and carry your brethren from before the sanctuary without the camp.
And they came nigh, and carried them in their vestments out of the camp, as Mosheh had spoken.
And Mosheh said to Aharon and to Elazar and to Ithamar his sons, Make not bare your heads, nor rend your garments, lest you die, and wrath be upon all the congregation; but let your brethren and all the house of Israel bewail the burning which the Lord hath kindled;
And go not forth from the door of the tabernacle of ordinance, lest you die; for the anointing oil of the Lord is upon you. And they did according to the word of Mosheh.
And the Lord spake unto Aharon, saying:
Drink not wine nor strong drink, neither thou nor thy sons with thee, when you enter into the tabernacle of ordinance, that you die not. It is an everlasting statute unto your generations,
For the distinguishment between the holy and the common, and between the unclean and the clean;
And that you may teach the sons of Israel all the statutes which the Lord hath spoken to them through Mosheh.
And Mosheh spake with Aharon and with Elazar and with Ithamar his sons who were left: Take the mincha which remaineth of the oblations of the Lord, and eat it unleavened at the side of the altar, because it is most holy.
It shall be eaten in the holy place; for it is thy portion, and the portion of thy sons of the oblations of the Lord; for so have I been commanded.
But the breast of the uplifting and the shoulder of the separation you may eat on (any) clean place, and thy sons and thy daughters with thee; for it is thy portion, and the portion of thy sons, which hath been given of the hallowed sacrifices of the children of Israel.
The shoulder of the separation and the breast of the uplifting they will bring with the oblation of the fat things to uplift, an elevation before the Lord: and they shall be thine and thy sons’ with thee by an everlasting statute, as the Lord hath commanded.
But Mosheh made inquiry for the goat of the sin offering; and, behold, it had been burned; and he was angry with Elazar and Ithamar the sons of Aharon who were left, saying:
Why have you not eaten of the sin offering in the holy place, because it is most holy; and He hath delivered it unto you for pardoning mercy upon the sin of the congregation to make atonement for them before the Lord?
Behold, the blood of it was not brought in within the sanctuary: eating you should have eaten it within the holy (precinct), as I had commanded.
And Aharon said to Mosheh, Behold, this day they have brought their sin offering and their burnt offering before the Lord; but such griefs as these having come upon me, if I had eaten of the sin offering today, would it have been right before the Lord?
And Mosheh heard, and it was pleasing in his eyes.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh and to Aharon, saying to them:
Speak with the children of Israel, saying: These are the animals which you may eat of all the beasts which are upon the earth.
Everyone that parteth the sole and divideth the paw (or hoof) and that bringeth up the cud among the cattle, that you may eat.
But these you shall not eat, of them that bring up the cud or of them that divide the hoof: the camel, because he bringeth up the cud, but divideth not his hoof, he is unclean to you.
And the coney, because he bringeth up the cud, but doth not divide the hoof, is unclean to you.
And the hare, because he bringeth up the cud, but the hoof divideth not, shall be unclean to you.
And the swine, because he parteth the sole, and divideth the hoof, but cheweth not the cud, he shall be unclean to you.
You shall neither eat their flesh nor touch their carcases; they are unclean to you.
And these you may eat of all that are in the waters; everyone that hath fins and scales in the waters, in the seas, and in the rivers, of them you may eat.
But anyone that hath not (both) fins and scales in the seas and in the rivers; every (such) reptile of the waters, and every living animal in the waters, shall they be to you;
of their flesh you shall not eat, and their carcases you shall abhor;
Whatsoever hat not (both) fins and scales in the waters is to be an abomination to you.
And these shall you hold in abomination among the birds; you shall not eat them, they are an abomination: the eagle, and the sea eagle, and the osprey,
And the kite, and the vulture, after his kind;
And every raven after his kind;
And the ostrich, and the nightbird, and the gull, and the hawk, after his kind;
And the owl, and the diver for fish, and the ibis,
and the swan, and the green bird,
and the stork, and the pica, after his kind, and the moorcock, and the bat.
Every winged thing that creepeth, (or) walketh upon four, is an abomination to you.
Yet these you may eat, of every creeping thing that flieth, that walketh upon four which hath joints above its feet wherewith to leap upon the ground.
Of such as these you may eat, the locust after his kind, and the bald locust, and the serpent-killer after his kind, and the grasshopper after his kind;
But every other creeping thing that flieth having four feet is to be an abomination to you.
And by these you will be unclean; everyone who toucheth their carcases shall be unclean until the evening.
And whosoever carrieth a carcase of them, shall was his clothes and be unclean until the evening;
every beast that divideth the hoof, but is not cloven-footed, and that bringeth not up the cud, is to be unclean to you; whosoever toucheth them shall be unclean.
And every (animal) that goeth upon its paws, of all beast that go upon four, shall be unclean to you; whoever toucheth their carcases shall be unclean until the evening.
And whoever carrieth their carcase shall wash his clothes and be unclean until the evening; to you they are unclean.
And these shall be to you unclean among the reptiles which creep upon the ground; the weasel, and the mouse, and the crocodile after his kind,
and the field mouse (or ferret,) and the chameleon, and the newt, and the lizards, and the mole.
These are unclean to you of all that creep; everyone who toucheth them in their dead state shall be unclean until evening.
And upon whatever any of them may fall in their dead state it shall be unclean; whether a vessel of wood, or raiment, or skin, or sack, everything whatever in which work is done, must be put into water, and it shall be unclean until the evening, and must be purified.
And whatever earthen vessel into which any of them may fall, all that is within (it) is polluted, and you shall break it.
Any food for eating, upon which water (from such a vessel) is poured, shall be unclean, and all liquor which was for drinking in any (such) vessel shall be unclean.
And anything upon which a part of their dead bodies may have fallen shall be unclean; oven or cooking pan, they shall be broken, they are unclean and shall be unclean to you.
Nevertheless, a fountain or a pit, the place of a collection of waters, (into which they may have fallen,) shall be clean; but he who toucheth their dead bodies shall be unclean.
And if a part of their carcase fall upon any seeding seed which is to be sown, it is clean;
But if water be put upon the seed, and a part of their carcase fall their fall thereupon, it is unclean to you.
And if anyone of the cattle of which you eat die, whosoever toucheth its carcase shall be unclean until the evening.
And he who eateth of its carcase shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the evening. And he who may carry its carcase shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the evening.
And every reptile that creepeth upon the ground is abominable, it shall not be eaten.
Whatsoever goeth upon its belly, and whatever goeth upon four, anything that hath many feet, and every reptile that creepeth, you shall not eat, for they are an abomination.
Ye shall not make yourselves abominable with your animals by any reptile that creepeth, nor make yourselves unclean, nor be polluted by them, lest by them you be made unclean.
For I am the Lord your God; sanctify yourselves and be holy, for I am Holy; that you may not contaminate your souls with any reptile which creepeth upon the ground;
For I am the Lord who brought you up from the land of Mizraim to be unto you a God; and you shall be holy, for I am Holy.
This is the law of the cattle, and of the fowl, and of every living animal that moveth in the waters, and of every living thing that moveth on the ground,
for making a distinction between the unclean and the clean, between the animal that may be eaten, and the animal that may not be eaten.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh saying:
Speak with the children of Israel, saying: A woman, when she hath conceived and borne a male child, shall be unclean seven days; according to the days for the removal of her uncleanness, (or, her seclusion from her uncleanness,) she shall be unclean.
And on the eighth day he shall be circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin;
And she shall continue thirty and three days in the purification of blood; no sacred thing may she touch, nor may she come into the sanctuary, until the days of her purification be completed.
But if she bear a female child, she shall be unclean fourteen days, according to (the law of) her separation; and sixty and six days she will remain for the purification of the blood.
And when the days of her purification are complete, for the son or for the daughter, let her bring a lamb of its year for a burnt offering, and a young pigeon or a turtle dove for a sin offering, unto the door of the tabernacle of ordinance, unto the priest,
Who shall offer it before the Lord, and make atonement for her, and she shall be cleansed from the uncleanness of her blood. This is the law for her who beareth male or female.
But if she find not her hand sufficient for (the providing of) a lamb, let her take two turtle doves, or two young pigeons; one for the burnt offering, and the other for the sin offering, and the priest shall make atonement for her, and she shall be clean.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh and with Aharon, saying:
A man, in the skin of whose flesh there may be an abscess, or pustule, or brightness, and it be in the skin of his flesh like a stroke of the leprosy, shall be brought unto Aharon the priest, or to one of his sons the priests.
And the priest shall see the plague in the skin of the flesh, and if the hair in the affected spot be turned white, and the appearance of the plague be deeper than the skin of his flesh, it is the plague of leprosy; and the priest shall inspect him and make (pronounce) him to be unclean.
But if a bright spot be in the skin of his flesh, and the appearance be not deeper than the skin, and the hair be not turned white, the priest shall shut up the stricken (man) seven days.
And on the seventh day the priest shall inspect him, and if the plague stands as it did, if the plague hath not increases in the skin, let the priest shut him up a second seven days.
And the priest shall look upon him on the second seventh day; and, behold, if the plague hath become obscure, and the plague hath not spread in the skin, the priest shall make him to be clean; it is a sore, and he shall wash his clothes and be clean.
But if the diseased spot increase again in the skin after having been seen by the priest for his cleansing, he shall be brought a second time to the priest.
And the priest inspecting, and, behold, the soreness hath increased in the skin, the priest shall make him to be unclean; it is the leprosy.
When the plague of leprosy is in a man, let him be brought to the priest.
And the priest shall inspect him, and, behold, if the abscess is white in the skin, and it hath turned the hair white, and the sign of quick flesh be in the abscess,
It is an old leprosy in the skin of the flesh, and the priest shall make him unclean, but shall not shut him up (to ascertain his uncleanness), for he is unclean.
And if the leprosy increasing shall increase in the skin, and the leprosy cover the whole skin of the plague (struck man) from his head unto his feet, wherever the eyes of the priest may look,
the priest shall observe, and, behold, (if) the leprosy covereth all his flesh, the plagued shall be (considered) clean; the whole of him is turned white, he is clean.
But in the day that quick flesh appeareth in him he shall be unclean;
And the priest shall observe the quick flesh, and make him to be unclean. The quick flesh is unclean, it is the leprosy.
But if the quick flesh turn to be white, he shall come to the priest;
And the priest shall observe, and, behold, if the plague is turned white, the priest shall make the plagued to be clean; he is clean.
And if a man have in him, in his skin, an ulcer, and it hath healed,
but in the place of the ulcer there come a white abscess, or a bright spot, reddish-white, let him show it to the priest,
And the priest shall inspect, and, behold, if the appearance of it be deeper than the skin, and the hair be turned white, the priest shall make him to be unclean; it is the plague of leprosy increasing in the ulcer.
But if the priest look on it, and, behold, the hair is not white, nor (the depth) lower than the skin, and it hath become obscure, the priest shall seclude him seven days;
And if increasing it increaseth in the skin, the priest shall make him to be unclean; it is the plague.
But if the spot abideth in its place, and increaseth not, it is a description of an ulcer, and the priest shall make him clean.
Or, if a man hath in his skin a burning wound, and there be the sign of a glowing wound whitish-red or (altogether) white,
the priest shall look upon it, and, behold, if the hair be white in the bright spot, and the appearance be deeper than the skin, it is leprosy increasing in the wound, and the priest shall make him unclean; it is the plague of leprosy.
But if the priest see it, and, behold, the hair is not white in the spot, and it is not deeper than the skin, and is becoming obscure, the priest shall seclude him seven days.
And the priest shall look upon him on the seventh day; if, increasing, it increaseth in the skin, the priest shall make him to be unclean; it is the plague of leprosy.
But if the spot abideth in its place, and doth not increase in the skin, but hath become obscure, it is (only) a burning sore, and the priest shall make him to be clean, for it is the sign of an inflammation.
And if a man or a woman have a plague on the head, or in the beard,
the priest shall inspect the plague, and, behold, if the appearance is deeper than the skin, and there is in it a thin reddish hair, the priest shall make him unclean; it is a scar (or scurvy), it is leprosy in the head or the beard.
And if the priest observe the plague of the scurvy, and, behold, its appearance is not deeper than the skin, and the hair in it is not black, the priest shall seclude him who hath the plague of the scurvy seven days.
And the priest shall inspect the plague on the seventh day; and, behold, if the scurf hath not increased, and there is no reddish hair in it, and the appearance of the scurf be not deeper than the skin,
He must shave around the scurfed spot; but the spot itself he must not shave; and the priest shall shut him up (who hath) the scurf a second seven days.
And the priest shall look upon the scurf on the seventh day, and, behold, if the scurf is not increased in the skin, and its appearance is not deeper than the skin, the priest shall make him clean; and he shall wash his clothes and be clean.
But if the scurf increase in the skin after that he hath been (pronounced) clean,
The priest shall inspect him, and, behold, if the scurf be increased in the skin, the priest need not seek for the reddish hair; he is unclean.
But if the scurf abide as it was, and black hair have sprung up in it, the scurf hath healed, he is clean, and the priest shall make him to be clean.
And if a man or a woman have in the skin of their flesh bright white spots,
Then the priest shall look, and, behold, if the spots in the skin of their flesh be dim white, it is a freckle growing in the skin; he is clean.
And if a man’s hair fall off from his head, he is bald, but he is clean.
And if the hair of his head fall off toward his face, he is partly bald, but is clean.
But if in the baldness or partial baldness there be a whitish-red scar, it is leprosy growing in the baldness or partial baldness.
Then the priest shall look, and, behold, if the plague spot be whitish-red in the baldness or the partial baldness, as the appearance of leprosy in the skin of the flesh,
The man is a leper, he is unclean; and the priest shall verily make him to be unclean; his plague is in his head.
And the leper in whom is the plague, his clothes shall be rent, and his head bared; and, like the mourner, he shall be covered unto his lip, and shall cry: Be not made unclean! Be not made unclean!
All the days that the plague is upon him shall he be unclean; he is unclean; he shall dwell apart, his habitation shall be without the camp.
The garment which hath the plague of leprosy in it, whether it be in a garment of woollen or of linen,
Whether in the warp or in the woof of linen or of woolen, or in leather, or anything made of skin:
If the plague be green or red in the garment or in the skin, whether in the warp, or in the woof, or in anything of skin, it is a plague of leprosy, and must be showed to the priest.
And the priest shall look at the plague, and shut it up seven days.
And he shall look at the plague on the seventh day; if the plague hath increased in the garment, whether in the warp or in the woof, or in a skin, or anything made of skin for work, it is a plague of consuming leprosy, it is unclean.
And he shall burn the garment, whether it be in warp or woof, of wool, or of linen, or anything (made) of skin, which hath the plague in it; for it is a consuming leprosy; he shall burn it in fire.
But if the priest look, and, behold, the plague hath not increased in the garment, whether in warp or woof, or in anything of skin;
Then the priest shall direct, and they shall wash that wherein is the plague, and he shall shut it up a second seven days.
And the priest shall look after that they have washed the plague, and, behold, if (the state of) the plague hath not increased, it is (nevertheless) unclean; thou shalt burn it with fire, it is a fretting leprosy, whether in its smoothness or its roughness (i.e., its right or wrong side).
And if the priest look, and, behold, the plague hath become obscure after they have washed it, he shall tear it out of the garment, or out of the skin, or out of the warp, or of the woof.
And if it reappear in the garment, in warp or woof, or increase in any vessel of skin, thou shalt burn in fire that which hath the plague in it.
And the garment, or warp, or woof, or anything of skin which hath been washed, and the plague hath gone form it, shall be dipped the second time, and shall be clean.
This is the law for the plague of leprosy in a garment of woolen or linen, in the warp or the woof, or anything of skin, to make it to be clean or unclean.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
This shall be the law for the leper on the day of his purification: He shall be brought to the priest;
And the priest shall go forth out of the camp, and the priest shall look, and, behold, if the leper be healed of his leprosy,
Then the priest shall direct that there be brought for him who is to be cleansed two birds, alive, clean, and wood of cedar and scarlet (wood) and hyssop.
And the priest shall direct that one of the birds be killed in an earthen vessel with spring water.
And he shall take the living bird with the cedar wood, and the scarlet, and the hyssop, and dip them and the living bird in the blood of the bird that had been killed over the spring water.
And he shall sprinkle it on him who is to be cleansed form leprosy seven times, and he shall be clean: and the living bird he shall send forth upon the face of the field.
And he who is cleansed shall wash his clothes, and shave off all his hair, and wash himself clean with water, and afterward he may come into the camp; but he shall dwell without his tent seven days.
And on the seventh day he shall (again) shave off all the hair of his head, and his beard and his eyebrows, the whole of his hair shall he shave off, and wash his clothes, and wash his flesh with water, and he shall be clean.
And on the eighth day let him take two (he) lambs unblemished, and one ewe lamb of the year unblemished, and three tenths of flour sprinkled with oil for a mincha, and one loga of oil.
And the priest who maketh him clean shall make the man who is cleansed to stand with them before the Lord at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance.
And the priest shall take one lamb and offer him for a trespass offering, and the loga of oil, and shall uplift them an elevation before the Lord.
And he shall slay the lamb on the place where the sin offering is killed, and the burnt offering, (namely,) in the holy place; for as the sin, so the trespass, offering is the priest’s: it is most sacred.
And the priest shall take some of the blood of the trespass offering, and the priest shall put it upon the tip of the right ear of him who is cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the tow of his right foot.
And the priest shall take of the log of oil and pour it on the priest’s left hand.
And the priest shall dip the finger of his right hand in the oil which is upon his left hand, and shall sprinkle of the oil with his finger seven times before the Lord.
And of the rest of the oil which is upon his hand the priest shall put upon the tip of the right ear of him who is cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the tow of his right foot, upon the blood of the trespass offering.
And the remainder of the oil which is upon the priest’s hand he shall put upon the head of him who is cleansed, and the priest shall make atonement for him before the Lord.
And the priest shall perform the sin offering, and make atonement for him who is cleansed from his defilement, and afterwards shall he kill the burnt offering.
And the priest shall sacrifice the burnt offering with the mincha at the altar, and the priest shall make atonement for him, and he shall be clean.
But should he be a poor man, and his hand have not (so much) pertaining (to him), let him take one lamb for the trespass offering for the elevation to atone for him, and one-tenth of flour sprinkled with oil for the mincha, and a loga of oil
And two turtle doves or two young pigeons which his hand may possess; and one shall be the sin offering, and one the burnt offering.
And he shall bring them on the eighth day of his purification unto the priest, at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance before the Lord.
And the priest shall take the lamb of the trespass offering, and the log of oil, and the priest shall uplift them, an elevation before the Lord.
And he shall kill the lamb of the trespass offering, and the priest shall take of the blood of the trespass offering, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of him who is cleansed, and on the finger of his right hand, and on the tow of his right foot.
And of the oil the priest shall pour (some) upon the priest’s left hand;
and the priest shall sprinkle with his finger of the oil that is in his left hand seven times before the Lord.
And the priest shall put of the oil which is in his hand upon the tip of the right ear of him who is cleansed, and on the finger of his right hand, and on the tow of his right foot, upon the spot of the blood of the trespass offering.
And the remainder of the oil which is in the priest’s hand he shall put upon the head of him who is cleansed, to propitiate for him before the Lord.
And he shall offer (perform) one of the turtle doves, or of the young pigeons,
Which his hand may possess, the one for a sin offering, and one for a burnt offering, with the mincha; and the priest shall make atonement for him who is cleansed, before the Lord.
This is the law for him in whom hath been the plague of leprosy, whose hand hath not had sufficiency for (the sacrifices of) his purification.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh and to Aharon, saying:
When you have entered the land of Kenaan, which I will give unto you for a possession; and I have put the plague of leprosy upon a house in the land of your possession;
And he who owns the house shall come and show to the priest, saying, There is a plague, as it appeareth to me, in the house:
The priest shall direct that they turn out (all that is in) the house before the priest goeth in to inspect the plague; that all that is in the house be not (condemned as) unclean; and afterward the priest shall enter to survey the house.
Then he shall look at the plague; and, behold, if the plague be in the walls of the house in seams, green or red, and they appear to be deeper than the (surface of the) wall,
then the priest shall go out from the house to the door of the house, and shut up the house seven days.
And the priest shall return on the seventh day, and look, and, behold, if the plague hath increased in the walls of the house,
then the priest shall order that they take down the stones of the house in which the plague is, and cast them without the town into an unclean place.
And they shall scrape the house within round about, and throw the plaster (dust) which they have scraped off without the town, into an unclean place.
And they shall take other stones, and insert them in the place of the former stones, and shall take other plaster and cover the house.
And if the plague return and increase in the house after that the stones have been taken down, nad after they have scraped the house, and after it hath been plastered (anew);
Then the priest shall enter, and, behold, if the plague hath increased in the house, it is a corroding leprosy in the house, it is unclean.
And they shall break down the house, the stones of it, the timber, and all the mortar of the house; and he shall carry them (have them carried) without the town unto an unclean place.
And whoso goeth into the house all the days that it is shut up, shall be unclean until the evening.
And he who may sleep in the house shall wash his clothes, and he who eateth in the house shall wash his clothes.
But if the priest, having entered, shall look, and, behold, the plague hath not increased in the house after the house hath been plastered, the priest shall make (pronounce) the house to be clean, for the plague hath been cured.
And he shall take, to purify the house, two birds, and cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop.
And he shall kill the one bird in a vessel of pottery with spring water,
and take the cedar wood, and the hyssop, and the scarlet, and the living bird; and dip them in the blood of the bird which had been killed and in the spring water, and sprinkle the house seven times.
And he shall purify the house with the blood of the bird, and with the spring water, and with the living bird, and with the cedar wood, and with the hyssop, and with the scarlet.
But he shall send forth the living bird out of town, upon the face of the field, and make atonement for the house, and it shall be clean.
This is the law for every plague of leprosy and of scorbutics,
And for leprosy in clothing, and in a house:
And for abscess, and scar, and inflamed spot:
To teach on what day it is unclean, and on what day it is purified. This is the law for the leprosy.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh and to Aharon, saying:
Speak with the sons of Israel, and say to them: When any man hath a defluxion by the running of his flesh, he is unclean.
And this shall be his uncleanness by his defluxion, when his defluxion floweth form his flesh, or his flesh hath ceased from its flowing, it is (the cause) of his uncleanness.
Every bed whereon he lieth who hath the defluxion shall be unclean; and anything whereon he sitteth shall be unclean.
And whoever toucheth his bed shall wash his clothes, bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening.
And he who sitteth on a thing whereon he who hath the issue hath sat shall wash his clothes, and bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening.
And he who toucheth the flesh of him who hath the issue shall wash his clothes, and bathe in water, and be unclean until evening.
And if he who hath the issue spit upon one who is clean, he shall wash his clothes, and bathe in water, and be unclean until evening.
And any saddle (or carriage) that he who hath the issue may ride upon shall be unclean;
And whoever toucheth any things that have been under him shall be unclean until evening.
And whomsoever he who hath the issue toucheth, and hath not rinsed his hands in water, shall wash his clothes, and bathe in water, and be unclean until evening.
And every vessel of earthenware which he who hath the issue may have touched shall be broken, and every vessel of wood shall be rinsed in water.
And when he who hath had a defluxion shall be cleansed of his issue, he shall number to himself seven days for his purification, and wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in spring water, and be clean.
And on the eighth day let him take two turtle doves, or two young pigeons, and bring before the Lord at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance, and give them to the priest.
And the priest shall perform (the offering of) them; one for the sin, and one for the burnt, offering; and the priest shall make atonement for him before the Lord, for his issue.
And if seed of copulation go out from a man, he shall wash all his flesh with water, and be unclean until evening.
And any garment or any skin on which may be seed of copulation, shall be washed in water, and be unclean until evening.
The woman with whom a man shall lie with seed of copulation, they shall bathe themselves with water, and be unclean until evening.
If a woman have a defluxion of blood in her flesh, seven days shall be for her separation, and whoso toucheth her shall be unclean until evening.
And everything on which she lieth in her separation shall be unclean, and anything that she sitteth upon shall be unclean.
And anyone who toucheth her bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe in water, and be unclean until evening;
And anyone who toucheth a thing upon which she hath sat shall was his clothes, and bathe in water, and be unclean until evening.
And if it be on her bed, or anything on which she hath sat, when he hath touched it, he shall be unclean until the evening.
And if a man lie with her, and her separation be upon him, he shall be unclean seven days, and any bed whereon he lieth shall be unclean.
And if a woman hath a defluxion of blood many days beyond the time of her separation, if it run beyond (the time) of her separation, all the days of the issue of her uncleanness shall be as the days of her separation; she shall be unclean.
Any bed on which she lieth all the days of her defluxion shall be as the bed of her separation, and everything on which she sitteth shall be unclean as the uncleanness of her separation.
And whoso toucheth them shall be unclean, and shall wash his clothes, and bathe in water, and be unclean until evening.
But if she be cleansed form her defluxion, then let her number to herself seven days, and afterward she is clean.
And on the eighth day let her take or herself two turtle doves, or two young pigeons, and bring them to the priest at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance.
And the priest shall make the one a sin offering, and one burnt offering, and the priest shall atone before the Lord for the issue of her uncleanness.
And (thus) shall you separate the children of Israel from their uncleanness, that they die not, by defiling My Tabernacle which is among them.
This is the law for him who hath an issue, or whose seed goeth from him, and who is defiled therewith;
And of her who hath an issue of separation; and of him who hath a flowing issue, of the male and of the female, and of him who lieth with her who is unclean.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh after the two sons of Aharon were dead, who offered the strange fire before the Lord, and died;
And the Lord said unto Mosheh, Speak with Aharon thy brother, that he may not enter at any time into the Holy Place within the veil before the mercy seat which is upon the ark, that he die not; for in the cloud will I reveal Myself over the mercy seat.
With this shall Aharon enter the holy place: With a young bullock for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering.
With the holy linen vesture shall he be clothed, and linen drawers shall be upon his flesh, and with the linen girdle shall he be bound, and the linen mitre shall be upon his head: these are holy garments; and he shall wash his flesh in water, and then put them on.
And of the congregation of the sons of Israel let him take two kids of the goats for a sin offering, and one ram for a burnt offering.
And Aharon shall offer the bullock of the sin offering for himself, and make atonement for himself and for the men of his house.
And he shall take the two goats, and make them to stand before the Lord, at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance.
And Aharon shall put lots upon the two goats; one lot for the Name of the Lord, and one lot for Azazel.
And Aharon shall offer the goat whose lot came up for the Name of the Lord, and make him a sin offering;
And the goat whose lot came up for Azazel he shall make to stand alive before the Lord, to make an atonement upon him, and to send him away to Azazel, to the desert.
And Aharon shall offer the bullock for his own sin, and make atonement for himself and for the men of his house and he shall kill the bullock for the sin offering which is for himself.
And he shall take a censer full of coals of fire from off the altar before the Lord, and his handful of sweet incense beaten small, and carry (them) within the veil.
And he shall put the sweet incense upon the fire before the Lord, and the cloud of incense will envelope the mercy seat which is over the testimony, that he may not die.
And he shall take of the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it with his finger upon the face of the mercy seat eastward, and before the mercy seat he shall sprinkle seven times of the blood with his finger.
And be shall kill the goat for the sin offering of the people, and enter, with its blood, within the veil, and do with his blood as he had done with the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it upon the mercy seat and before the mercy seat.
And he shall (thus) make atonement for the holy place on account of the uncleanness of the children of Israel, and the rebellion of all their sin. And so shall he do for the tabernacle of ordinance which remaineth with them in the midst of their uncleanness.
But no man shall be in the tabernacle of ordinance (at the time of) his entering to make atonement in the holy place until his coming out: and he shall atone for himself, and for the men of his house, and for all the congregation of Israel.
And he shall go forth to the altar which is before the Lord, and make atonement for it; and take of the blood of the bullock and of the goat’s blood, and put upon the horns of the altar round about;
And of the blood he shall sprinkle upon it with his finger seven times, and cleanse it and sanctify it from the uncleanness of the children of Israel.
And when he hath completed to atone for the holy place, and for the tabernacle of ordinance, and for the altar, then shall he bring the living goat.
And Aharon shall lay his two hands upon the head of the live goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their rebellions, and all their sins, and put them upon the head of the goat, and send him away, by the hand of an appointed man, to go into the desert.
And the goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities into a land not inhabited; and he shall send the goat away into the desert.
And Aharon shall go into the tabernacle of ordinance, and put off the linen robes which he wore on going into the Holy Place, and shall lay them there aside.
And he shall wash his flesh with water in the Holy Place, and put on his garments, and come forth to offer his burnt sacrifice, and the burnt sacrifice of the people, and make atonement for himself and for the people.
And the fat of the sin offering he shall burn at the altar.
But he who led away the goat unto Azazel shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterwards go into the camp.
And the bullock of the sin offering whose blood was carried in to make atonement in the Holy Place, he shall take forth out of the camp, and they shall burn their skins and their flesh and their food with fire.
And he who burned them must wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh with water, and may then enter into the camp.
And this shall be to you for an everlasting statute: in the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, you shall afflict (humble) your souls, and do no work, whether the native-born or the stranger that dwelleth among you.
For on that day he shall make atonement for you, to cleanse you from all your sins, that you may be cleansed from all your sins before the Lord.
A Sabbath it shall be to you, and you shall humble your souls. It is an everlasting statute.
And the priest whom he shall anoint, and who shall offer his oblation, to minister instead of his father, shall make the atonement, and dress himself with the vestments of fine linen, even the consecrated vestments.
And he shall make atonement for the Holy of Holies, and for the tabernacle of ordinance and for the altar he shall atone, and for all the people of the congregation shall he atone.
And this shall be to you an everlasting statute for the expiation of all the children of Israel from all their sins once in the year. And he did as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with Aharon, and with his sons, and with all the sons of Israel, and say to them: This is the word which the Lord hath commanded, saying:
Any man of the house of Israel who shall kill bullock or lamb or goat in the camp, or who shall kill (such as sacrifices) without the camp,
and bring it not to the door of the tabernacle of ordinance, that it may be offered an oblation in the presence of the Lord before the tabernacle of the Lord, blood shall be reckoned to that man; he hath shed blood, and that man shall be destroyed from his people.
In order that the sons of Israel may bring their victims which they (formerly) sacrificed upon the face of the field, before the Lord at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance, unto the priest, and offer them as consecrated oblations in the presence of the Lord.
And the priest shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar of the Lord at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance, and burn the fat to be received with acceptance before the Lord.
And they shall no more sacrifice their victims unto demons after which they have wandered: this shall be an everlasting statute to you unto your generations.
And say thou to them, Whatever man of the house of Israel, or the stranger who sojourneth among you, who sacrificeth a burnt offering or a consecrated victim,
And bringeth it not to the door of the tabernacle of ordinance, that it may be performed before the Lord, that man shall be destroyed from his people.
And what man soever of the house of Israel or of the strangers who sojourn among you, who shall eat any blood, I will set my anger upon the man who shall have eaten blood, and will destroy him from among his people.
Because the life of flesh is in the blood, and I have given it to you upon the altar to make atonement for your souls; for it IS THE BLOOD THAT ATONETH FOR THE SOUL.
Therefore have I said to the children of Israel, Let no man of you eat blood, nor let the strangers who sojourn among you eat blood;
And whatever man of the sons of Israel, or of the strangers who sojourn among you, that hunteth venison of beast or bird which may be eaten, let him pour out its blood and cover it in the earth (or in the dust).
For the life of all flesh is its blood; it is for its life; and I have said to the children of Israel, You shall not eat the blood of any flesh, for the life of all flesh is its blood; everyone who eateth of it shall be destroyed.
And everyone who eateth of a carcase (that hath died of itself) or hath been torn, whether he be native-born or of the strangers, let him wash his clothes, and bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening, and (then) shall he be clean.
But if he wash not, nor bathe his flesh, he shall bear his transgression.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with the sons of Israel, and say unto them: I am the Lord your God:
You shall not do according to the people of the land of Mizraim in which you dwelt, nor after the works of the people of the land of Kenaan, whither I am bringing you, shall you do, neither shall you walk in their laws.
My judgments shall you perform and keep My statutes to walk in them; I am the Lord your God.
And you shall keep My statutes and My judgments, which if a man do he shall live by them an everlasting life. I am the Lord.
No man shall come nigh to any of his own flesh to uncover the nakedness; I am the Lord.
The nakedness of thy father, or the nakedness of thy mother, thou shalt not uncover. She is thy mother; thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.
The nakedness of thy father’s wife thou shalt not uncover, it is thy father’s nakedness.
The nakedness of thy sister, the daughter of thy father, or the daughter of thy mother, who hath been begotten of thy father by another wife, or of thy mother by another husband, their nakedness thou shalt not uncover.
The nakedness of thy son’s daughter, or the daughhter of thy daughter, thou shalt not uncover; for they are thy nakedness.
The nakedness of the daughter of thy father’s wife who hath been begotten of thy father, who is thy sister, thou shalt not uncover.
The nakedness of thy father’s sister thou shalt not uncover; she is of kin to thy father.
The nakedness of thy mother’s sister thou shalt not uncover; for she is of kin to thy mother.
The nakedness of thy father’s brother thou shalt not uncover; unto his wife thou shalt not come near; she is the wife of thy father’s brother.
The nakedness of thy daughter-in-law thou shalt not uncover; she is thy son’s wife, thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.
The nakedness of thy brother’s wife thou shalt not uncover; it is thy brother’s nakedness.
The nakedness of a woman and of her daughter thou shalt not uncover; thou shalt not take the daughter of her son nor the daughter of her daughter to uncover her nakedness; they are near of kin, it is a device of wickedness.
And a wife with her sister thou shalt not take to cause her tribulation by uncovering her nakedness over her in her life (time).
And unto a woman in the separation of her uncleanness shalt thou not come near to uncover her nakedness.
Nor with the wife of thy neighbour shalt thou carnally lie to defile her.
And of thy children thou shalt give none to transfer them to Molek, (or, to make them pass through to Molek,) neither shalt thou profane the Name of the Lord thy God: I am the Lord.
And with the male thou shalt not lie as with the woman; it is an abhorrent thing.
Nor with any beast shall be thy lying down to defile thyself with it; neither shall a woman stand before a beast to permit him to prevail with her; it is confusion.
Ye shall not pollute yourselves with any of these; for with all these have the peoples defiled themselves whom I am about to drive away from before you.
And the land (itself) is contaminated; and I will visit the guilt that is upon it, and the land shall vomit forth the inhabitants.
But you shall keep My statutes and My judgments, and commit none of these abominations, neither the native-born nor the sojourners who sojourn among you;
For all these abominations have been done by the men of the land who have been before you, and the land hath been polluted;
That the land vomit you not out when ye defile it; as it will have cast out the people who were before you.
For whoso committeth any of these abominations, the souls that do them shall be destroyed from among their people.
And you shall observe the keeping of My word, that you do not (according to) the abominable usages which have been done before You, nor be corrupted by them. I am the Lord your God.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with all the congregation of the sons of Israel and say to them, You shall be holy; for I, the Lord your God, am holy.
A man shall reverence his mother and his father, and you shall keep the day of My Sabbath: I am the Lord your God.
Turn not after idols, nor make molten things (for worship): I am the Lord your God.
And when you offer the sacrifice of consecrated things before the Lord, make the sacrifice thereof with your own free-will.
On the day that it is sacrificed it may be eaten, and on the following day; but that which remaineth on the third day shall be burned with fire.
If indeed it be eaten on the third day, it (the oblation) is rejected, and shall not be accepted.
And whoever eateth it shall bear his guilt; for he hath profaned that which was consecrated, and that man shall destroyed from his people.
And when you reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not wholly reap the corners of thy field, and the gleanings of thy harvest thou shalt not gather.
Neither in thy vineyard shalt thou (entirely) ingather, nor collect the remainder of thy vineyard; thou shalt leave them for the poor, and for the stranger: I am the Lord thy God.
You shall not steal, nor prevaricate, nor be false, a man with his neighbour.
Neither swear by My Name unto falsehood, nor profane the Name of thy God: I am the Lord.
Thou shalt not overbear thy neighbour, nor be coercive: the hire of the hireling shall not abide with thee till the morning.
Thou shalt not curse him who cannot hear, nor put a stumblingblock before him who cannot see, but shalt fear thy God: I am the Lord.
You shall not deal falsely in judgment, nor accept the face of the poor, nor honour the face of the great; in truthfulness shalt thou judge thy neighbour.
Thou shalt not make false accusations against thy people, neither stand against thy neighbour’s blood: I am the Lord.
Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart: reproving, reprove thou thy neighbour, and contract not sin his account.
Thou shalt not be revengeful, nor keep enmity against the children of thy people, but love thy neighbour as thyself. I am the Lord.
You shall observe My statutes. Thy cattle thou shalt not make to gender with various kinds, nor sow thy field with various kinds, nor let a garment of a mixture of woollen and linen come upon thee.
And if a man lie carnally with a woman, and she be a handmaid betrothed unto (another) man, and with redemption of money not redeemed, nor having freedom given to her by an instrument of writing, the stripe shall be upon her; they shall not be put to death, for she was not free.
But he shall bring his trespass offering before the Lord, at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance, a ram for a trespass offering.
And the priest shall make atonement with the ram of the trespass offering before the Lord for the sin that he hath sinned, that the sin he hath sinned may be forgiven him.
And when you have entered upon the land, and have planted any (kind) of tree for eating, the fruit of it shall be put away (from you); three years shall it be set aside to be destroyed; it shall not be eaten.
But in the fourth year all the fruit shall be consecrated for thanksgiving before the Lord;
And in the fifth year you shall eat the fruit of it, that the fruit may be added (increased) to you. I am the Lord your God.
You shall not eat anything with the blood. You shall not use enchantments, nor augury by the clouds.
You shall not shave the hair on your head in a circle, nor destroy the hair of thy beard,
nor make a cutting for the dead in thy flesh; nor imprint signatures upon you: I am the Lord.
Thou shalt not profane thy daughter to make her to become a fornicatress, lest the land become whorish, and the land be filled with the ways of wickedness.
The days of Sabbaths, which are Mine, observe ye, and hold in reverence the house of My sanctuary. I am the Lord.
Turn not after deceivers, nor inquire by diviners to pollute yourselves with them: I am the Lord your God.
Thou shalt rise up before one who is a teacher in the law, and pay honour to the presence of the aged, and fear thy God. I am the Lord.
And if a stranger sojourn with you in the land, you shall not oppress him.
As one born among you shall be the stranger who sojourneth among you, and thou shalt love him as thyself, because you were sojourners in the land of Mizraim: I am the Lord your God.
You shall commit no falsity in judgment, in rule, (or line,) in weight, or in measure.
Balances of truth, weights of truth, a measure in truth, and hins of truth you shall have.
I am the Lord your God, who have brought you out from the land of Mizraim; and you shall keep all My statutes, and all My judgments, and do them: I am the Lord.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying,
Speak unto the sons of Israel: Whatever man of the sons of Israel, or of the strangers who sojourn in Israel, giveth his offspring unto Molek, with killing shall he be killed; the people of the house of Israel shall stone him with stones.
And I will show My displeasure against that man, and will destroy from among his people, because he hath given his offspring unto Molek, to defile My sanctuary and to profane My holy Name.
And if the people of the house of Israel turn away (or hide) their eyes from that man when he giveth his offspring to Molek, that they may not have to put him to death,
I will give forth My anger against that man, and against his abettors, and will destroy him, and all who go after him, to wander after Molek, from among their people.
And the man who turneth away after impostors and diviners to wander after them, I will set My displeasure upon that man, and will cut him off from among his people.
But you shall be sanctified, and be holy; for I am your God.
And you shall observe My statutes, and do them: I am the Lord who sanctify you.
For the man who curseth his father or his mother shall be surely put to death; he hath cursed his father, he is guilty of death.
And the man who committeth adultery with his neighbour’s wife shall be surely put to death; the adulterer and the adulteress.
And the man who lieth with his father’s wife, uncovering his father’s nakedness, shall be surely put to death; both of them are guilty of death.
And a man who lieth with his daughter-in-law, both of them shall be slain: they have wrought confusion, they are guilty of death.
And a man who lieth with a man as with a woman, both of them have wrought abomination: they are to be surely put to death, of death they are guilty.
And when a man taketh a wife along with her mother, it is wickedness; both he and they shall be burned with fire; such wickedness shall not be among you.
And if a man lie with a beast, be shall be surely put to death, and you shall kill the beast.
And if a woman approach to a beast to submit to it, the woman shall be put to death, and the beast; they shall verily be killed; of death they are guilty.
And a man who shall take his sister, the daughter of his father, or the daughter of his mother, and see her nakedness, and she see his nakedness, it is an ignominy and they shall be destroyed before the eyes of the children of their people: he hath uncovered the nakedness of his sister, he shall receive (the punishment of) his guilt.
And a man who lieth with a woman who is unclean, and uncovereth her nakedness, he hath uncovered her shame, and she hath uncovered the uncleanness of her blood: both of them shall be cut off from among their people.
Neither shalt thou uncover the nakedness of thy mother’s sister, nor of thy father’s sister; for he will have uncovered that of his near kin; they shall receive for their sin.
And if a man lie with the wife of his father’s brother he hath uncovered the nakedness of his father’s brother; they shall receive for their guilt without children shall they die.
And if man take his brother’s wife, a thing to be kept aloof from, (merachaka,) he bath uncovered the nakedness of his brother, they shall be childless.
But keep you all My statutes and all My judgments, and do them, that the land into which I bring you to dwell may not cast you out.
You shall not walk in the laws of the peoples whom I drive away from before you; for they have committed all these thin, and My Word hath abhorred them.
But I have said to you, Ye shall inherit this land, and I will give it to you to possess it, a land producing milk and honey. I am the Lord your God who have separated you from the peoples.
And you shall make distinction between animals clean and unclean, and between fowls unclean and clean, and not make your souls abominable by beast, or by fowl, or by anything that creepeth on the ground which I have separated (as to be) unto you unclean.
And you shall be holy before Me; for I the Lord am holy, and I have separated you from the nations to be worshippers before Me.
A man or a woman with whom are impostures or divinations shall be verily put to death; with stones they shall be stoned, they are guilty of death.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying: Speak unto the priests, the sons of Aharon, and say to them: Let no one be defiled among his people on account of the dead:
Yet for his kin, who is nigh to him, for his mother, and for his father, and for his son, and for his daughter, and for his brother,
and for his sister, a virgin who is near to him, who hath no husband, for her he may be defiled.
But a chief among his people (the high priest) shall not defile himself, to make himself profane.
They shall not make baldness on their heads, nor cut away the hair of their beards, nor scarify their flesh with marks.
They shall be holy before their God, and shall not profane the Name of their God; for they offer the oblations of the Lord their God, and they shall be holy.
They shall not take to wife a woman who is a harlot, or one who is corrupted, nor may they take a woman who hath been put away from her husband; for (the priest is to be) holy before his God.
Thou shalt consecrate him, for he is to offer the oblation of thy God: he shall be sacred to thee; for I the Lord, who sanctify you, am Holy.
And if the daughter of a man who is a priest profane herself by becoming an harlot, she hath profaned the sanctity of her father; she shall be burned with fire.
And the (high) priest who hath been consecrated from his brethren, upon whose head hath been poured the oil of consecration, and who, at the offering of his oblation, is arrayed with the (holy) robes, shall not make bare his head, nor rend his garments.
Nor shall he enter unto any dead body, nor defile himself for his father or his mother.
And he shall not go out from the sanctuary nor defile the sanctuary of his God; for the crown of the anointing oil of his God is upon him. I am the Lord.
And he shall take a wife in her virginity;
A widow, or a divorced person, or a corrupt harlot, these he shall not take; but a virgin from his people shall he take for a wife.
And his offspring he shall not profane among his people; for I the Lord do sanctify him.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with Aharon, saying: A man of the generations of thy sons who hath any blemish on him shall not approach to offer the oblation of his God.
For no man in whom is a blemish may come nigh; a blind man, or lame, or flat nosed, or disproportioned;
Or a man who hath a broken foot, or a broken hand,
or who is crookbacked, or dwarfish, or who hath a white spot in his eye, or the scurvy, or ringworm, or who hath ruptured testicles.
No man of the offspring of Aharon the priest who hath a blemish may approach to offer the oblations of the Lord; having a blemish in him he shall not draw near to present the oblation of his God:
Yet of the sanctified oblations of his God, even of the most holy, he may eat:
Only he shall not enter within the veil, nor approach the altar, because he hath a blemish; that he profane not My sanctuary; for I am the Lord who sanctify them.
And Mosheh spake with Aharon, and with his sons, and with all the sons of Israel.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with Aharon and with his sons, and let them keep separate from the consecrated things of the children of Israel, that they profane not the Name of My Holiness which they (are to) sanctify before Me: I am the Lord.
Say to them, Any man of all the sons of your generations who shall touch the hallowed things which the children of Israel consecrate before the Lord, having his uncleanness upon him, that man shall perish before Me: I am the Lord.
Any man of Aharon’s offspring who hath leprosy or an unclean effusion shall not eat of the consecrated things until he be clean; and whosoever toucheth any unclean animal, or a man whose seed goeth from him,
Or a man who toucheth any reptile that maketh him unclean, or a man who maketh him unclean by any of his uncleanness,
The man who toucheth him shall be unclean until the evening, and may not eat of things consecrated unless he wash his flesh with water.
But when the sun hath gone down, and he shall have purified himself, he may afterward eat of the hallowed things, for it is his food.
A carcase which hath been torn he may not eat, to defile himself therewith: I am the Lord.
But let them keep the keeping of My word, lest they bring guilt upon themselves, and die for it, because they have profaned it, I am the Lord who sanctify them.
No stranger shall eat of that which is consecrated, neither a sojourner with a priest, or a hireling, may eat of the consecrated thing.
But if the priest buy a person with a purchase of his money, he may eat of it, and he who hath been born in his house, they may eat of his bread.
And the daughter of a priest, if she be married to a stranger, may not eat of things set apart and hallowed.
But if the priest’s daughter be a widow, or divorced, and, having, no child, hath returned to her father’s house, as in her youth, she may eat of her father’s meat; but no stranger shall eat thereof.
And if a man eat some consecrated thing through ignorance, he shall add a fifth unto it, and give the consecrated thing unto the priest.
And let them not profane the hallowed things of the children of Israel which are set apart before the Lord,
nor bring upon themselves iniquities and sins, when they eat in uncleanness the things that are holy. I am the Lord, who sanctify them.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with Aharon, and with his sons, and with all the children of Israel, and say to them: When any man of the sons of Israel, or of the sojourners in Israel, will offer the oblation of any of their vows or any of their free-will oblations which they may offer before the Lord for a burnt sacrifice;
That it may be acceptable from you, (let it be) a male without blemish, of the bullocks, or of the lambs, or of the goats.
But whatever hath a blemish in it you shall not offer, for it will not be acceptable for you.
And if a man present a consecrated victim before the Lord, as a vow set apart, or a free-will offering of the herd or of the flock, it must be perfect, to be acceptable; there shall be no blemish in it.
Blind, or broken, or mutilated, or having imposthumes, or ulcers, or blotches, these you shall not offer before the Lord, nor of them present an oblation upon the altar before the Lord.
But a bullock or a lamb that hath anything superfluous or deficient you may make a free-will offering, but for a vow it will not be acceptable.
And that which is crushed, or rent, or worn out, or emasculated, you shall not offer before the Lord, nor do it in your land.
Nor from (the hand of) a son of the Gentiles may you offer an oblation to your God of any of these, because their corruption is in them, a blemish is in them; they will not be acceptable for you.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
When a bullock, or lamb, or goat, is brought forth, it shall be seven days with its dam, and on the eighth day and thenceforward it will be acceptable to be offered as an oblation before the Lord.
Whether it be a cow or ewe, ye shall not immolate (both) her and her offspring on one day.
And when you present a thank-offering before the Lord, offer it so as to be acceptable for you.
It is to be eaten on that day, nothing shall remain of it till the morning. I am the Lord.
And you shall observe My commandments, and do them. I am the Lord.
Nor shall you profane My holy Name, for I will be hallowed among the sons of Israel. I am the Lord who sanctify you,
who have led you forth from the land of Mizraim to be unto you Eloha: I am the Lord.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with the sons of Israel, and say to them: The FESTIVALS of the Lord which you shall convoke as holy convocations, these are My festivals.
Six days thou shalt do work, but on the seventh day is the rest of the Sabbath; a holy convocation, (in it) you shall do no work. It is a Sabbath before the Lord in all your dwellings.
These are the festivals of the Lord, holy convocations which you shall convoke in their seasons.
In the first month, on the fourteenth of the month, between the suns, is the Pascha before the Lord,
and on the fifteenth day of this month is the feast (chagga) of unleavened cakes before the Lord; seven days you shall eat unleavened bread.
In the first day you shall have a holy convocation; no laborious work shall you do;
But you shall offer an oblation before the Lord seven days; in the seventh day there shall be a holy convocation; no laborious work may you do.
And the Lord spake with Mosheb, saving:
Speak with the sons of Israel, and say to them: When you have entered into the land that I will give unto you, and you reap its harvest, you shall bring an omera of the first of your harvest unto the priest,
And he shall uplift the omera before the Lord to be accepted for you: after the day of the festivity (yoma taba) shall the priest uplift it.
And you shall perform on the day of your elevation of the omera (the sacrifice of) an unblemished lamb of the year, as a burnt offering before the Lord.
And the mincha thereof shall be two-tenths of flour mingled with oil, an oblation to be accepted before the Lord; and its libation, wine, the fourth of a hin.
Neither bread, nor parched corn, nor green ears shall you eat until this day when you bring the oblation of your God; an everlasting statute unto your generations in all your dwellings.
And count to you, after the festival day, from the day that you brought the omera of the elevation, seven weeks, complete shall they be.
Until the (day) after the seventh week number fifty days, and (then) offer a new mincha before the Lord.
Bring from your dwellings two loaves for an elevation, two cakes, of two-tenths of flour shall they be, baked with leaven, as firstfruits before the Lord.
And with the bread you shall offer seven unblemished lambs of the year, one young bullock, and two rams; they shall be a burnt offering before the Lord, with their mincha and their libation, to be received with acceptance before the Lord.
And you shall make one of the goats (a sacrifice) for a sin offering, and two lambs of the year for consecrated offerings.
And the priest shall uplift them with the bread of the firstfruits an elevation before the Lord; with the two lambs they (the loaves) shall be consecrated before the Lord for the priest.
And on this same day you shall proclaim (that) it shall be a holy convocation to you. Ye shall do no work of labour. (This is) an everlasting statute in all your dwellings unto your generations.
And when you reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not entirely finish the corner of thy field in thy reaping, nor shalt thou gather up the gleanings of thy harvest; for the poor and for the stranger thou shalt leave them: I am the Lord your God.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with the sons of Israel, saying: In the seventh month you shall have a (season of) Rest; a memorial of the Trumpet, a holy convocation;
No work of labour shall you do, but offer an oblation before the Lord.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
But on the tenth day of this seventh month shall be the Day of Atonement (Yoma de Kippuraia, the Day of Expiations); a holy convocation you shall have, and afflict (or humble) your souls and offer the oblation before the Lord.
And NO WORK may you do on that same day, for it is the Day of Atonement, to make an atonement for you before the Lord your God.
For every man who will not humble himself on that same day, shall be cut off from his people.
And any man who doeth any work oil that same day, I will destroy that man from among his people.
No work shall you do: an everlasting statute unto your generations, in all your dwellings.
A Sabbath of rest shall it be to you, and ye shall humble your souls, on the ninth of the month at evening: from evening to evening you shall rest your rest.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with the sons of Israel saying: On the fifteenth day of this seventh month (shall be) the Feast of Bowers, seven days before the Lord.
On the first day a holy convocation; no work of labour may you do.
Seven days you shall offer oblations before the Lord; on the eighth day you shall have a holy convocation, and offer an oblation before the Lord. You shall be gathered together; no work of labour may you do.
These are the Festivals of the Lord which you shall proclaim to be holy convocations, to offer an oblation before the Lord, a burnt sacrifice, and a mincha, and a consecrated offering and libations (according to) the directory of the day, on its day.
Beside (or except) the Sabbaths of the Lord, and beside your gifts, and beside all your vows, and beside all your free-will offerings which you present before the Lord.
Also on the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when you have gathered in the produce of the ground, you shall solemnize a feast of the Lord seven days. On the first day there shall be rest, and on the eighth day rest.
And you shall take to you on the first day the fruit of the orange (or citron) tree, and branches of palms, and myrtles, and willows of the brook, and rejoice before the Lord your God seven days.
And solemnize it, a feast before the Lord, seven days in the year; it is an everlasting statute unto your generations; in the seventh month shall you solemnize it.
In bowers shall you dwell seven days; everyone who is native-born in Israel shall dwell (or sit) in the bowers:
That your generations may know that I made the children of Israel to dwell under the shadow of clouds when I brought them foorth from the land of Mizraim: I am the Lord your God.
And Mosheh declared the order of the Festivals of the Lord, and taught them to the sons of Israel.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying,
Instruct the sons of Israel to bring to thee oil of olives, pure (and) beaten, to give light, to make the lamps burn continually.
Outside of the veil of the testimony in the tabernacle of ordinance, shall Aharon order it from evening till morning before the Lord continually; an everlasting statute unto your generations.
Upon the pure candelabrum shall be order the lamps before the Lord continually.
And thou shalt take flour, and prepare twelve cakes; two-tenths shall be for one cake.
And thou shalt place them in two rows (orders), six in an order, upon the pure table before the Lord.
And thou shalt put pure frankincense upon (each) order, and it shall be for Bread of Memorial, (Lechem leadkara,) an oblation before the Lord.
From Sabbath day to Sabbath day he shall order it before the Lord continually, from the offerings of the children of Israel, an everlasting statute.
And it shall be for Aharon and for his sons, that they may eat it in the holy place; for it is most sacred to him of the oblations of the Lord by an everlasting statute.
And the son of a woman, a daughter of Israel, but he was the son of a Mizraite man went out among the children of Israel; and the son of the Israelite woman, and a man, a son of Israel, had contention in the camp.
And the son of the woman the daughter of Israel gave expression to the Name, and execrated. And they brought him unto Mosheh. And the name of his mother was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibree, of the tribe of Dan.
And they bound him in the house of confinement, until it should be explained to them by the decree of the Word of the Lord.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Bring forth him who hath imprecated without the camp, and let all who heard lay their hands upon his head, and let all the congregation stone him.
And speak thou with the sons of Israel, saying: Whatever man imprecateth before his God shall bear his guilt,
And be who (so) expresseth the Name of the Lord, dying shall die, and all the congregation shall stone him, as well the stranger as the native-born; when he hath made (blasphemous) expression of the Name, he shall be put to death.
And the man who killeth any soul of man shall die, being put to death.
And he who killeth the life of a beast shall make it good, life for life.
And if a man inflict a blemish on his neighbour, as he hath done, so it shall be done to him:
Bruise for bruise, eye for eye, tooth for tooth as he hath inflicted a blemish upon a man, it shall be done to him.
And he who killeth a beast shall make it good; but he who killeth a man shall be pat to death.
One judgment shall you have, for the stranger as for the native-born shall it be; for I am the Lord your God.
And Mosheh spake with the sons of Israel, and they brought out the blasphemer without the camp, and stoned him with stones; and the sons of Israel did as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh in the mountain of Sinai, saying:
Speak with the children of Israel, and say to them: When you have entered into the land that I will give you, the land shall have rest by an intermission (shemet shemittha) before the Lord.
Six years thou shalt sow thy field, and six years prune thy vineyard, and gather in its fruit;
But in the seventh year the land shall have a respite of rest (neach shemittha), a respite before the Lord; thou shalt not sow thy field nor prune thy vineyard.
The after crop of thy harvest thou shalt not reap, neither make vintage of the grapes which thou mayest have left, it shall be a year of remission to the land.
Yet the remission of the land shall be to thee for food, to thee, and to thy servant, and to thy handmaid, and to thy hireling, and to the sojourner who dwelleth with thee.
And for thy cattle, and for the beasts that are in thy land, shall all the produce of it be for meat.
And number to thee seven (such) years of Release, beast shall make it good And number to thee seven (such) years of Release, which are seven times seven years; and the days of the seven years of release shall be to thee (in all) forty and nine years.
And thou shalt make the sound of the trumpet to pass forth, in the seventh month on the tenth of the month, on the day of the expiations shall you make (the sound of) the trumpet to pass through all your land.
And you shall sanctify the year of the fifty years, and proclaim liberty in all the land to all its inhabitants; it is and it shall be a jubilee to you; and each man shall return to his inheritance, and each to his family shall return.
A jubilee shall that year of fifty years be to you. Ye shall not sow nor reap the after crop, nor make vintage of the remainder,
for it is a jubilee; it shall be sacred to you; of the growth of the field you may eat.
In the year of this jubilee a man shall return to his inheritance.
And when thou sellest a sale to thy neighbour, or buyest of thy neighbour’s hand, you shall not impose, a man upon his brother.
For the number of the years after the (last) jubilee thou shalt buy of thy neighbour; for the number of the years of the produce he shall sell to thee:
According to the multitude of the years thou shalt increase the price, and according to the fewness of the years thou shalt diminish the price; for he selleth thee the amount of the fruits.
And you shall not impose, a man upon his neighbour; but thou shalt fear thy God, for I am the Lord your God.
And you shall perform My statutes, and keep My judgments, and do them, and dwell in the land in security.
And the land shall yield her fruitage, and you shall eat unto the full, and dwell upon it in security.
And if you say, What shall we eat in the seventh year; behold, we are not to sow, nor to gather in our fruit?
I will command My benediction upon you in the sixth year, and it shall produce for three years.
And you shall sow in the eighth year, and eat of the old produce unto the ninth year: until the fruit come in, you shall eat of the old.
But you may not sell the ground absolutely: for the land is Mine, for you are guests and sojourners before Me;
And in all the land of your inheritance you shall let the ground have redemption.
When thy brother hath become poor, and shall have sold his possession, his redeemer who is of kin to him may come and release that which his kinsman has sold.
And if he have no one to release it, and it pertaineth to his hand to find sufficient means for its redemption;
Then let him reckon the years of its sale, and restore the full amount to the man who bought it, that he may return to his possession.
But if his hand find not sufficiency to give him, the (property) sold shall be in the hand of the buyer until the year of Jubilee, and shall go out in the Jubilee, and return to his possession.
And if a man sell a dwelling house in a town surrounded with a wall, he may redeem it within the full year of the sale of it; within that time shall be its redemption.
But if it be not repurchased when the whole year is completed, the house that is in the walled town shall belong absolutely to him who bought it for his generations; it shall not go out at the Jubilee.
But the houses of the villages which have no wall round about them shall be accounted as the field of the land; they may be redeemed, or shall go out at the Jubilee.
And the cities of the Levites, the houses of the cities of their inheritance, may be always redeemed by the Levites (or, be a perpetual redemption for the Levites).
And (so of him) who purchaseth of the Levites, the purchased house in the city of their possession shall go out at the Jubilee; for the houses of the cities of the Levites are their inheritance among the sons of Israel.
But a field in the suburbs of their cities may not be sold; for it is an everlasting possession for them.
And if thy brother hath become poor, and his band waver with thee, then thou shalt strengthen him, and he shall be a guest and a sojourner with thee.
Thou shalt not take from him any usuries, nor interest (increase), but shalt fear thy God, and let thy brother live with thee.
Thou shalt not give him thy money for usury, nor thy food for increase.
I am the Lord your God, who brought you out from the land of Mizraim, to give you the land of Kenaan, and to be your God.
And if thy brother hath become poor with thee, and hath sold himself to thee, thou shalt not make him do the works of slaves,
But as a hired man and an inmate shall he be with thee; until the year of Jubilee shall he serve with thee:
Then shall he go out from being with thee, he and his children with him, and return to his family and to the inheritance of his fathers.
For they are My servants, whom I brought out from the land of Mizraim; they shall not be sold as the selling of bondmen.
Thou shalt not make him serve with rigour, but shalt fear thy God.
Thy bondmen and thy handmaids thou shalt have from the Gentiles who are about thee; from them thou mayest obtain bondmen and handmaids.
And also from the sons of the uncircumcised strangers who sojourn with you, of them and of their children who are with you which are born in the land, you may obtain a possession,
And may make them an inheritance for your children after you to inherit them for a possession to serve them perpetually; but among your brethren the sons of Israel no man shall make his brother labour with hardness.
And if the hand of an uncircumcised sojourner with thee wax strong, and thy brother with thee become poor and sell himself to the uncircumcised sojourner with thee, or to an Aramite of the race of the stranger,
after that he is sold he may have redemption; one of his brethren may redeem him.
Either his father’s brother, or the son of his father’s brother, may redeem him; or anyone of kin to the flesh of his family may redeem him; or if his hand be able, he may redeem himself.
And he shall reckon with his purchaser from the year that he sold himself, unto the year of Jubilee, and the money of his payment shall be according to the number of the years, according to the days of an hireling shall it be with him.
If the years be yet many, according to them shall he give the price of his redemption;
Or if but few years remain unto the year of Jubilee, he shall compute with him, and according to the years shall give for his redemption.
As a hireling year by year shall he be with him; he shall not work him with rigour before thine eyes.
But if he be not redeemed within those years, he shall go out at the year of Jubilee, he and his children with him.
For the sons of Israel are My servants; they are servants whom I brought out of the land of Mizraim: I am the Lord your God.
You shall make to you no idols, nor image, nor set up for you a statue; nor a stone for worship shall you make on your land to worship upon it, for I am the Lord your God.
The days of my Sabbaths you shall keep, and reverence the house of my sanctuary: I am the Lord.
If you walk in My statutes, and observe My commandments and perform them,
Then will I give you rains in their season, and your land shall yield her produce, and the tree of the field its fruit.
And for you the threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the shooting forth of the seed; and you shall eat your bread with sufficiency, and dwell safely in your land.
And I will give peace in the land, and you shall inhabit, and no one (be among you) who disturbeth. And I will make the evil beast to cease from the land, neither shall they who destroy with the sword pass through on your land.
And you shall chase your adversaries, and they shall fall before you by the sword.
And five of you shall chase a hundred, and a hundred of you put a myriad to flight, and your adversaries shall fall before you by the sword.
For I will have regard to you in my Word, to do you good, and will add to you, and multiply you, and establish My covenant with you.
And you shall eat the old of the old, and shall turn out the old before the new.
And I will set My Tabernacle among you, and My Word shall not reject you.
And I will make My Shekinah to dwell among you, and I will be to you Eloha, and you shall be a people before Me.
I am the Lord your God who brought you out from the land of Mizraim, that you should not be bondmen to them; and I brake off the yoke of the Gentiles from you, and brought you into liberty.
But if you will not be obedient to My Word, nor perform all these commandments;
And if you despise My statutes, and your soul abhor My judgments, so as not to do all My commandments, by your making My covenant of no effect, (or, by your changing My covenant,)
I also will do this unto you: I will visit you with trouble, wasting and burning with darkness of eyes, and exhaustion of soul; and ye shall sow your seed in vain for your enemies shall eat it.
And I will reveal My anger against you, and you shall be broken before your enemies; they that hate you shall reign over you, and ye shall flee when no one pursueth you.
And if yet with these ye will not obey My Word, I will add sevenfold chastisement upon your sins.
And I will break the glory of your power, and will make the heavens above you obdurate as iron, to give no rain, and the ground beneath you hard as brass in yielding no fruit;
And your strength shall be put forth in vain, for your ground will not yield its produce, nor the tree of the earth its fruit.
And if you will walk on forwardly before Me, and will not turn again to obey My Word, I will add to bring upon you a stroke sevenfold (heavier) according to your sins.
And I will send the beast of the wilderness against you, and it shall devour you, and consume your cattle, and diminish you, and make your ways desolate.
And if through these (calamities) ye will not be corrected by My Word, but will walk before Me with hardness (of heart),
I also will proceed with you in hardness, and will smite you, even I, sevenfold for your sins.
And I will bring upon you those who kill with the sword, who shall take vengeance upon you in punishment for your transgressions against the words of the law. And you will congregate in your cities; but I will send forth the pestilence among you, and you shall be delivered into the hands of your enemies.
When I shall have broken for you the support of food, ten women will prepare your bread in one oven, and return your bread by weight, and you will eat, but will not be satisfied.
And if with this you will not be obedient to My Word, but will walk before me with obstinacy,
I will proceed with you with strengthened anger, and will chastise you, even I, sevenfold for your sins.
And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your daughters will you eat.
And I will destroy your high places, and cut down your images, and will throw your carcases upon the carcases of your idols, and My Word shall abhor you.
And I will make your cities a waste, and lay waste your sanctuary, and accept no more the offering of your congregation.
And I will make your country a wilderness, and your enemies who will dwell in it shall spread desolation upon it.
And I will disperse you among the nations, and draw out after you them who kill with the sword, and your country shall be a desert and your cities a waste.
Then shall the land enjoy her repose all the days in which it shall be a desert, and you be in the land of your enemies: so shall the land repose, and enjoy her remission:
All the days of its desolateness it shall rest; because it did not rest in your times of intermission, when you were inhabitants upon it.
And to the heart of those of you who are left in the land of their enemies will I send brokenness, and they shall flee at the sound of a falling leaf; they shall flee as flying from before those who kill with the sword, and fall, while no man pursueth.
They shall thrust, one man against his brother, as (fugitives) from before them who destroy with the sword, while no one is pursuing and ye shall have no power against your adversaries;
And ye shall perish among the nations, and the land of your enemies shall consume you.
And they who are left of shall pine away in your sins, in their adversaries’ land, and for their sins, also, the evil deeds of their fathers which their own hands hold fast, shall they pine away.
But, if they will confess their sins, and the sins of their fathers, and their falseness with which they have acted falsely before My Word, and that they have walked before me in obduracy,
(while) I also have dealt against them with sharpness, and brought them into the land of their enemies; when then their stout heart shall be broken, and they concur with (the punishment of) their sins,
I will remember my covenant with Jacob, and my covenant with Izhak, and also my covenant with Abraham will I remember, and I will remember the land.
But the land shall be left by them, and shall enjoy her repose while made desolate for them, and they shall receive (the punishment of) their sins; curses instead of blessings will I have brought upon them who had cast away My judgments, and whose soul had abhorred My statutes.
Yet, even in the land of their enemies I will not strike them down, nor cast them away to consume them utterly, and to make My covenant with them to change; for I am the Lord their God.
But I will remember the former covenant with them whom I brought out of the land of Mizraim in the eyes of the nations, that I might be their God. I am the Lord.
These are the statutes and judgments and laws which the Lord appointed between His Word and the sons of Israel, in the mountain of Sinai, by the hand of Mosheh.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with the sons of Israel, and say to them: When a man setteth apart a votive offering, (it shall be) by estimation of the life before the Lord.
If it be the valuation for a male from twenty years to sixty years old, the valuation shall be fifty shekels of silver, in the shekel of the sanctuary.
And if a female, the valuation shall be thirty shekels.
And if the age be from five years to twenty years, the valuation for a male shall be twenty shekels, and for a female ten shekels.
And if the age be from a month unto five years, the valuation for a male shall be twenty shekels, and for a female ten shekels. And if the age be from a month unto five years, the valuation for a male shall be five shekels of silver, and for a female three shekels of silver shall be the valuation.
But if (the age) be sixty years and upwards, for a male the valuation shall be fifteen shekels, and for a female ten shekels.
But if he be too poor (for the sum of) his valuation, then he shall stand before the priest, and the priest shall make valuation for him upon the word of that which the hand of him who maketh the vow may possess; so shall the priest make his estimate.
And if it be an animal of which (some portion) will be offered an oblation before the Lord, all that he giveth of it before the Lord shall be sacred;
He shall not alter it or change it, good for bad, or bad for good; and if he will indeed change animal for animal, both it and that for which it is changed shall be sacred.
And if it be any unclean animal, of which none may be offered an oblation before the Lord, he shall present the animal before the priest,
And the priest shall value it, whether good or bad; according to the estimate of the priest so shall it be.
Arid if he will redeem it, then he shall add the fifth upon its value.
And when a man shall sanctify his house, to be consecrated before the Lord, the priest shall value it, whether good or bad; as the priest shall value it, so shall it stand.
And if he who had consecrated it will redeem his house, then let him add the fifth of the price of its value upon it, and it shall be his.
And if a man consecrate a field of his possession before the Lord, its valuation shall be according to (the quantity of) its seed; if sown with barley, a measure shall be (valued at) fifty shekels of silver.
If he consecrate his field from the year of Jubilee, it shall stand according to its value.
But if he consecrate his field after the year of Jubilee, the priest shall reckon the money with him according to the years which remain until the (next) year of Jubilee, and it shall be abated from the valuation.
But if he will redeem the field that he had consecrated, let him add to it a fifth of its valuated price, and it shall be confirmed to him.
But if he will not redeem the field, or if he have sold the field to another man, it shall not be redeemed any more:
But the field, when it would have gone out at the Jubilee, shall be consecrated before the Lord as a field devoted (hekel cherema); the possession of it shall be to the priest.
And if a man will consecrate before the Lord a field which he hath bought, and which is not of the fields of his inheritance,
then the priest shall reckon the sum (receipt) of its value until the year of Jubilee, and he shall give the price of it in that day, a holy thing before the Lord.
In the year of Jubilee the field shall return unto him who sold it, to whom the possession of the land had belonged.
And every valuation shall be in the shekel of the sanctuary, twenty maheen before the Lord.
Moreover, the first-born among cattle which is to be a firstling, before the Lord, no man may consecrate, whether ox or sheep; it is the Lord’s already.
And if it be an unclean animal, then he shall redeem it according to its valuation, and add one fifth thereto: or if it be not redeemed, then it shall be sold according to its valuation.
Nevertheless, no devoted thing which a man shall have devoted before the Lord of all that he hath of man or of beast and of the field of his possession may be sold or redeemed; every devoted thing is most sacred before the Lord.
No devoted one who is devoted (or accursed) of men, (as the criminal doomed to death,) shall be redeemed; being slain, he shall be killed.
And all the tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the land or of the fruit of the tree, is the Lord’s; it is sacred before the Lord.
But if a man will redeem any of his tithe, a fifth shall be add upon it.
And every tithing of oxen or sheep, whatever passeth under the tithing rod, shall be sacred before the Lord.
He shall not choose between the good and bad, neither shall he change it. But if he will commute it, both it and that for which it was exchanged shall be consecrate, and not be redeemed.
These are the commandments which the Lord commanded Mosheh for the children of Israel, in the mountain of Sinai.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh in the wilderness of Sinai, in the tabernacle of ordinance, on the first of the second month, in the second year of their coming out from the land of Mizraim, saying:
Take the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel after their kindreds, and after the house of their fathers, with the number of their names, every male by their capitations:
From a son of twenty years and upwards, everyone who can go forth to war in Israel, thou and Aharon number them by their hosts.
And with you let there be a man of each tribe, a man who is chief of the house of his fathers.
And these are the names of the men who shall stand with you. Of Reuben, Elizur bar Shedeur;
of Shemeon, Shelumiel bar Zuri-Shaddai;
Of Jehudah, Nachshon bar Aminadab;
Of Issakar, Nethanel bar Zuar;
Of Zebulon, Eliab bar Chelon;
Of the Beni-Joseph, of Ephraim, Elishama bar Amihud; of Menasheh, Gamliel bar Pheda-Zur;
Of Benyamin, Abidan bar Gideoni;
Of Dan, Achiezer bar Amishaddai;
Of Asher, Phagiel bar Akran;
Of Gad, Eljasaph bar Dehuel;
Of Naphtali, Achira bar Enan.
These were the called ones of the congregation, princes of the tribes of their fathers, chiefs of the thousands of Israel were they.
And Mosheh and Aharon took these men who were expressed by their names;
And they assembled all the congregation on the first of the second month, and they declared their pedigrees according to the house of their fathers, with the number of their names from twenty years old and upwards, by their polling.
As the Lord commanded Mosheh, he numbered them in the wilderness of Sinai.
And the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel, by their generations and their families, according to the house of their fathers, with the number of their names, by their polls; every male from twenty years old and upward, all going forth in the host:
Of the tribe of Reuben were numbered forty and six thousand and five hundred.
Of the sons of Shemeon, by their generations and their families and the house of their fathers, were numbered, by the number of their names, according to their polls, every male from twenty years old and upwards, everyone going forth in the host;
Of the tribe of Shemeon, were numbered fifty and nine thousand and three hundred.
Of the sons of Gad, the generations of the families of the house of their fathers, according to the number of their names from twenty years old and upwards, everyone going forth in the host;
Of the tribe of Gad, were numbered forty and five thousand and six hundred and fifty.
Of the sons of Jehudah, the generations of the families of the house of their fathers, by the number of their names, from twenty years old and upwards, everyone going forth in the host;
Of the tribe of Jehudah, were numbered seventy and four thousand and six hundred.
Of the sons of Issakar, the generations of the families of the house of their fathers, by the number of their names, from twenty years old and upwards, everyone going forth in the host;
Of the tribe of Issakar, were numbered fifty and four thousand and four hundred.
Of the tribe of Zebulon, the generations of the families of the house of their fathers, by the number of their names, from a son of twenty years and upward, everyone going forth in the host;
Of the tribe of Zebulon, were numbered fifty and seven thousand and four hundred.
Of the sons of Joseph, the generations of the Beni-Ephraim by the kindreds of the house of their fathers, in the number of their names, from a son of twenty years and upwards, everyone going forth in the host;
Of the tribe of Ephraim, forty thousand and five hundred.
The generations of the Beni Menasheh by the kindreds of the house of their fathers, in the number of their names, from a son of twenty years and upwards, everyone going forth in the host;
Of the tribe of Menasheh, were numbered thirty and two thousand and two hundred.
The generations of the sons of Benyamin, by the kindreds of the house of their fathers, in the number of their names, from a son of twenty years and upward, everyone going forth in the host;
Of the tribe of Benyamin, were numbered thirty and five thousand and four hundred.
The generations of the Beni Dan, by the kindreds of the house of their fathers, in the number of their names, from a son of twenty years and upward, everyone going forth in the host;
Of the tribe of Dan, were numbered sixty and two thousand and seven hundred.
Of the generations or the Beni Asher, by the kindreds of the house of their fathers, in the number of their names, from a son of twenty years and upward, everyone going forth in the host;
Of the tribe of Asher, were numbered forty and one thousand and five hundred.
The generations of the sons of Naphtali, by the kindreds of the house of their fathers, in the number of their names, from a son of twenty years and upwards, everyone going forth in the host;
Of the tribe Naphtali, were numbered fifty and three thousand and four hundred.
These were the numbered ones whom Mosheh and Aharon, and the twelve men, the princes of Israel, did number, severally, according to the house of their fathers.
And all those who were numbered of the Beni Israel according to the house of their fathers, from a son of twenty years and upward, everyone going forth in the host of Israel;
All the numbered ones were six hundred and three thousand and five hundred and fifty.
But the Levites, by the tribe of their fathers, were not numbered among them.
And the Lord had spoken with Mosheh, saying:
Only the tribe of Levi thou shalt not number, nor take the account of them among the sons of Israel.
But thou shalt appoint the Levites over the tabernacle of the testimony, and over all its vessels, and over all that belongeth to it: and they shall carry the tabernacle and all its vessels, and serve it; and they shall encamp round about the tabernacle.
And when the tabernacle is to go forward, the Levites shall take it apart; and when the tabernacle is to be stationary, the Levites shall set it up; but the stranger who cometh nigh shall be put to death.
And the sons of Israel shall encamp every man upon his own dwelling-place, and every man by his standard, according to their hosts.
But the Levites shall dwell round about the tabernacle of the testimony, that there may not be wrath upon the congregation of the sons of Israel; and the Levites shall watch the watching of the tabernacle of testimony.
And the sons of Israel did according to all that the Lord commanded Mosheh, so did they.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh and with Aharon, saying:
Every man (shall encamp) by his standard, by the ensign of the house of their fathers shall the sons of Israel encamp.
Over against the tabernacle of ordinance shall they encamp round about. The standard of the camp of Jehudah shall they pitch, according to their hosts, eastward toward the sunrise: and the chief of the sons of Jehudah is Nachshon bar Aminadab.
And his host, and the number of them, seventy and four thousand and six hundred.
And they who pitch next by him shall be the tribe of Issakar; and the chief of the sons of Issakar, Nethanel bar Zuar;
And his host, and the numbered of it, fifty and four thousand and four hundred.
The tribe of Zebulon, and the chief of the sons of Zebulon, Eliab bar Chelon.
And his host, and the numbered of them, fifty and seven thousand and four hundred.
All that were numbered of the camp of Jehudah, a hundred and eighty and six thousand and four hundred, by their hosts: they shall go forward in front.
The standard of the camp of Reuben (shall be) to the south, by their hosts: and the chief of the Beni Reuben, Elizur bar Shedeur.
And his host, and the numbered of it, forty and six thousand and five hundred.
And they who pitch by him shall be the tribe of Shemeon; and the chief of the Beni Shemeon, Shelumiel bar Zuri-Shaddai;
And his host, and the numbered of them, fifty and nine thousand and three hundred.
And the tribe of Gad, and the chief of the Beni Gad, Eljasaph bar Rehuel;
And his host, and the numbered of them, forty and five thousand six hundred and fifty.
All who were numbered of the camp of Reuben, a hundred and fifty and one thousand four hundred and fifty, by their hosts: they shall go forward secondly.
But the tabernacle of ordinance shall be taken forward with the camp of the Levites, in the midst of the camp: as they encamp, so shall they go onward, every man in his place, by their standard.
The standard of the camp of Ephraim, by their hosts, shall be to the west: and the chief of the Beni-Ephraim, Elishama bar Ammihud.
And his host and their numbered ones, forty thousand and five hundred.
And they who shall be next by him shall be the tribe of Menasheh: and the chief of the Beni Menasheh, Gamliel bar Phedazur.
And his host, and the numbered thereof, thirty and two thousand and two hundred.
And the tribe of Benyamin, and the chieftain of the sons of Benyamin, Abidan bar Gideoni:
And his host, and the numbered thereof, thirty and five thousand and four hundred.
All the numbered of the camp of Ephraim were a hundred and eight thousand and one hundred, by their hosts: and they went forward thirdly.
The standard of the camp of Dan (shall be) to the north, by their hosts; and the chieftain of the Beni Dan, Achiezer bar Ammi-Shaddai.
And his host, and the numbered thereof, sixty and two thousand and seven hundred.
And those who encamp by him shall be the tribe of Asher; and the chieftain of the Beni Asher, Phagiel bar Akran.
And his host, and the numbered of it, forty and one thousand and five hundred.
And the tribe of Naphtali, and the chief of the Beni Naphtali, Achira bar Enan:
And his host, and the numbered thereof, fifty and three thousand and four hundred.
All who were numbered of the camp of Dan, a hundred and fifty and seven thousand and six hundred: they shall go hindmost by their standards.
These are they who were numbered of the sons of Israel, by the house of their fathers; all who were numbered in the camps by their hosts, six hundred and three thousand five hundred and fifty.
But the Levites were not numbered among the sons of Israel, as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And the sons of Israel did according to all which the Lord commanded Mosheh: so did they encamp by their standards, and so went they forward every man by his family, and by the house of his fathers.
And these are the generations of Aharon and Mosheh in the day that the Lord spake with Mosheh in the mountain of Sinai.
And these; are the names of the sons of Aharon. His firstborn, Nadab; and Abihu, Elazar, and Ithamar.
These are the names of the sons of Aharon, the priests, who were consecrated that their oblations might be offered, (and that they might) minister.
But Nadab and Abihu died before the Lord; in their offering the strange fire before the Lord in the wilderness of Sinai: and they had no children. And Elazar and Ithamar ministered before Aharon their father.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Bring the tribe of Levi near, and appoint them before Aharon the priest, that they may minister with him.
And they shall keep the watch and the charge of all the congregation by the tabernacle of ordinance to perform the service of the tabernacle.
And they shall keep all the vessels of the tabernacle of ordinance, and the charge of the sons of Israel to perform the service of the tabernacle.
And thou shalt give the Levites unto Aharon, and to his sons; they are delivered and given to him from the sons of Israel.
And thou shalt appoint Aharon and his sons, that they may keep their priesthood; but the stranger who cometh near shall be put to death.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
And I, behold, I have brought near the Levites from among the sons of Israel instead of every firstborn that openeth the womb of the sons of Israel; and the Levites shall minister before Me.
For every firstborn is Mine; on the day that I slew every firstborn in the land of Mizraim, I sanctified before Me every firstborn in Israel from man to animal; they are Mine: I am the Lord.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh in the wilderness of Sinai, saying:
Number the sons of Levi, after the house of their fathers, by their families; every male from a month old and upward shalt thou number them.
And Mosheh numbered them according to the word of the Lord, as he had been commanded.
And these were the sons of Levi by their names: Gershon and Kehath and Merari.
And these are the names of the Beni-Gershon after their families: Lebni and Shemei.
And the Beni Kehath after their families: Amram and Izhar, Hebron and Uzziel.
And the Beni-Merari by their families, Mahali and Mushi; these are the families of the Levites after the house of their fathers.
Of Gershon were the family of Libni and the family of Shemei; these are the families of Gershon.
Those that were numbered of them, every male from the son of a month and upward, the number of them was seven thousand and five hundred.
The families of Gershon shall encamp behind the tabernacle, westward:
And the Rab of the house of the fathers of Gershon, Eljasaph bar Lael.
And the charge of the Beni-Gershon in the tabernacle of ordinance (shall be) the tent and its covering, and the hanging of the door of the tabernacle of ordinance;
And the curtains of the court, and the hanging of the gate of the court which is by the tabernacle, and by the altar round about, and the cords of it, for all its service.
And of Kehath was the family of Amram, and the family of Izhar, and the family or Hebron, and the family of Uzziel: these are the families of Kehath.
According to the number of all the males, from the son of a month and upward, eight thousand and six hundred, keeping the charge of the sanctuary.
The families of the Beni Kehath shall encamp by the side of the tabernacle, southward.
And the Rab of the house of the fathers of the Kehath families (shall be) Elizaphan bar Uzziel.
And their charge shall be the ark, and the table, and the candelabrum, and the altar, and the vessels of the sanctuary with which they minister, and the tent, (or hanging, Sam. Vers., “covering,”) and all (that pertaineth to) the service thereof.
And the chief (armarkella) who is appointed over the chiefs (rabbins) of the Levites is Elazar bar Aharon the priest: under his hand shall they be appointed who have the charge of the keeping of the sanctuary.
Of Merari, the families of Mahli and the families of Mushi.
And the numbers of them, according to the numbers of all the males, from the son of a month and upwards, six thousand and two hundred.
And the Rab of the house of the fathers of the Merari families, Zuriel bar Abichael; and they shall encamp on the side of the tabernacle northward.
And the charge for the custody of the sons of Merari shall be the boards of the tabernacle, and its bars, and its pillars, and its sockets, and all its vessels, and whatever (pertaineth) to its service;
And the pillars of the court round about, and their sockets, their pins, and their cords.
But they who encamp before the tabernacle eastward, even before the tabernacle of ordinance toward the sunrise, shall be Mosheh, and Aharon and his sons, keeping charge of the sanctuary, to watch over the children of Israel; and the stranger who cometh near shall be put to death.
All who were numbered of the Levites whom Mosheh and Aharon numbered by the word of the Lord, by their families, every male, from the son of a month and upward, twenty and two thousand.
And the Lord spake unto Mosheh, Number all the firstborn males of the children of Israel, from the son of a month upward, and the number of their names.
And thou shalt take the Levites before me, I am the Lord, instead of all the firstborn of the sons of Israel; and the cattle of the Levites instead of all the firstlings of the cattle of the Beni Israel.
And Mosheh numbered, as the Lord commanded him, all the firstborn of the sons of Israel.
And all the firstborn males, by the number of their names, from the son of a month and upward by their numbers, were twenty and two thousand two hundred and seventy and three.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Take the Levites instead of all the firstborn of the Beni Israel, and the cattle of the Levites instead of their cattle; and the Levites shall minister before Me: I am the Lord.
And of the redeemed ones of the two hundred and seventy and three of the sons of Israel who are more than the Levites,
Thou shalt take of each five shekels, by poll, in the shekel of the sanctuary shalt thou take; twenty mahin are a shekel.
And thou shalt give the silver of the redeemed who exceed them to Aharon and his sons.
And Mosheh took the silver of the redeemed who were more than the redeemed by the Levites.
Of the firstborn of the Beni Israel he took the silver, a thousand and three hundred and sixty-five shekels, in the shekel of the sanctuary.
And Mosheh gave the silver of the redeemed ones to Aharon and to his sons, by the Word of the Lord, as the Lord had commanded Mosheh.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh and with Aharon, saying:
Take the reckoning of the Beni Kehath from among the sons of Levi by the house of their fathers,
From thirty years and upward, unto fifty years; all that come to the host, to do the work of the tabernacle of ordinance.
And this (shall be) the service of the Beni Kehath in the tabernacle of ordinance, the Holy of Holies.
And Aharon and his sons shall enter in, what time the camp is to proceed; and they shall unloose the veil that is hung, and cover therewith the ark of the testimony,
And put over it a covering of hyacinthine skins, and overspread it with a wrapper, wholly purple, having inset its staves.
And upon the table of the presence bread they shall spread a wrapper of purple, and on it put the bowls and mortars, and the measures and cups for libations, and the bread that is ever on it;
And overspread it with a wrapper of scarlet, and cover it with a covering of hyacinth skins, having inset its staves.
And they shall take a purple wrapper, and cover the candelabrum of the light, and its lamps, and its tongs, and its snuff dishes, and all the vessels of the service by which they serve it;
And put it and all its vessels into a covering of hyacinthine skins, and set it upon a bar.
And upon the golden altar they shall spread a purple wrapper, and cover it with a covering of hyacinth skins, and fix its staves.
And they shall take all the vessels of the ministry with which they minister in the sanctuary, and put them in a cloth of purple, and cover them with a covering of hyacinth skins, and set them upon bars.
And they shall collect the cinders from the altar, and spread upon it a wrapper of crimson,
And put thereon all its vessels by which they minister upon it; censers, fleshhooks, shovels, and basins; all the vessels of the altar; and spread over it a covering of hyacinthine skins, and inset its staves.
And when Aharon and his sons have completed to cover up the sanctuary, and all the vessels of the sanctuary in the moving of the camp, the sons of Kehath shall go in to carry (them), but they shall not touch the holy things (themselves), lest they die; but these are the burden of the sons of Kehath in the tabernacle of ordinance.
And that delivered unto Elazar bar Aharon the priest (shall be) the oil for the light, and the aromatic incense, and the continual mincha, and the anointing oil, (with) the charge of all the tabernacle, and whatever belongeth to the sanctuary and its vessels.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh and with Aharon, saying:
Cut not off the tribe of the family of Kehath from among the Levites;
But do this to them, that they may live and not die, in their approach to the Holy of Holies: Let Aharon and his sons go in, and appoint each man his service and his burden.
But they shall not go in to see, when the vessels of the sanctuary are covered, lest they die.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Take the account of the sons of Gershon also, after the house of their fathers, by their families;
From thirty years and upwards to fifty years shalt thou number them, of all who come by companies to perform service in the tabernacle of ordinance.
This is the service or the family of Gershon, to serve and to carry.
And they shall carry the curtains of the tabernacle, and the tent of the tabernacle of ordinance, its covering, and the covering of hyacinth which is over it above, and the hanging for the door of the tabernacle of ordinance;
And the curtains of the court, and the hanging that is at the entrance of the court, which is by the tabernacle and by the altar round about, and their cords, and all the instruments of their service; and with all that is delivered to them they shall perform their service.
By the word of Aharon and his sons shall be all the service of the Beni-Gershon, with all their burdens, and all their employment; and you shall appoint them in charge with all their burdens.
This is the service of the family of the Beni-Gershon in the tabernacle of ordinance, and their charge shall be under the hand of Ithamar bar Aharon the priest.
The sons of Merari number thou after the families of their father’s house;
From a son of thirty years and upward unto fifty years, shalt thou number them, of all who come by companies to perform the service of the tabernacle of ordinance.
And this is the charge of their burthen of all the service in the tabernacle of ordinance; the boards of the tabernacle, and its bars, and its pillars, and their bases;
And the columns of the court round about, their bases, pins, and cords of all the instruments of all their service; and by their names you shall number the instruments of the charge of their burthen.
This is the ministry of the family of the Beni-Merari, after all their service in the tabernacle of ordinance under the hand of Ithamar bar Aharon the priest.
And Mosheh and Aharon and the chiefs of the congregation numbered the sons of Kehath, by their families, and by the house of their fathers;
From a son of thirty years and upward to fifty years; everyone who came with the band to the service in the tabernacle of ordinance.
And they who were numbered of them by their families, were two thousand seven hundred and fifty.
These are the numbered of the family of Kehath, everyone serving in the tabernacle of ordinance, whom Mosheh and Aharon numbered upon the Word of the Lord, by the hand of Mosheh.
And the numbered of the sons of Gershon after the families of their father’s house,
from thirty years and upwards to fifty years, everyone who cometh with the band to the service of the tabernacle of ordinance,
even those who were numbered of them by their families of their father’s house, were two thousand six hundred and thirty.
These are the numbered of the Beni-Gershon, everyone who did service in the tabernacle of ordinance, whom Mosheh and Aharon numbered by the mouth of the Word of the Lord.
And the numbered of the Beni-Merari, by the families of their father’s house,
from thirty years and upward to fifty years, all who come by bands to serve in the tabernacle of ordinance,
even they who were numbered by their families, were three thousand and two hundred.
These are they who were numbered in the families of the Beni-Merari, whom Mosheh and Aharon numbered by the mouth of the Word of the Lord, by the hand of Mosheh.
All the numbered ones of the Levites whom Mosheh and Aharon and the chiefs of Israel numbered, by their families, and by the house of their fathers,
From thirty years and upward to fifty years, all who came to minister the ministry of the service, and the work of carrying in the tabernacle of ordinance,
even the numbered of them were eight thousand five hundred and eighty.
Upon the Word of the Lord they were numbered by the hand of Mosheh; every man according to his service and his burthen they were numbered, as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Command the sons of Israel to send away from the camp everyone who is leprous, and everyone who hath an issue, and everyone who is defiled with the pollution of the life of man:
From male to female you, shall send them away, that they defile not their camps; for My Shekinah dwelleth among you.
And the sons of Israel did so; as the Lord spake with Mosheh, so did the sons of Israel.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
When a man or a woman hath committed any of the sins of mankind to prevaricate prevarication before the Lord, and that man hath become guilty;
They shall make confession of the sin which they have committed, and restore the principal of (the property of) the trespass, and add a fifth part thereto, and give to him against whom the sin was committed;
But if the man (hath deceased, or) hath no kinsman unto whom the trespass should be returned, let the trespass be restored before the Lord unto the priest, besides the ram of atonement which shall be offered to atone for him.
And all separated things of all the consecrations of the sons of Israel which are offered by the priest are his.
And the consecrated tenths of every man shall be his, and whatsoever a man giveth unto the priest shall be his.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with the sons of Israel, and say to them: If a man’s wife go astray and prevaricate against him prevarication,
And a man lie with her, and it be hidden from her husband’s eyes, and she be contaminated, and there be no witness against her, and she be not convicted (or apprehended);
But the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife that she hath been defiled; or the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he become jealous of his wife, though she be not defiled;
Then shall the man bring his wife to the priest, and bring her offering for her, a tenth part of three seins of barley flour; he shall pour no oil thereon, nor put frankincense upon it, because it is a mincha of jealousy, a mincha of remembrance, bringing sins to remembrance.
And the priest shall bring her near, and make her stand before the Lord.
And the priest shall take water from the laver in an earthen vessel. And the priest shall take from the dust which is on the floor of the tabernacle, and put it into the water.
And the priest shall make the woman stand before the Lord, and shall uncover the woman’s head, and put the mincha of remembrance, the mincha of jealousy, upon her hands; and in the priest’s hand shall be the bitter waters of cursing.
And the priest shall adjure her, and say to the woman: If no man hath lain with thee, and if thou bast not gone astray to uncleanness (with another) instead of thy husband, be thou unhurt (zakaah, innocent, clean) from these bitter waters of cursing.
But if thou hast gone astray (to another) instead of thy husband, and art defiled; and another man hath lain with thee, besides thy husband,
the priest shall adjure the woman by the oath of the curse; and the priest shall say to the woman: The Lord set thee for a curse and an execration in the midst of thy people, by the Lord making thy thigh to be corrupt, and thy bowels to swell.
And these waters of cursing shall enter thy inside, to make thy bowels to swell, and thy thigh to become corrupt. And the woman shall say, Amen, Amen!
And the priest shall write these maledictions upon a book, and shall wash them out with the bitter waters.
And he shall make the woman to drink the bitter waters of cursing; and the waters of the curse shall enter into her unto bitterness.
And the priest shall take from the woman’s hand the mincha of jealousy; and wave the mincha before the Lord, and offer it upon the altar.
And the priest shall take with a full hand from the mincha the memorial of it, and burn it upon the altar; and afterward the woman shall drink the water.
And when he hath made her drink the water, it shall be that if she hath been defiled and hath wrought perverseness with her husband, the waters of the execration will enter into her with bitterness, and her bowels will swell, and her thigh become corrupt: and the woman shall be for an execration among her people.
But if the woman hath not been defiled, but is innocent, they shall enter harmlessly, and she shall conceive with conception.
This is the law of jealousy, when a woman hath gone astray from her husband,
or when the spirit of jealousy passeth upon a man, and he become jealous of his wife. He shall make the wife stand before the Lord; and the priest shall do for him (according to) all this law.
And the man shall be innocent from guilt, but the woman shall bear her sin.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with the children of Israel, and say to them: When a man or a woman would be separated by a vow of the Nazira, to be devoted before the Lord;
He shall abstain from wine, (whether) new or old; vinegar of new wine or vinegar of old wine he may not drink; neither of anything expressed from grapes may he drink; nor of grapes, either fresh or dried, may he eat.
All the days of his nazirate he may not eat of aught that is produced by the vine (wine tree), from its kernels to its expressed juice.
All the days of his nazir vow a razor shall not pass upon his head; until the days be fulfilled which he should devote before the Lord, he shall be consecrate; he shall let the hair of his head grow.
All the days of his vow before the Lord; he shall come near no dead person:
For his father or his mother, for his brother or his sister, should they die, he shall not make himself unclean; because the consecration of Eloha is upon his head:
All the days of his nazirhood shall he be consecrate before the Lord.
And if anyone with him die suddenly (to him) unawares, and he defile the head of his vow, let him shave his head on the day of his purification, on the seventh day let him shave it:
And on the eighth day let him bring two turtle doves or two young pigeons unto the priest, to the door of the tabernacle of ordinance.
And let the priest make one a sin offering, and one a burnt offering, to atone for him; for that he had sinned by the dead; and let him consecrate his head (anew) on that day.
And he shall devote before the Lord the days of his nazirhood, and bring a lamb of the year for a trespass offering: but the former days have been in vain, because he hath defiled his vow.
And this is the law of the Nazirite on the day that the days of his vow are fulfilled. He shall be brought to the door of the tabernacle of ordinance;
And shall present his oblation before the Lord, a lamb of the year, one unblemished, for a burnt offering, and one ewe lamb of the year, unblemished, for a sin offering; and one ram unblemished for a consecrated oblation;
and a basket of unleavened bread, cakes of flour mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil, their minchas and their libations.
And the priest shall present them before the Lord; and make the sin offering and the burnt offering,
And the ram he shall make a consecrated oblation before the Lord with the basket of unleavened cakes; and the priest shall make the mincha, and the libation therewith.
And let the Nazirite, at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance, shave his consecrated head; and take the hair of his consecrated head and lay it upon the fire which is under the cauldron, for the peace offerings.
And the priest shall take the boiled shoulder of the ram, and one of the unleavened cakes from the basket, and one unleavened wafer, and put (them) upon the hands of the Nazirite after the shaving of his consecration.
And the priest shall uplift them, an elevation before the Lord. It shall be dedicated to the priest, with the breast of the elevation, and the shoulder of the separation; and after that the Nazirite may drink wine.
This is the law of the Nazirite, who hath vowed his oblation before the Lord, for his consecration, besides those which may come to his hand; according to the vow which he hath vowed, so shall he do according to the law of his consecration.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with Aharon and with his sons, saying: Thus shall you bless the children of Israel, and shall say unto them:
The Lord bless thee and keep thee.
The Lord make His Shekinah to shine upon thee, and be merciful to thee.
The Lord turn away His displeasure from thee, and bestow upon thee peace.
And they shall bestow the benediction of My Name upon the sons of Israel, and I will bless them.
And it was on the day when Mosheh had completed to set up the tabernacle, and to anoint it, and to consecrate it, and all its vessels, and had anointed and sanctified them,
That the princes of Israel, heads of the house of their fathers, the chiefs of the tribes, who had been appointed over them who were numbered,
came near, and brought their oblations before the Lord. Six covered wagons and twelve oxen; a wagon for two of the princes, and an ox for each one: and they brought them before the tabernacle.
And the Lord spake to Mosheh, saying:
Take (the waggons) from them, that they may be for the work of the service of the tabernacle of ordinance; and thou shalt give them to the Levites, to each man according to the need of his work.
And Mosheh took the waggons and the oxen, and gave them to the Levites.
Two waggons and four oxen gave he to the sons of Gershon, according to the need of their work;
And four waggons and eight oxen he gave to the sons of Merari, according to the need of their work, by the hand of Ithamar bar Aharon the priest.
But to the sons of Kehath he gave not, because they had the work of the sanctuary, and carried upon their shoulders.
And the princes offered at the dedication (chanucha) of the altar on the day that they anointed it, and the princes presented their oblations before the altar.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, One prince shall offer, on each day of the dedication of the altar.
And he who offered his oblation on the first day was Nachshon bar Aminadab, of the tribe of Jehudah:
And his offering was, one bowl of silver, a hundred and thirty shekels was its weight; one silver vase, seventy shekels in weight, in shekels of the sanctuary; both of them filled with flour, mingled with oil, for a mincha;
One pan (censer) weighing ten shekels; it was of gold, filled with fragrant incense;
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the year for a burnt offering;
One kid of the goats for a sin offering;
And for consecrated oblations, two oxen, five rams, five goats, five lambs of the year. This was the oblation of Nachshon bar Aminadab.
On the second day offered Nethanel bar Zuar, prince of the tribe of Issakar.
He offered his oblation, one silver bowl, a hundred and thirty shekels was its weight; one silver vase, its weight seventy shekels, in the shekels of the sanctuary; both of them filled with flour sprinkled with oil for a mincha;
One pan weighing ten shekels; it was of gold, full of fragrant incense;
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the year for a burnt offering,
One kid of the goats for a sin offering;
And for a sacrifice of consecrated things, two oxen, five rams, five goats, five lambs of the year. This was the oblation of Nethanel bar Zuar.
On the third day, the prince of the Beni Zebulon, Eliab bar Chelon.
His offering, one silver bowl, its weight one hundred and thirty shekels; one silver vase, its weight seventy shekels in the shekels of the sanctuary; both of them filled with flour mingled with oil for a mincha;
One pan weighing ten shekels; it was of gold, and filled with fragrant incense;
One young bullock, one lamb of the year for a burnt offering,
One kid of the goats for a sin offering;
And for consecrated offerings, two oxen, five rams, five goats, five lambs of the year. This was the oblation of Eliab bar Chelon.
On the fourth day the prince of the sons of Reuben, Elizur bar Shedeur.
His offering, one silver bowl, one hundred and thirty shekels its weight, one silver vase, weighing seventy shekels in the shekels of the sanctuary, both of them filled with flour sprinkled with oil for a mincha;
One pan weighing ten shekels; it was of gold, and filled with fragrant incense;
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the year for a burnt offering,
One kid of the goats for a sin offering;
And for the consecrated oblation, two oxen, five rams, five goats, five lambs of the year. This was the oblation of Elizur bar Shedeur.
On the fifth day the prince of the Beni Shemeon, Shelumiel bar Zurishaddai.
His offering, one silver bowl, one hundred and thirty, shekels was its weight, one silver vase, weighing seventy shekels in the shekels of the sanctuary, both of them filled with flour mingled with oil for a mincha;
One pan weighing ten shekels; it was of gold, filled with fragrant incense;
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the year for a burnt offering,
One kid of the goats for a sin offering;
And for consecrated oblations two oxen, five rams, five goats, five lambs of the year. This was the oblation of Shelumiel bar Zurishaddai.
On the sixth day the prince of the sons of Gad, Eljasaph bar Dehuel.
His offering, one silver bowl, its weight one hundred and thirty shekels, one silver vase, weighing seventy shekels in shekels of the sanctuary, both filled with flour sprinkled with oil for a mincha;
One pan weighing ten shekels of gold, full of fragrant incense;
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the year for a burnt offering,
One kid of the goats for a sin offering;
And for consecrated oblations, two oxen, five rams, five goats, five lambs of the year. This was the oblation of Eljasaph bar Dehuel.
On the seventh day the prince of the sons of Ephraim, Elishama bar Ammihud.
His offering, one silver bowl weighing one hundred and thirty shekels, one silver vase weighing seventy shekels in shekels of the sanctuary, both of them filled with flour sprinkled with oil for a mincha;
One pan weighing ten shekels of gold, filled with fragrant incense;
One young bullock, one ram, one Iamb of the year, for a burnt offering;
One kid of the goats for a sin offering;
And for consecrated oblations, two oxen, five rams, five goats, five Iambs of the year. This was the oblation of Elishama bar Ammihud.
On the eighth day the prince of the Beni Menashe, Gamliel bar Phedazur.
His offering, one silver bowl, weighing one hundred and thirty shekels, one silver vase, weighing seventy shekels in shekels of the sanctuary, both of them filled with flour sprinkled with oil for a mincha;
One pan weighing ten shekels of gold, filled with fragrant incense;
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the year, for a burnt offering;
One kid of the goats for a sin offering;
And for consecrated oblations, two oxen, five rams, five goats, five lambs of the year. This was the oblation of Gamliel bar Phedazur.
On the ninth day the prince of the sons of Benyamin, Abidan bar Gideoni.
His oblation, one silver bowl, weighing one hundred and thirty shekels, one silver vase, weighing seventy shekels in shekels of the sanctuary, both of them filled with flour sprinkled with oil for a mincha;
One pall weighing ten shekels of gold, filled with fragrant incense;
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the year, for a burnt offering;
One kid of the goats for a sin offering;
And for consecrated oblations, two oxen, five rams, five goats, five lambs of the year. This was the oblation of Abidan bar Gideoni.
On the tenth day the prince of the sons of Dan, Achiezer bar Amishaddai.
His oblation, one silver bowl, weighing one hundred and thirty shekels, one silver vase, weighing seventy shekels in shekels of the sanctuary, both of them filled with flour sprinkled with oil for a mincha;
One pan weighing ten shekels of gold, filled with fragrant incense;
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the year, for a burnt offering;
One kid of the goats for a sin offering;
And for consecrated oblations, two oxen, five rams, five goats, five lambs of the year. This was the oblation of Achiezer bar Amishaddai.
On the eleventh day the prince of the Beni Asher, Phagiel bar Akran.
His oblation, one silver bowl, weighing one hundred and thirty shekels, one silver vase, weighing seventy shekels in shekels of the sanctuary, both of them filled with flour sprinkled with oil for a mincha;
one pan weighing ten shekels of gold, filled with fragrant incense;
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the year, for a burnt offering;
One kid of the goats for a sin offering;
And for consecrated oblations two oxen, five rams, five goats, five lambs of the year. This was the oblation of Phagiel bar Akran.
On the twelfth day, the prince of the Beni Naphtali, Achira bar Enan.
His oblation, one silver bowl, weighing one hundred and thirty shekels, one silver vase, weighing seventy shekels in shekels of the sanctuary, both of them filled with flour sprinkled with oil for a mincha;
One pan weighing ten shekels of gold, filled with fragrant incense;
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the year, for a burnt offering;
One kid of the goats for a sin offering;
And for consecrated oblations two oxen, five rams, five goats, five lambs of the year. This was the oblation of Achira bar Enan.
This was the dedication of the altar, on the day that they anointed it. By the princes of Israel (were offered) twelve silver bowls, twelve silver vases, twelve golden censers;
One hundred and thirty shekels was the weight of one silver bowl, and seventy that of one silver vase: all the silver vessels weighed two thousand four hundred shekels in shekels of the sanctuary.
The golden censers were twelve, full of fragrant incense, weighing each ten shekels; the weight of the censers was, in shekels of the sanctuary, all the gold of the censers one hundred and twenty (shekels).
All the bullocks for the burnt offering were twelve bullocks, rams twelve, lambs of the year twelve, and their minchas. And for the sin offering twelve kids of the goats.
And all the oxen for consecrated victims were twenty-four oxen, rams sixty, goats sixty, lambs of the year sixty. This was the Dedication of the Altar after they had anointed it.
And when Mosheh had gone into the tabernacle of ordinance to speak with Him, then heard he the Voice of Him who spake with him from above the Mercy Seat over the Ark of the Testimony, between the two Kerubaia; and He spake unto him.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with Aharon, and say to him: When thou dost kindle the lamps upon the face of the candelabrum, the seven lamps shall be burning (together).
And Aharon did so: on the face of the candelabrum he made the lamps burn, as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And this work of the candelabrum was of beaten gold, from its shaft to its lilies, beaten (gold) according to the pattern which the Lord had showed to Mosheh, so had he made the candelabrum.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Bring near the Levites from among the sons of Israel, and purify them.
And thus shalt thou do to them to purify them. Sprinkle upon them the water of purification, and make the razor to pass over all their flesh, and let them wash their vestments, and they shall be clean.
And let them take a young bullock, and his mincha of flour, sprinkled with oil; and a second bullock, a young bullock shalt thou take, for the sin offering.
And bring the Levites before the tabernacle of ordinance, and assemble all the congregation of the children of Israel.
And thou shalt bring the Levites before the Lord; and the sons of Israel shall lay their hands upon the Levites;
And Aharon shall offer the Levites as an elevation before the Lord from the sons of Israel, that they may perform the service of the Lord.
And the Levites shall lay their hands upon the head of the bullocks, and make the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, before the Lord, to make an atonement for the Levites.
And thou shalt set the Levites before Aharon, and before his sons, and offer them up (as) an elevation before the Lord.
And thou shalt thus separate the Levites from among the sons of Israel, that the Levites may minister before Me.
And afterward shall the Levites enter, to minister (in) the tabernacle of ordinance; for thou wilt have purified them, and offered them up as an elevation.
For by a separation are they separated unto Me from among the sons of Israel, instead of every firstborn who openeth the womb of all the children of Israel have I taken them (to be) before Me.
For Mine are all the firstborn of the children of Israel, of man and of beast: in the day that I slew all the firstborn in the land of Mizraim did I sanctify them before Me.
And I have taken the Levites instead of all the firstborn of the sons of Israel.
And the Levites I have given as a gift unto Aharon and to his sons, from among the sons of Israel, to minister the service for the children of Israel in the tabernacle of ordinance, and to make atonement for the children of Israel, that death may not be among the children of Israel when the children of Israel come nigh to the sanctuary.
And Mosheh and Aharon, and all the congregation of the sons of Israel, did unto the Levites according to all that the Lord commanded Mosheh for the Levites; so did the sons of Israel to them.
And the Levites were purified, and they cleansed their raiment, and Aharon offered them (as) an elevation before the Lord; and Aharon made an atonement for them to purify them.
And afterwards the Levites went in to perform their service in the tabernacle of ordinance before Aharon and before his sons; as the Lord had commanded Mosheh concerning the Levites, so did they unto them.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
This is (the law) of the Levites: from a son of five-and-twenty years and upward he shall come with the bands in their service (in the) tabernacle of ordinance,
and from fifty years old he shall return from the company of the ministers, and work no longer;
But minister with his brethren at the tabernacle of ordinance in keeping the custody; yet the service he shall not perform: so shalt thou do with the Levites in their charge.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, in the wilderness of Sinai, in the second year of their going forth from the land of Mizraim, in the first month, saying:
Let the children of Israel perform the Pascha in its time.
On the fourteenth day of this month, between the suns, they shall perform it in its time according to all the rites of it, and according to all the form of it shall they do it.
And Mosheh spake with the sons of Israel to perform the Pascha.
And they performed the Pascha in Nisan, on the fourteenth day of the month, between the suns, in the wilderness of Sinai; according to all that the Lord had commanded Mosheh, so did the children of Israel.
But there were men who were unclean by defilement, (having touched) the body of a (dead) man, and they could not make the Pascha on that day; and they came before Mosheh and before Aharon that day,
And the men said to him: We are unclean, by the defilement of the life of a man, and are, therefore, restrained from offering the oblation of the Lord in its time among the sons of Israel.
And Mosheh said to them, Wait, till I shall have heard what will be commanded from before the Lord about your case.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with the sons of Israel, saying: If any man be unclean by the defilement of the life of a man, or be in the way, afar off’ from you or from your dwellings, he shall perform the Pascha before the Lord
in the second month, on the fourteenth day, between the suns, they shall perform it; with unleavened (bread) and with bitter (herbs) shall they eat it:
They shall not leave of it till the morning, and a bone of it shall not be broken; according to all the rites of the Pascha shall they perform it.
But the man who is clean, and is not upon a journey, and forbeareth to perform the Pascha, that man shall be cut off from his people: because he hath not offered the Lord’s oblation in its time, that man shall bear his guilt.
And if a stranger sojourn with you, and will perform the Pascha before the Lord, according to the rites of the Pascha, and according to the forms thereof, so shall he do: one statute shall you have, for the stranger, and for the native of the land.
And on the day that the Tabernacle was erected the Cloud covered the Tabernacle of the Testimony; and at evening there was upon the Tabernacle as the vision of Fire, until the morning.
So was it continually; the Cloud covered it (by day), and the appearance of the Fire in the night.
And according as the Cloud was uplifted above the Tabernacle, the sons of Israel afterward went on; and at the place where the Cloud rested, there did the sons of Israel encamp.
By the Word of the Lord the sons of Israel journeyed, and by the Word of the Lord they encamped; all the days that the Cloud rested, they remained.
However long the time the Cloud was upon the Tabernacle, (however) many the days, the sons of Israel kept the watch of the Word of the Lord, and journeyed not.
And if the Cloud was over the tabernacle a number of days, according to the Word of the Lord they remained, and by the Word of the Lord they went forward.
Or if the Cloud was (over the Tabernacle only) from the evening till the morn, and the Cloud was uplifted in the morning, they went forward; whether (in the) days or nights the Cloud was uplifted, they went forward;
Whether it was two days, or a month, or a longer season, (time by time,) the Cloud was in staying upon the Tabernacle to remain thereon, the children of Israel remained, and went not forward; but at the lifting up of it they proceeded.
By the Word of the Lord they abode, and by the Word of the Lord they proceeded; they observed the watch of the Word of the Lord, upon the Word of the Lord through Mosheh.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Make thee two trumpets of silver, beaten shalt thou make them, and they shall be for thee to convoke the assembly, and to move forward the host.
And they shall blow with them, and bring all the congregation together unto thee, at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance.
And if they blow with but one, the chiefs, the heads of thousands of Israel, shall gather together to thee.
When you blow with a full note, (or alarm,) the host that encampeth eastward shall go forward,
and when you blow with the second alarm, the hosts that encamp southward shall go on; an alarm shall they blow for their journeys.
But when the congregation is to be gathered together, you shall blow, but not with the alarm.
And the sons of Aharon, the priests, are to blow with the trumpets; and this shall be to you a perpetual statute for your generations.
And when you enter upon the battle fight for your country, with the oppressors who oppress you, ye shall blow the alarm with the trumpets, that your remembrance may come for good before the Lord your God, (and) that you may be delivered from them who hate you.
And on the day of your rejoicing, and on your solemnities, and at the beginning of your months, ye shall blow with the trumpets over your burnt offerings, and over your consecrated victims; and they shall be for a memorial before your God: I am the Lord your God.
And it was in the second year, in the second month, on the twentieth day of the month, that the Cloud was uplifted from above the Tabernacle of the Testimony,
And the children of Israel went forward upon their journeys from the wilderness of Sinai; and the Cloud rested in the wilderness of Pharan.
And they went forward at the first by the Word of the Lord through Mosheh.
In the first place the standard of the camp of the Beni Jehudah went forward by their hosts; and over the host was Nachshon bar Aminadab.
And over the host of the tribe of the Beni Issakar, Nethanel bar Zuar.
And over the host of the tribe of the Beni Zebulun, Eliab bar Chelon.
And the tabernacle was taken down, and the sons of Gershon went forward, and the sons of Merari, carrying the tabernacle.
And the standard (or order) of the camp of Reuben went forward by their hosts, and over its host was Elizur bar Shedeur:
And over the host of the tribe of the Beni Shemeun was Shelumiel bar Zurishaddai.
And over the host of the Beni Gad was Eljasaph bar Dehuel.
And the sons of Kehath went forward, carrying the sanctuary, and (the Gershonites and sons of Merari) set up the tabernacle against they came.
And the standard of the camps of the Beni-Ephraim went forward by their hosts, and over his host was Elishama bar Amihud.
And over the host of the tribe of the Beni Menasheh was Gamliel bar Phedazur.
And over the host of the tribe of the Beni Benyamin, Abidan bar Gideoni.
And the standard of the camps of the Beni Dan went forward collecting each camp according to their hosts; and over his host was Achiezer bar Amishaddai.
And over the host of the tribe of the Beni Asher, Phagiel bar Akran;
And over the host of the tribe of the Beni Naphtali, Achira bar Enan.
These are the journeys of the sons of Israel, and according to their hosts they went forward.
And Mosheh said unto Hobab bar Reuel, the Midianite, the father-in-law of Mosheh, We are journeying to the place of which the Lord hath said, I will give it unto you: come thou with us, and we will do thee good; for the Lord hath spoken, to bring good upon Israel.
But he said to him, I will not go (with you), but to my country and to my kindred will I go.
And he said, Leave us not, I beseech thee; for thou knowest how we should encamp in the wilderness; and the great things that will be done for us thou wilt see with thine eyes.
And it shall be that if thou wilt go with us, with the good by which the Lord shall do us good, will we do good to thee.
And from the mountain on which the glory of the Lord had been revealed they went forward, journeying three days; and the ark of the Lord’s covenant went before them, three days’ journey, to provide for them a place of encampment.
And the Cloud of Glory of the Lord overspread them by day as they went forth from their encampments.
And when the ark went forward, Mosheh said: Reveal thyself, O Lord, that Thine enemies may be scattered, and Thy adversaries may flee before thee.
And when it rested, he said: Return, O Lord, and dwell in Thy glory among the multitudes of the thousands of Israel.
But the people were discontented (or, were fomenting evil) before the Lord; and it was heard before the Lord, and His anger was strongly moved, and a fire was kindled against them from before the Lord, and it consumed the outskirts of the camp.
And the people cried unto Mosheh, and Mosheh prayed before the Lord, and the fire was subdued.
And Mosheh called the name of that place Enkindlement; because the fire had been kindled against them from before the Lord.
And the mixed multitude who were among them demanded with demand; and the children of Israel also turned, and wept, and said: Who will feed us with flesh?
We remember the fish which we ate in Mizraim freely, the cucumbers and melons, the cresses and onions and garlick.
But now our soul longeth, yet there is nothing before our eyes but manna.
Now the manna was like the seed of coriander, and its appearance as the appearance of bedilcha.
And the people went about and gathered; and he who would ground it in mills, or he who would beat it in the mortar, and they dressed it in the pan, and made cakes of it, and its taste was like the taste of a confection of oil.
And when the dew came down upon the camp at night, the manna descended upon it.
And Mosheh heard the people lamenting with their families, a man at the door of his tent. And the displeasure of the Lord grew very strong, as in the eyes of Mosheh it was evil.
And Mosheh said before the Lord, Wherefore hast Thou done painfully to Thy servant, and why have I not found mercy before Thee, that Thou hast put the burden of all this people upon me?
Am I father to all this people, or are they my children, that Thou hast said to me, Carry them in thy strength, as the nurse carrieth the suckling, unto the land which Thou hast covenanted to their fathers?
Whence shall I have flesh to give to all this people? For they lament to me, saying: Give us flesh to eat.
I am not able to bear all this people alone, because it is too heavy for me.
And if Thou do thus with me, kill me, I pray, if I have found mercy before Thee, that I may not see my wretchedness.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Gather unto Me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be elders of the people, and the overseers thereof, and bring them to the tabernacle of ordinance, and let them stand there with thee;
And I will reveal Myself, and will speak with thee there; and I will make enlargement of the Spirit that is upon thee, and put it upon them, that they may bear with thee the burden of the people, and thou mayest not sustain it by thyself alone.
And say thou to the people, Prepare yourselves for the morrow, and you shall eat flesh; for that you have lamented before the Lord, saying: Who will give us flesh, that we may eat? For it was better with us in Mizraim; and I will give you flesh, and you shall eat.
Not one day shall you eat (it), nor two days, nor five days, nor ten days, nor twenty days;
But for a month of days, until you loathe it, and it be an offence to you; because you have felt, dislike to the Word of the Lord, whose Shekinah dwelleth among you; and before whom you have wept, saying: Why came we out of Mizraim?
But Mosheh said, The people among whom I am are six hundred thousand footmen; and Thou hast said, I will give them flesh to eat for a month of days.
Shall the oxen and sheep be slaughtered for them, to satisfy them, or all the fish of the sea be gathered that they may be satisfied?
And the Lord said to Mosheh: Is the Word of the Lord restrained? Now shalt thou see whether My saying come to pass with thee or not.
And Mosheh went forth, and told the people the words of the Lord, and gathered together seventy men of the elders of the people, and set them round about the tabernacle.
And the Lord was revealed in the Cloud, and spake with him, and he made enlargement of the Spirit that was upon him, and imparted to the seventy men, the elders; and it came to pass that when the Spirit of prophecy rested upon them they prophesied, and ceased not.
But two men remained in the camp, the name of the one Eldad, and the name of the second Medad; and the Spirit of prophecy rested upon them; and, though they were in the writings, they had not come out of the camp; but they prophesied in the camp.
And a young man ran, and showed to Mosheh, and said: Eldad and Medad do prophesy in the camp.
And Jehoshua bar Nun, the minister of Mosheh from his youth, answered and said, Ribboni Mosheh, put them in bond.
But Mosheh said, Art thou jealous for my sake? I would that all the people of the Lord did prophesy, and that the Lord would confer the Spirit of prophecy upon them.
And Mosheh returned to the camp, he and the elders of Israel.
And the wind proceeded from before the Lord, and the quails flew abroad from the sea, and it bare them upon the camp as (the breadth of) a day’s journey here, and a day’s journey there, round about the camp, and as at a height of two cubits over the face of the ground.
And the people were up all that day, and all the night, and all the day after it, and collected the quails; he who collected least (gathered together) ten heaps; and they spread them abroad, round about the camp.
While yet the flesh was between their teeth, and they had not yet finished, the displeasure of the Lord was manifested strongly against the people, and the Lord inflicted death among the people with a very great mortality.
And he called the name of that place, The Graves of the Demanders; because there they buried the people who demanded.
From the Graves of the Demanders the people journeyed to Hatseroth, and they were in Hatseroth.
And Miriam and Aharon spake against Mosheh, because of the fair woman whom he had taken, because the fair woman who had been sent away he had taken.
And they said, Hath the Lord spoken only with Mosheh? Hath He not spoken with us also? And it was heard before the Lord.
(But the man Mosheh was very humble, more than all the men who were upon the face of the earth.)
And the Lord spake suddenly with Mosheh, and to Aharon and to Miriam: Come forth, you three, to the tabernacle of ordinance; and those three went forth.
And the Lord was revealed in the pillar of the Cloud, and stood at the door of the tabernacle: and He called Aharon and Miriam, and they two came forth.
And He said, Hear now My words. If there be prophets with you, I the Lord will reveal Myself (to them) in visions, in dreams will I speak with them.
But not so (with) My servant Mosheh; over all My house faithful is he.
Speaker with speaker will I speak with him; in apparition, and not in similitudes; and he shall behold the likeness of the glory of the Lord. And how is this, that you have not been afraid to speak against My servant, against Mosheh?
And the displeasure of the Lord was strong against them, and He went up.
And the Cloud went up from over the tabernacle. And, behold, Miriam was white as snow; and Aharon looked upon Miriam, and, behold, she was leprous.
And Aharon said to Mosheh, My lord, I entreat that thou wouldst not lay this sin upon us, in that we have acted foolishly, and have transgressed.
Let not this one, I entreat, be separated from among us, for she is our sister. Pray, now, over this dead flesh which is in her, that she may be healed.
And Mosheh prayed before the Lord, saying: O God, I beseech Thee, heal her now.
But the Lord said to Mosheh, If her father, correcting, had corrected her, ought she not to have been ashamed seven days? Let her be shut up seven days without the camp, and afterward be admitted.
And Miriam was shut up without the camp seven days; and the people journeyed not until Miriam was brought in.
And afterward the people journeyed from Hatseroth, and encamped in the wilderness of Pharan.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Send thou men, that they may explore the land of Kenaan, which I will give to the children of Israel: one man for each tribe of their fathers shall you send, each one a ruler among them.
And Mosheh sent them from the wilderness of Pharan, according to the Word of the Lord. All those men were heads of the children of Israel;
And these are their names: For the tribe of Reuben, Shamua bar Zakur;
For the tribe of Shemeon, Shaphat bar Hori;
For the tribe of Jehudah, Kaleb bar Jephuneh;
For the tribe of Issakar, Igal bar Joseph;
For the tribe of Ephraim, Hoshea bar Nun;
For the tribe of Benyamin, Phalti bar Raphu;
for the tribe of Zebulon, Gediel bar Sodi;
For the tribe of Joseph, the tribe of Menasheh, Gaddi bar Susi;
For the tribe of Dan, Ammiel bar GemaIi;
For the tribe of Asher, Sethor bar Mikael;
For the tribe of Naphtali, Nachbi bar Vapsi;
For the tribe of Gad, Geuel bar Machi:
These are the names of the men whom Mosheh sent to explore the land. And Mosheh called Hoshea bar Nun Jehoshua.
And Mosheh sent them away to explore the land of Kenaan. And he said to them, Go up hither by the south, and ascend to the mountain,
And see the country what it is, and the people who dwell upon it, whether they be strong or weak, few or many;
And what the land is in which they dwell, whether good or bad; and what the cities they inhabit, whether open, or walled in;
And whether the land is rich or poor; whether it hath trees or not: and you, be of good courage, and bring of the fruits of the land. And the days were the days of the first grapes.
And they went up, and explored the country, from the wilderness of Zin unto Rechob, to come unto Hamath.
And they went up by the south, and came to Hebron; and there were Achiman, Sheshai, and Talmai, sons of the giants; (and Hebron was built seven years before Tanis of Mizraim.)
And they came to the Stream of Grapes, and cut down there a branch, with one cluster of grapes, and carried it on a staff between two; and (they took also) of the pomegranates, and of the figs.
That place was called the Stream of Grapes, on account of the grapes (athkela) which the sons of Israel cut down from thence.
And they returned from the exploration of the country at the end of forty days.
And they went and came to Mosheh, and to Aharon, and to all the congregation of the children of Israel at the wilderness of Pharan, at Rekam, and returned the word to them, and to all the congregation, and showed them the fruit of the land.
And they recounted to him, and said: We came to the land whither thou didst send us, and truly it doth produce milk and honey, and this is the fruit of it.
But very mighty are the people who inhabit the land, and the cities are fortified and very great; and we saw, also, the sons of the giants there.
The Amalkaah dwell in the land of the south, and the Hittaah and Jebusaah and Amoraah dwell in the mountain, and the Kenaanaah dwell by the sea, and upon the bank of the Jordan.
And Kaleb quieted the people for Mosheh, and said: Going, let us go up and possess it, for we are able to (do) it:
But the men who had gone up with him said, We are not able to go up against the people, for they are stronger than we.
And they gave forth an evil report (name) about the land which they had explored to the children of Israel, saying: The country which we have passed through to search it, is a land that killeth its inhabitants;
And all the people whom we saw in it are men of stature; and there we saw the giants, the sons of Anak, which are of the giants; and we looked, in our own sight, as locusts, and so were we in their eyes.
And all the congregation lifted up and gave (forth) their voice; and all the people wept that night.
And all the children of Israel murmured against Mosheh and Aharon; and the whole congregation said to them, O that we had died in the land of Mizraim, or that we had died in this wilderness!
And why is the Lord bringing us to this land, that we may fall by the sword, and our wives and our children become a prey? Would it not be better for us to return into Mizraim?
And they said, a man to his brother, Let us appoint a chieftain, and go back into Mizraim.
And Mosheh and Aharon fell upon their faces before all the assembly of the sons of Israel.
And Jehoshua bar Nun, and Kaleb bar Jephuneh, who were of the explorers of the land, rent their clothes.
And they spake to all the congregation of the sons of Israel, saying: The land, which we passed through to explore it, is a good land, most exceedingly.
If the Lord hath pleasure in us, even He will bring us into this land, and give us the land which produceth milk and honey.
Only be not rebellious against the Word of the Lord, nor be afraid of the people of the land, for they are delivered into our hand; their strength is departed from them, and the Word of the Lord is our helper: fear them not.
But all the congregation said that they would stone them with stones. And the Glory of the Lord was revealed at the tabernacle of ordinance, unto all the children of Israel.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, How long will this people provoke Me, and how long will they disbelieve in My Word, for all the signs which I have wrought among them?
I will smite them with the pestilence and consume them; and will make of thee a people greater and stronger than they.
But Mosheh said before the Lord, And the Mizraee will hear of it; for Thou didst bring up by Thy power this people from among them,
And they will tell unto the inhabitants of this land; for they have heard that Thou, O Lord, dost dwell in Thy Shekinah among this people, whose eyes behold the glorious Shekinah of the Lord, and that Thy Cloud overshadoweth them, and that in the pillar of the Cloud Thou conductest them in the day, and in the pillar of Fire by night.
Now if Thou shalt kill this people as one man, the nations who have heard the fame of Thy power will speak, saying:
Because there was not strength (enough) before the Lord to bring this people into the land which He covenanted to them, He hath killed them in the desert.
And now I beseech, let power be magnified from before the Lord, as Thou hast thus spoken, saying:
The Lord is far from anger, and great in performing goodness and truth: forgiving iniquity and rebellion and sins, pardoning them who return unto His law: but acquitting not them who will not, turn, (but) visiting the sins of the fathers upon the rebellious children unto the third and unto the fourth generation.
Pardon, I beseech, the sins of this people according to the amplitude of Thy goodness, and as Thou hast forgiven this people from Mizraim until now.
And the Lord said, I have pardoned according to thy word.
Yet, as I live, with the glory of the Lord shall all the earth be filled.
Because all these men who have seen My glory, and the signs I wrought in Mizraim and in the desert, but have tempted before Me these ten times, and have not been obedient to My Word,
if they shall see the land which I covenanted to their fathers, nor shall any see it who have provoked before Me.
But My servant Kaleb, for that there was in him another spirit, and that he hath wholly followed (in) My fear, him will I bring into the land whither he went, and his children shall possess it.
Now the Amalkaah and the Kenaanaah dwelt in the valley. Tomorrow, turn you and get you to the wilderness by the way of the Sea of Suph.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh and unto Aharon, saying:
How long shall this evil congregation be murmuring against Me? The murmuring of the sons of Israel which they murmur against Me is heard before Me.
Say to them, As I live, saith the Lord, even as ye have spoken before Me, so will I do to you.
In this wilderness shall your carcases fall, and all who are numbered of you, of all your numbers, from one of twenty years and upward who have murmured against me.
If you shall come into the land in which I covenanted in My Word to cause you to dwell, except Kaleb bar Jephuneh, and Jehoshua bar Nun.
But your children, of whom you said they were for a prey, will I bring in, and they shall know the land which you have abhorred.
But your carcases shall fall in this wilderness;
And your children shall go about in the wilderness forty years, and shall bear your iniquities until your carcases be laid in the wilderness.
According to the number of the days in which you explored the land, forty days, a day for a year, a day for a year, you shall receive for your sins, even forty years, and you shall know (the consequence of) your murmuring against me.
I, the Lord, have made the decree in My Word, if I will not do unto all this evil congregation who have gathered together against Me; in this wilderness shall they find their end, and here shall they die.
And the men whom Mosheh sent to search the land, and who returned to make all the congregation murmur against him, by bringing forth an evil name upon the land;
Those men who brought out the evil name upon the land died by the plague before the Lord.
But Jehoshua bar Nun and Kaleb bar Jephuneh lived, of those men who went to explore the land.
And Mosheh told these words to all the children of Israel, and the people bewailed greatly.
And they arose in the morning to go up to the top of the mountain, saying: Behold, we will go up to the place of which the Lord hath spoken; for we have sinned.
But Mosheh said, Wherefore do you transgress against the decree of the Word of the Lord? But it will not prosper.
Go not up, for the Shekinah of the Lord is not among you, and be not broken before your enemies.
For the Amalkaah and the Kenaanaah are there before you, and you will fall by the sword; for, because you have turned away from the service of the Lord, the Word of the Lord will not be your helper.
Yet they would commit the wickedness of going up to the summit of the mountain, though the ark of the Lord’s covenant, and Mosheh, removed not from the midst of the camp.
And the Amalkaah and the Kenaanaah who dwelt in the mountain came down and smote them, and pursued them unto Hormah.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with the children of Israel, and say to them: When you shall (at last) have come into the land which I will give you,
and you will make an oblation before the Lord, a burnt offering, or a consecrated sacrifice for the release of a vow, or in a free-will offering, or in your solemnities to render an acceptable service before the Lord, from the herd or from the flock;
let him who offereth his oblation before the Lord bring for a mincha a tenth of flour sprinkled with the fourth of a hina of oil.
And wine for a libation the fourth of a hina shall he make upon the burnt offering, or hallowed sacrifice, for one lamb:
Or for a ram he shall make a mincha of two-tenths of flour sprinkled with the third of a hina of oil;
And wine for the libation thou shalt bring the third of a hina, to be received with acceptance before the Lord.
And when thou makest a bullock a burnt offering, or a hallowed sacrifice for the release of a vow, or hallowed sacrifices before the Lord,
let him bring with the bullock a mincha of three tenths of flour sprinkled with a half hina of oil;
And wine shalt thou bring for the libation the half of a hina, an oblation to be received with acceptance before the Lord.
So shalt thou do for one bullock, or one ram, or one lamb from the lambs, or from the kids.
According to the number that you perform so shall you do with each, according to their number.
All native-born (Hebrews) shall do these things to offer an oblation to be received with favour before the Lord.
And if a sojourner who sojourneth with you, or whoever among you in your generations will make an oblation to be received with favour before the Lord, as you do, so shall he do.
One congregation and one rite shall be for you and for the sojourners who sojourn; it is an everlasting statute; as you are, so shall the sojourner be before the Lord:
One law and one judgment shall be for you and for the sojourners who dwell with you.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with the sons of Israel, and say to them, When you have come into the land into which I will bring you,
and when you eat of the bread of the land, you shall set apart a separation before the Lord.
Of the first of your food you shall set apart a cake for a separation; as the separation of the threshing-floor, so shall you set it apart;
Of the first of your bread (dough) you shall give the separation before the Lord in your generations.
And should you be in ignorance, and not do all these commandments of which the Lord hath spoken with Mosheh,
Even all which the Lord commanded you by the hand of Mosheh from the day that the Lord commanded and thenceforward in your generations,
It shall be that if anything be hid from the eyes of the congregation and you do ignorantly, then all the congregation shall make a burnt offering of one young bullock, to be received with acceptance before the Lord, with his mincha and his libation, according to the proper manner, and one kid of the goats for a sin offering:
And the priest shall make atonement for all the congregation of the sons of Israel, and it shall be forgiven them, for it was ignorance; but they shall bring their oblation before the Lord on account of their ignorance.
And it shall be forgiven to all the congregation of the children of Israel, and to the sojourners who sojourn among them; for all the people (were) in ignorance.
And if one sin ignorantly, he shall bring a female kid of the year for a sin offering;
And the priest shall make atonement for the man who hath erred in his sin through ignorance before the Lord, to atone for him, and it shall be forgiven him.
For the native-born of the sons of Israel, and for the sojourner who sojourneth among you, one law shall there be for you, for him who acteth in ignorance.
But the man who doeth presumptuously, whether of the native-born, or of the sojourners, he provoketh the Lord to anger, and that man shall perish from among his people:
Because he hath despised the word of the Lord, and hath made His commandment vain, that man shall be utterly destroyed, his sin is upon him.
And while the children of Israel were in the wilderness, they found a man stealing wood on the day of the Sabbath;
And they who had found him stealing wood brought him to Mosheh and Aharon, and to all the congregation.
And they bound him in the house of custody; for it had not been explained to them what they should do to him.
And the Lord said unto Mosheh, The man shall be surely put to death; all the congregation shall stone him with stones without the camp.
And all the congregation brought him forth without the camp, and stoned him with stones, and he died; as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And the Lord spake to Mosheh, saying:
Speak with the children of Israel, and bid them that they make them fringes upon the borders of their garments throughout their generations, and that upon the fringes on the borders they put a ribbon of hyacinth.
And they shall be to you for fringes, that you may look upon it, and remember all the commandments of the Lord, and do them, and not wander after the imagination of your heart, or after the sight of your eyes, after which you have gone astray.
That you may remember and do all My precepts, and be saints before your God.
I am the Lord your God who brought you forth from the land of Mizraim to be to you Eloha: I am the Lord your God.
But Korack bar zhar bar Kahath bar Levi, and Dathan and Abiram the sons of Eliab, and On bar Pelath of the Beni Reuben, made a division.
And they rose up in the presence of Mosheh with (other) men of the sons of Israel, two hundred and fifty, chiefs of the congregation, who at the time of the convocation had been men of name.
And they gathered together against Mosheh, and against Aharon, and said to them, You are too great; for the whole of the congregation are all of them holy, and the Lord’s Shekinah dwelleth among them: wherefore then are you lifted up above the church (congregation) of the Lord?
And Mosheh heard, and fell upon his face.
And he spake with Korach, and with all the congregation, saying: In the morning the Lord will make blown who it is who pertaineth to Him, and who bath been consecrated to approach to His presence; and whosoever He shall appoint shall go near unto His service.
This do: Take you censers, Korach and all his congregation;
And put fire in them, and put sweet incense upon it before the Lord tomorrow: and the man whom the Lord will choose, he shall be holy. You have too much, sons of Levi.
And Mosheh said to Korach, Hear now, sons of Levi:
Is it a little thing with you that the God of Israel hath separated you from the congregation of Israel to bring you near before Him to perform the service of the Lord’s tabernacle, and to stand before the congregation to minister to them?
But He hath brought thee nigh, and all thy brethren the sons of Levi with thee: and seek you now the High Priesthood also?
Therefore thou and all thy company have gathered together against the Lord. And Aharon, what is he, that you murmur against him?
And Mosheh, sent to call Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab; but they said, We will not come up.
Is it a trifle that thou hast brought us from a land making milk and honey to kill us in the desert, that thou mayest domineer and rule over us?
Neither hast thou brought us into the land that maketh milk and honey, to give us an inheritance of fields and vineyards: wilt thou blind the eyes of these men? We will not come up.
And Mosheh was greatly angered, and said before the Lord, Receive not Thou their offering: I have not taken one ass from them, neither have I injured one of them.
And Mosheh said to Korach, Be thou and all thy company prepared before the Lord, thou and they and Aharon tomorrow.
And take every man his censer, and put sweet incense upon them, each man to offer before the Lord (with) his censer.
And they took every man his censer, and set fire in it, and put sweet incense thereon, and stood at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance, with Mosheh and Aharon.
And Korach assembled with him all the company at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance. And the glory of the Lord was revealed to all the congregation.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh and to Aharon, saying:
Separate yourselves from among this company, and I will consume them at once.
But they fell upon their faces, and said, O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and thou be wroth with all the congregation?
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with the congregation, saying: Get you up from among the tents of Korach, Dathan, and Abiram.
And Mosheh arose and went unto Dathan and Abiram, and the elders of Israel followed him.
And he spake with the congregation, saying: Remove now from the tents of these guilty men, and touch not anything that is theirs, lest you be stricken with all their sins.
And they gat up from the tents of Korach, Dathan, and Abiram round about; and Dathan and Abiram came out, and stood at the door of their tents, with their wives, and their sons, and their families.
And Mosheh said: By this shall you know that the Lord hath sent me to do all these works, because (I do them) not of my own will:
If these men die the death of all men, and the visitation of all men be visited upon them, the Lord hath not sent me.
But if the Lord create a creation, and the earth open her mouth, and swallow them up, and all that is theirs, and they go down alive into Sheul, then you will know that these men have caused anger before the Lord.
And it was, when he had finished to speak all these words, that the ground under them clave asunder,
and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and the men of their houses; and all the men of Korach, and all their substance,
they, and all who were theirs, went down alive into Sheul; and the earth closed upon them, and they perished from among the congregation.
And all Israel who stood round about them fled from their cry; for they said, Lest the earth swallow us.
And fire came out from before the Lord, and consumed the two hundred and fifty men who had offered the sweet incense.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak to Elazar bar Aharon the priest, that he take out the censers from among the burnings, and throwaway the fire, for they are consecrated.
The censers of those guilty men who sinned against their souls, let him make of them beaten plates, to cover the altar; for they had offered them before the Lord, and they are consecrated; and they shall be for a sign unto the children of Israel.
And Elazar the priest took the golden censers, with which they who were burned had offered, and beat them abroad, for a covering for the altar,
to be a memorial to the sons of Israel, that no strange man who is not of the seed of Aharon shall approach to burn sweet incense before the Lord, and that he be not as Korach and his company, as the Lord had said to him by the hand of Mosheh.
But on the day which followed, all the congregation of the sons of Israel murmured against Mosheh and against Aharon, saying: You have caused the death of the Lord’s people.
And it was, while the congregation gathered against Mosheh and against Aharon, that they looked toward the tabernacle of ordinance; and, behold, the cloud covered it, and the glory of the Lord was revealed.
And Mosheh and Aharon went up before the tabernacle of ordinance;
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
separate yourselves from the midst of this congregation, that I may now consume them. But they fell upon their faces.
And Mosheh said to Aharon: Take the censer, and put fire upon it from the altar, and lay on sweet incense, and go quickly to the congregation, and make atonement for them; for anger hath gone forth from before the Lord, the plague hath begun.
And Aharon took, as Mosheh had said, and ran into the midst of the congregation, and, behold, the plague had begun among the people; and he put on sweet incense and made atonement for the people.
And he stood between the dead and the living, and the plague ceased.
But they who died of the plague were fourteen thousand and seven hundred, beside those who died on account of the matter of Korach.
And Aharon returned to Mosheh, unto the door of the tabernacle of ordinance, and the plague ceased.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak with the sons of Israel, and take from them severally a rod, according the house of their fathers, twelve rods, and write thou the name of each man upon his rod.
And upon the rod of Levi thou shalt write the name of Aharon; for one rod (only) there shall be for each chief of their father’s house.
And thou shalt lay them up in the tabernacle of ordinance before the testimony, where I will appoint My Word to be with thee.
And it shall be that the rod of the man whom I will choose shall bud; and I will make to cease from before Me the murmuring; of the sons of Israel, with which they have murmured against you.
And Mosheh spake with the sons of Israel; and all their chiefs gave to him, every chief one rod, according to the house of their fathers, twelve rods. And Aharon’s rod was among their rods.
And Mosheh laid up the rods before the Lord in the tabernacle of the testimony.
And it came to pass on the following day, that Mosheh went into the tabernacle of the testimony; and, behold, the rod of Aharon of the house of Levi had germinated, and produced branches, and had blossomed, and ripened almonds.
And Mosheh brought out all the rods from before the Lord unto all the sons of Israel, and they recognized and took every man his rod.
And the Lord said to Mosheh: Take back Aharon’s rod before the testimony, to be kept for a sign unto the rebellious people, that their murmurings before Me may come to an end, and they die not.
And Mosheh did as the Lord commanded, so did he.
And the children of Israel spake to Mosheh, saying: Behold, some of us are slain with the sword; and, behold, some are swallowed up by the earth; and, behold, some perish with the plague.
Whoever, approaching, approacheth the tabernacle of the Lord dieth; behold, we are consumed with death.
And the Lord said to Aharon: Thou and thy sons, and the house of thy fathers with thee, shall make reconciliation on account of transgressions (against) the sanctuary; and thou and thy sons with thee shall make atonement for the sins of your priesthood.
And thy brethren also of the tribe of Levi, the tribe of thy father, bring with thee, and let them be added with thee, to serve thee; but thou and, thy sons with thee (shall minister) before the tabernacle of the testimony.
And they shall keep thy charge, and the charge of all the tabernacle; but to the vessels of the sanctuary and of the altar they (the Levites) shall not approach, that neither they nor you may die.
And they shall be joined, with thee, and keep charge of the tabernacle of ordinance for all the service of the tabernacle, and a stranger shall not come near you.
And they shall keep charge of the sanctuary and of the altar, that there may be no more wrath upon the sons of Israel.
And, behold, I have taken your brethren, the Levites, from among the sons of Israel; as a gift are they given to you before the Lord, to perform the service of the tabernacle of ordinance.
But thou, and thy sons with thee, take charge of your priesthood, for everything about the altar and within the veil you shall fulfil the service; the ministry of the priesthood I have given you as a gift, and the stranger who cometh near shall die.
And the Lord said to Aharon: Behold, I have given to thee the charge of My separated things; of all that are consecrated by the sons of Israel unto thee have I given them, and to thy sons, on account of the anointing, by an everlasting statute.
This shall be thine of the most holy things which remain from the fire, of all their oblations, and of all their minchas, and of all their sin offerings, and of all their trespass offerings which they render before Me; they are most sacred to thee and to thy sons.
In the sanctuary thou mayest eat thereof, every male may eat it, to thee it shall be consecrated.
And this is thine: the separated things of their minchas, of all the elevations of the sons of Israel, to thee have I given them, and to thy sons, and to thy daughters with thee, by an everlasting statute: everyone who is clean in thy house may eat thereof.
All the best of the oil, and all the best of the wine, and the wheat, the firstfruits of them which they present before the Lord, unto thee I have given them.
The firstfruits of all that is on their land which they present before the Lord shall be thine; everyone in thy house who is clean may eat thereof.
Everything devoted in Israel shall be thine.
Whatever openeth the womb of all flesh which they offer before the Lord, of man, or of beast, shall be for thee; but thou shalt surely redeem the firstborn of man, and the firstling of an unclean animal thou shalt redeem;
And his redemption shall be at the age of one month; thou shalt redeem with the price of five shekes, in the shekel of the sanctuary it is ten meahs:
But the firstling of an ox, or of a sheep, or of a goat, thou mayest not redeem, they are consecrated; thou shalt sprinkle their blood upon the altar, and burn their fat, an oblation to be accepted before the Lord.
But their flesh shall be for thee, as the breast of the elevation, and the right shoulder, they shall be thine.
All the consecrated separations which the sons of Israel set apart before the Lord, I have given to thee and to thy children with thee by an everlasting covenant; an everlasting covenant of salt it is before the Lord, with thee, and thy children with thee.
And the Lord said to Aharon: In their land thou wilt not have possession, nor will thine be a portion among them; the gifts that I have given thee, they are thy portion and thy inheritance among the children of Israel.
And to the sons of Levi, behold, I have given all the tenths in Israel for a possession, on account of the service with which they serve in the ministry of the tabernacle of ordinance.
But the children of Israel must no more come nigh to the tabernacle of ordinance, to contract guilt and to die.
But the Levites shall perform the service of the tabernacle of ordinance, and shall bear their iniquity; a statute forever unto your generations. And among the sons of Israel they shall not possess an inheritance;
For the tenths of the children of Israel which they set apart before the Lord for a separation, I have given to the Levites for a possession; therefore have I said to them, Among the sons of Israel you shall not possess an inheritance.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Speak also to the Levites, and say to them, When you take from the sons of Israel the tenths which I have given you of theirs, you shall set apart from them a separation before the Lord, a tenth of the tenth.
And your separation shall be reckoned to you as the corn from the threshing-floor, and as the wine of the wine-press;
So shall you set apart the separation before the Lord of all your tenths that you receive from the sons of Israel, and give thereof a separation before the Lord unto Aharon the priest.
Of all that is given to you ye shall set apart every separation for the Lord, of all the best of it, to be the hallowed portion thereof.
And say thou to them, When you have set apart the finest of it, it shall be reckoned to the Levites as the produce of the threshing-floor, and as the fruitage for the wine-press;
And you may eat it in every place, you and the men of your house; for it is a remuneration to you on account of your service in the tabernacle of ordinance.
And you shall not contract guilt by it in your setting apart the finest of it, nor profane the consecrated things of the children of Israel.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh and to Aharon, saying:
This is the decree of the law which the Lord hath commanded, saying: Speak to the sons of Israel that they bring to thee a red heifer, unblemished, with no spot in her, and upon which no yoke hath been put.
And you shall give her unto Elazar the priest, that he may bring her without the camp, and (one) shall slaughter her before him.
And Elazar, the priest, shall take (some) of her blood with his finger, and sprinkle of her blood against the face of the tabernacle of ordinance seven times.
And (one) shall burn the heifer before his eyes; her skin, and her flesh, and her blood, with her food shall he burn.
And the priest shall take cedar wood, and hyssop, and scarlet, and cast it into the midst of the burning of the heifer.
And the priest shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterwards come into the camp: but the priest shall be unclean until the evening.
And he who burneth her shall wash his clothes with water, and bathe his flesh in water, and be unclean until evening.
And a man who is clean shall gather up the ashes of the heifer, and lay them up without the camp in a clean place, and it shall be for the congregation of the children of Israel to keep, for the sprinkling with water; it is (a purification) for sin.
And he who gathereth up the ashes of the heifer shall wash his raiment, and be unclean until the evening; and it shall be for the children of Israel, and for the strangers who dwell among you, a statute forever.
Whosoever toucheth the dead of any of mankind shall be unclean seven days.
He shall sprinkle with it on the third day, and on the seventh day shall be clean; but if he sprinkle it not on the third day, on the seventh day he shall not be clean.
Whoever toucheth the dead body of a man who hath died, and sprinkleth not with it, defileth the tabernacle of the Lord; and that man shall be cut off from Israel: because the water of sprinkling is not sprinkled upon him, he shall be unclean, (for) his uncleanness is yet upon him.
This is the law when a man dieth in a tent: everyone who entereth the tent, and everyone who is in the tent, shall be unclean seven days.
And every open earthen vessel which hath not a covering fastened upon it round about is unclean.
And whoever toucheth one who is slain with the sword upon the face of the field, or a dead body, or the bone of a man, or a grave, shall be unclean seven days.
And for the unclean person they shall take of the ashes of the burnt sin offering, and put spring water upon it in a vessel.
And a man who is clean shall take hyssop, and dip it in the water, and sprinkle upon the tent, and upon every vessel, and upon the persons who are there, and upon him who had touched the bone, or the slain, or the dead body, or the grave.
And the clean person shall sprinkle the unclean on the third day, and on the seventh day; and on the seventh day he shall be clean; and shall sprinkle his raiment, and wash with water, and at the evening he shall be clean.
But the man who is unclean, and it bath not been sprinkled upon him, shall be cut off from the congregation, because he would defile the sanctuary of the Lord. The water of sprinkling was not sprinkled upon him; he is unclean.
And it shall be to them for an everlasting statute, that he who applieth the water of sprinkling shall wash his clothes, and whoever toucheth the water of sprinkling shall be unclean until the evening;
And whatever may be touched by the unclean person shall be unclean, and the man who toucheth it shall be unclean until the evening.
And the children of Israel, the whole congregation, came to the wilderness of Zin in the first month, and the people abode in Rekem; and Miriam died there, and was buried there.
And there was no water for the congregation; and they gathered against Mosheh and against Aharon;
And the people were contentious with Mosheh, and spake, saying, Would that we had died when our brethren died before the Lord!
And why have you brought the congregation of the Lord into this wilderness, that we and our cattle may die here?
And wherefore have you made us come up from Mizraim, to bring us into this evil place? This is not a place for sowing; here are neither fig trees, nor vines, nor pomegranates, neither is there water to drink.
And Mosheh and Aharon went up from before the congregation unto the door of the tabernacle of ordinance, and fell upon their faces; and the glory of the Lord was revealed to them.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying,
Take the rod, and gather the congregation together, thou and Aharon thy brother, and speak to the Rock, before their eyes, and it shall give its waters; and thou shalt bring forth water for them from the rock, and give drink to the congregation and their cattle.
And Mosheh took the rod from before the Lord, as He had commanded him.
And Mosheh and Aharon assembled the congregation before the rock; and he said to them: Hear now, rebels! Are we to draw forth water for you from this rock?
And Mosheh lifted up his hand, and smote the rock with the rod two times; and the waters came forth greatly, and the congregation drank and their cattle.
But the Lord spake unto Mosheh and Aharon: Because you have not believed in My Word to sanctify Me in the eyes of the sons of Israel, therefore you shall not bring this congregation into the land that I have given them.
These are the Waters of Strife, because the sons of Israel strove before the Lord, and He was sanctified in them.
And Mosheh sent ambassadors from Rekem to the king of Edom: Thus saith thy brother Israel, Thou knowest all the trouble we have found;
That our fathers went down into Mizraim, and we dwelt in Mizraim many days, and the Mizraee badly treated us and our fathers.
And we prayed before the Lord, and He accepted our prayers, and sent an Angel, and brought us out from Mizraim; and, behold, we are in Rekem, a city which is on the side of thy border.
Let us now pass through thy country: we will not go through a field or through a vineyard, nor will we drink up the water of the cistern: on the king’s highway will we travel; we will not turn to the right hand or to the left until we have passed through thy border
But Edomea said to him, Thou shalt not pass through my border, lest I come out against thee with the slaughtering sword.
And the sons of Israel said to him, We would go up by the trodden way; and if we drink of thy water, I and my cattle, we will give thee the price of it; we will do nothing evil; upon my feet I will pass through.
But he said, Thou shalt not pass through. And Edomea came out to meet him with great force and with a strong hand.
So Edomea refused to permit Israel to go through his border; and Israel turned away from him.
And they went forward from Rekem, and all the congregation of the children of Israel came to Mount Hor.
And the Lord spake to Mosheh and to Aharon at Mount Hor, by the coast of the land of Edom, saying:
Aharon shall be gathered unto his people; for he shall not enter into the land which I have given to the children of Israel, because you rebelled against My Word at the waters of strife.
Take Aharon and Elazar his son, and bring them up to Mount Hor;
And strip Aharon of his vestments, and put them upon Elazar his son; and Aharon shall be gathered (to his people), and shall die there.
And Mosheh did as the Lord commanded, and they went up to Mount Hor before the eyes of all the congregation.
And Mosheh took off his garments from Aharon, and put them upon Elazar his son. And Aharon died there, on the summit of the mount. And Mosheh and Elazar came down from the mount.
And all the congregation saw that Aharon was dead; and all the house of Israel bewailed Aharon thirty days.
And when the Kenaanah, king Arad, who dwelt in the south, heard that Israel was coming by the way of the explorers, he set battle in array against Israel, and took some of them captives.
And Israel vowed a vow before the Lord, and said: If Thou wilt surely deliver this people into my hand, then I will destroy their cities.
And the Lord accepted Israel’s prayer, and gave up the Kenaanaah; and he destroyed them and their cities, and he called the name of the place Charma.
And they journeyed from Mount Hor by the way of the Sea of Suph, to go round from the land of Edom: and the soul of the people was wearied in the way.
And the people murmured (or, growled) against the Word of the Lord, and contended with Mosheh, (saying) Why have you brought us up out of Mizraim to die in the desert? For there is neither bread nor water, and our soul is weary of manna, this light food.
And the Lord sent forth burning serpents among the people, and much people of Israel died.
And the people came to Mosheh, and said: We have sinned, for we have murmured before the Lord, and have contended with thee. Intercede before the Lord, that He may remove the serpents from among us. And Mosheh prayed for the people.
And the Lord said to Mosheh: Make thee a burning (serpent), and uplift it on an ensign; and everyone who hath been bitten, and beholdeth it, shall live (or, be saved).
And Mosheh made a serpent of brass, and set it upon an ensign; and when a serpent had bitten a man, if he looked up to the serpent of brass, he lived (or, was saved).
And the children of Israel journeyed and encamped in Oboth.
And they journeyed from Oboth, and encamped at the Ford of the Passengers, which is in the wilderness over against Moab, toward the sunrise.
And they removed from thence, and encamped by the brook Zared.
Thence they journeyed, and pitched on the other side of Arnon, that is in the wilderness that stretcheth out from the coasts of the Amoraah; for Arnon is the border of Moab, between Moab and the Amoraah.
Wherefore it is said in the Book of the Wars, That which the Lord did by the Sea of Suph, and the great deeds which (He wrought) by the torrents of Arnon,
And at the flowing of the streams which lead towards Lechayath, and are joined at the confine of Moab.
And from thence was given to them the well, which is the well whereof the Lord spake to Mosheh, Gather the people together, and I will give them water.
Therefore sang Israel this song: Spring up, O well; sing ye unto it.
The well which the princes digged, the chiefs of the people cut it, the scribes with their staves; it was given to them in the wilderness.
And from (the time) that it was given to them it descended with them to the rivers, and from the rivers it went up with them to the height,
And from the height to the vale which is in the fields of Moab, at the head of Ramatha, which looketh towards Beth Jeshimon.
And Israel sent messengers to Sihon, king of the Amoraah, saying:
I would pass through thy country: I will not turn aside into field or vineyard; we will not drink of the waters of the cistern; by the king’s highway will we go until we have crossed thy border.
But Sihon would not permit Israel to pass through his coast; and Sihon gathered all his people, and came out to prevent Israel in the wilderness, and came to Jahaz, and arrayed battle against Israel.
And Israel smote him with the edge of the sword, and took possession of his land from Arnon unto Jabbok, unto the Beni Ammon; for the border of the Beni Ammon was strong.
And Israel subdued all those cities, and Israel dwelt in all the cities of the Amoraah, in Heshbon, and in all the villages thereof.
For Heshbon was the city of Sihon, king of the Amoraah; he had made war with the former king of Moab, and had taken all his territory from his hand unto Arnon.
Therefore, say the proverbs: Come to Heshbon; let the city of Sihon be builded and finished:
For an east wind strong as fire hath gone out from Heshbon, and the servants of war (as) with a flame from the city of Sihon: they have slain the people who inhabited Lechayath of Moab, the priests who ministered in the idol-temple in the height of Arnona.
Woe to you, Moabaee, you are undone, ye people who have worshipped Kemosh; he hath delivered up his besieged sons and his daughters into captivity, unto Sihon, king of the Amoraah.
And the kingdom hath ceased from Heshbon, the dominion hath passed away from Dibon, they have laid waste unto Nophak which joineth Medeba.
And Israel dwelt in the land of the Amoraah.
And Mosheh sent to explore Jaazer; and they subdued the towns, and drave out the Amoraah who were therein.
And they turned and went up by the way of Mathnan; and Og, king of Mathnan, came out to meet them, he and all his people, to give battle at Edrei.
But the Lord said to Mosheh, Fear him not: for I have delivered him into thy hand with all his people and his country; and thou shalt do to him as thou hast done to Sihon, the king of the Amoraah who dwelt in Heshbon.
And they smote him, and his sons, and all his people, until none remained of him who were spared; and they took possession of his land.
And the sons of Israel moved onward, and encamped in the plain of Moab (at some space) from the ford of the Jordan (towards) Jericho.
And Balak bar Zippor saw all that Israel had done to the Amoraah.
And the Moabaah feared before the people greatly, because they were many; yea, the Moabaee were in distress before the sons of Israel.
And Moab said to the elders of Midian, Now will this host consume all that are round about us, as the ox licketh up the herbage of the field. And Balak bar Zippor was the king of Moab at that time.
And he sent messengers to Bileam bar Beor unto Pethor Aram which is upon the Phrat, the land of the sons of his people, to call him, saying: Behold, a people hath come out of Mizraim; lo, they cover the sunshine from the earth, and they are dwelling over against me.
Come now, I entreat, curse this people for me, for they are stronger than I: if perhaps I may become able to fight with him, and drive him from the land: for I know that he whom thou blessest is blessed, and he whom thou dost curse is accursed.
And the elders of Moab and of Midian went, with the (price of) divinations in their hands, and came to Bileam, and told him the words of Balak.
And he said to them, Lodge here for the night, and I will return you word, according as the Lord speaketh with me. And the princes of Moab tarried with Bileam.
And a word from before the Lord came unto Bileam, and said, Who are these men who are with thee?
And Bileam said before the Lord, Balak bar Zippor, king of Moab, hath sent to me.
Behold, a people are come out of Mizraim, and hide the glance of the sun from the earth. Now come, curse him for me, that I may be able to fight him, and drive him away.
And the Lord said to Bileam, Thou shalt not go with them: thou shalt not curse the people, for he is blessed.
And Bileam arose in the morning, and said to the princes of Balak, Go back to your country; for it is not pleasing before the Lord to permit me to go with you.
And the princes of Moab arose and came to Balak, and said, Bileam refuseth to come with us.
But Balak added to send princes more (in number) and nobler than those.
And they came to Bileam, and said to him: Thus saith Balak bar Zippor: Be not, I beseech thee, hindered from coming to me;
For I will greatly honour thee with honour, and will do all that thou shalt bid me. Come, then, curse me this people.
Bileam responded, and said to the servants of Balak: If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I have no power to transgress the decree of the Word of the Lord my God, to do either little or great.
But now I beg you tarry here this night, that I may know what yet the Lord will speak unto me.
And word came from before the Lord unto Bileam by night, and said to him: If the men come to call thee, arise and go with them; nevertheless the word that I speak with thee, that thou shalt do.
And Bileam rose up in the morning, and saddled his ass, and went with the princes of Moab.
But the displeasure of the Lord was provoked because he (so) went; and the angel of the Lord stood in the road to withstand him: and he was riding upon his ass, and his two young men with him.
And the ass discerned the angel of the Lord standing in the way with his sword drawn in his hand; and the ass started aside from the road, and went into the field. And Bileam struck the ass to make her to return into the road.
And the angel of the Lord (again) stood in the way of the vineyards in a place where there was a fence here and a fence there.
And the ass discerned the angel of the Lord, and thrust herself to the wall, and drave Bileam’s foot against the wall; and he smote her again.
And the angel of the Lord yet passed on, and stood in a narrow place where there was no way to turn to the right or to the left.
And the ass discerned the angel of the Lord, and fell down under Bileam; and Bileam’s wrath was provoked, and he smote the ass with his staff.
And the Lord opened the mouth of the ass; and she spake to Bileam, What have I done to thee that thou bast smitten me these three times?
And Bileam said to the ass, Because thou hast mocked me: would that there was a sword in my hand! For now would I kill thee.
And the ass said to Bileam, Am I not thy ass, upon whom thou hast ridden from (the time that) I have been thine unto this day? Have I ever been used to do thus to thee? And he said, No.
And the Lord unveiled Bileam’s eyes, and he saw the angel of the Lord standing in the road with his sword unsheathed in his hand: and he bowed, and worshipped upon his face.
And the angel of the Lord said to him, Wherefore hast thou smitten thine ass these three times? Behold, I have come out to withstand thee, because it is seen before me that thou art willing to go in a way contrary to me.
But the ass discerned me, and turned from before me these three times: unless she had turned from before me, now should I have slain thee, and her would I have spared.
And Bileam said to the angel of the Lord, I knew not that thou wast standing before me in the way. And now, if it be evil in thine eyes, I will return.
But the angel of the Lord said to Bileam, Go with the men; only the word that I shall speak with thee, that thou shalt say. And Bileam went with the princes of Balak.
And Balak heard that Bileam was coming, and went forth to meet him, at a city of Moab which is upon the border of Arnon, on the side of the frontier.
And Balak said to Bileam, Did not I sending send for thee to call thee? Why didst thou not come to me? Hast thou not indeed said that I am not able to do thee honour?
And Bileam said to Balak, Behold, I have come to thee: but even now, have’ I really any power to speak anything? The word which the Lord putteth into my mouth I will speak.
And Bileam went with Balak, and they came to a city of his territory.
And Balak slaughtered oxen and sheep, and sent to Bileam and to the princes who were with him.
And when it was morning, Balak took Bileam, and brought him up to the high places of his idol; and he saw from thence the extreme of the people.
And Bileam said to Balak, Build me here seven altars, and prepare me here seven bullocks and seven rams.
And Balak did as Bileam had spoken, and Balak and Bileam offered up a bullock and a ram upon every altar.
And Bileam said to Balak, Remain by thy burnt offering; and I will go, if perhaps the Word may meet me from before the Lord; and the word that He showeth me I will disclose unto thee. And he went solitary.
And the Word from before the Lord met Bileam; and he said to Him; The seven altars have I set in order, and have offered a bullock and a ram upon every altar.
And the Lord put a word upon Bileam’s mouth, and said to him: Return unto Balak, and thus shalt thou speak.
And he returned to him, and, behold, he was standing by his burnt sacrifice, he and all the nobles of Moab.
And he took up his parable, and said: Balak, king of Moab, hath brought me from Aram, From the mountains of the east: Come, curse me, Jakob, Come, hunt down Israel for me.
How shall I curse whom God hath not cursed? How shall I persecute whom God hath not?
For from the top of the mountain I discern him, And look upon him from the heights; Lo, the people by themselves are to possess the world, And among the nations they shall not be judged with consumption.
Who can number the dust of the house of Jakob, Of whom it is said, They shall increase as the dust of the earth, Or of one of the four camps of Israel? Let mine be the death of his truthful ones, And let my end be as theirs!
And Balak said to Bileam, What hast thou done to me? I brought thee to curse my enemies, and, behold, blessing hast thou blessed them.
But he said, That which the Lord hath put in my mouth must I not observe to speak?
And Balak said to him, Come now with me to another place, from whence thou mayest see him, where thou canst see only the outer side, but not the whole, and curse him for me from thence.
And he brought him to the field of the watch-tower on the top of the hill; and builded seven altars, and offered a bullock and a ram on every altar.
And he said to Balak, Stand here by thy burnt offering, and I will go yonder.
And the Word from before the Lord met Bileam, and put a word in his mouth, and said, Return to Balak, and thus speak.
And he came to him, and he was standing by his burnt offering, and the nobles of Moab with him. And Balak said to him, What hath the Lord spoken?
And he took up his parable, and said: Arise, Balak, and hear, Listen to my words, Bar Zippor:
The word of Eloha is not as the words of men; The sons of men speak, but lie; Nor is it as the works of the children of flesh, Who decree to do, but repent, and change their counsels. What He hath said He will perform, And His every word is steadfast.
Behold, I have received benedictions to bless Israel, And I may not turn my blessing from him.
I have seen that in the house of Jakob The worshippers of idols are not, Nor in Israel the workers of the work of lies. The Word of the Lord their God is their helper, And the Shekinah of their King is among them.
God, who brought them out from Mizraim, Becomes his strength and exaltation.
For no divinations can prosper against the house of Jakob, Nor enchantments against the myriads of Israel. According to the time it shall be said of Jakob and of Israel, What hath Eloah wrought!
Behold, the people shall dwell as a lioness, And as a lion shall he lift himself up; Until he hath slain with slaughter, He will not rest in his land, And inherit the treasures of the nations.
And Balak said to Bileam, Neither cursing curse them, nor blessing bless them.
But Bileam answered and said to Balak, Did I not tell thee, saying, All that the Lord speaketh, that I must do?
And Balak said to Bileam, Come now, I will take thee to another place; perhaps it may be pleasing before the Lord, that thou mayest curse them for me from thence.
And Balak conducted Bileam to the top of the high place that looketh toward the face of Beth Jeshimon.
And Bileam said to Balak, Build me here seven altars, and prepare me here seven bullocks and seven rams.
And Balak did as Bileam had said, and offered a bullock and a ram on every altar.
And Bileam saw that it was appointed before the Lord to bless Israel; and he went not as at those former times to inquire by divinations, but set his face towards the calf that the sons of Israel had made in the wilderness.
And Bileam lifted up his eyes, and beheld Israel dwelling by his tribes; and the Spirit of prophecy rested upon him from before the Lord.
And he took up his parable, and said: Bileam, the son of Beor, hath said, The man who saw the Beautiful hath said,
he hath said who heard the Word from before God, Who saw the vision of the Almighty, prostrate when he saw:
How goodly is thy land, O Jakob, And the house of thy habitation, O Israel!
As rivers flowing onward; as the watered garden by Euphrates, As aromatics planted by the Lord; as cedars planted by the waters.
The king anointed from his sons shall increase, And have dominion over many nations; His king shall be mightier than Agag, and his kingdom be exalted.
God, who brought them from Mizraim, is mighty and high, and by Him Shall Israel use the wealth of the nations their foes, Enjoy the spoils of their kings, and inherit their lands.
He reposed in his strength, as the lion and the lioness, And no kingdom may commove him. They who bless thee shall be blessed, And they who curse thee be accursed.
And the anger of Balak was roused against Bileam, and he smote his hands together. And Balak said to Bileam, I called thee to curse my enemies, and, behold, blessing hast thou blessed them these three times!
And now go to thy place. I said, Honouring I would honour thee; but, behold, the Lord hath kept thee back from honour.
But Bileam said to Balak, Did I not also tell the messengers whom thou sentest to me, saying,
If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I have no power to transgress the decree of the Word of the Lord, to do good or evil of my own will; whatsoever the Lord shall sat that will I speak?
And now, behold, I go unto my people. Come, I will give thee counsel what thou shouldst do; and will show thee what this people will do unto thy people at the end of the days.
And he took up his parable, and said: Bileam, the son of Beor, speaketh, The man who saw the Beautiful speaketh,
He speaks who heard the Word from before God, And who knoweth knowledge from the Most High, Who saw the vision of the Almighty, prostrate when he saw.
I see him, but not now; I behold him, but not nigh. When a king shall arise out of Jakob, And the Meshiha be anointed from Israel, He will slay the princes of Moab, and reign over all the children of men;
And Edom shall be an inheritance, And Seir a possession of his adversaries; But Israel shall prosper in riches.
One will descend from the house of Jakob, Who will destroy him that escapeth from the city of the peoples.
And he looked on the Amalkaah, and took up his parable, and said: Amalek was the beginning of the wars of Israel, But in his end he shall perish forever.
And he beheld the Shalmaah, and took up his parable, and said: Strong is the house of thy dwelling, And in a strong fortress thou hast set thy abode;
But yet Shalmaah shall be destroyed, For Athuria will make thee captive.
And he took up his parable, and said: Woe to the wicked who may live when God doeth this!
And ships will come from the Kittaee, And afflict Athur, and subdue beyond the Phrat; But they also shall perish forever.
And Bileam arose, and went and returned to his place; and Balak also went upon his way.
But Israel abode in Shittin; and the people began to commit whoredom with the daughters of Moab;
And they invited the people to the sacrifices of their idols, and the people did eat and bowed down to their idols.
And Israel was joined unto Baala Pheor, and the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel.
And the Lord said unto Mosheh: Take all the chiefs of the people, and judge, and slay him who is guilty of death before the Lord, over against the sun, that the fierce anger of the Lord may be turned away from Israel.
And Mosheh said to the judges of Israel: Slay every man his men who have joined themselves to Baala Pheor.
And, behold, a man of the sons of Israel came and brought to his brethren a Midianitha, in the eyes of Mosheh, and in the eyes of all the congregation of the children of Israel, who were weeping at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance.
And Phinehas bar Elazar bar Aharon the priest saw, and arose from the midst of the congregation, and took a lance in his hand;
And he went in after the man, the son of Israel, into the tent, and thrust both of them through, the man, the son of Israel, and the woman, through her belly; and the pestilence was stayed from the children of Israel.
But they who had died by the pestilence were twenty and four thousand.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Phinehas the son of Elazar, the son of Aharon, the priest, hath turned away My anger from the children of Israel, in that he was zealous with My zeal among them; and I have not consumed the children of Israel in My jealousy.
Say therefore to him (that), behold, I decree unto him My covenant of peace;
And he shall have it and his sons after him; a covenant of priesthood forever, because he hath been zealous before his God, and hath propitiated for the children of Israel.
And the name of the man of Israel who was slain with the Midianitess was Zimri bar Salu, a chief of the house of his fathers of the house of Shemeon;
And the name of the woman, the Midianitess, was Kosbe, the daughter of Zur, who was chief of the people of his father’s house in Midian.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Punish the Midianites and slay them,
For they afflict you with their snares, with which they ensnare you; as by the occasion of Pheor, and by that of Kosbe, daughter of a prince of Midian, their sister, who was slain on the day of the pestilence in the matter of Pheor.
And it came to pass after the plague,
that the Lord spake to Mosheh and to Elazar bar Aharon the priest, saying:
Take the account of all the congregation of the sons of Israel, from a son of twenty years and upwards by the house of their fathers, everyone that goeth out with the host in Israel.
And Mosheh and Elazar the priest spake with them, and directed to number them in the plains of Moab, by the Jordan (over against) Jericho, saying:
From a son of twenty years and upward, as the Lord commanded Mosheh, and the sons of Israel who went forth from the land of Mizraim.
Reuben, the first-born of Israel: the sons of Reuben, Hanok, the family of Hanok; Phallu, and the family of Phallu;
of Hezron, the family of Hezron; of Karmi, the family of Karmi.
These are the families of Reuben, and they who were numbered of them were forty-three thousand seven hundred and thirty.
And of the sons of Phallu, Eliab;
And the sons of Eliab, Nemuel, and Dathan, and Abiram: these are Dathan and Abiram who called the congregation that gathered against Mosheh and Aharon in the congregation of Korach, in their gathering against the Lord,
when the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them with Korach, and the congregation died, being devoured by the fire, two hundred and fifty men; and they became a sign;
but the sons of Korach died not.
The sons of Shimeon by their families: of Nemuel, the family of Nemuel; of Jamin, the family of Jamin;
of Zerach, the family of Zerach; of Shaul, the family of Shaul.
These are the families of Shemeon, twenty-two thousand two hundred.
The sons of Gad after their families; of Zephon, the family of Zephon; of Haggi, the family of Haggi; of Shumi, the family of Shumi; of Aggi, the family of Aggi;
Of Ozni, the family of Ozni; of Heri, the family of Heri;
of Arod, the family of the Arodi of Areli, the family of Areli.
These are the families of the Beni Gad, the number of whom was forty thousand five hundred.
Of the sons of Jehudah, Her and Onan: but Her and Onan died in the land of Kenaan;
Of the sons of Jehudah after their families: of Shelah, the family of Shelah; of Pherez, the family of Pherez; of Zerach, the family of Zerach.
Of the sons of Pherez: of Hezron, the family of Hezron; of Hamul, the family of Hamul.
These are the families of Jehudah; the number of them seventy-six thousand five hundred.
The sons of Issakar by their families: Tola, the family of Tola; of Phua, the family of the Phuni;
Of Jasub, the family of Jasub; of Shimron, the family of Shimron.
These are the families of Issakar; their number sixty-four thousand three hundred.
The sons of Zebulon by their families: of Sared, the family of Sared; of Elon, the family of Elon; of Jahleel, the family of Jahleel.
These are the families of Zebulon, by their number sixty thousand five hundred.
The sons of Joseph by their families, Menasheh and Ephraim,
The sons of Menasheh: of Makir, the family of Makir; and Makir begat Gilead; of Gilead, the family of Gilead.
These are the children of Gilead: of Jezar, the family of Jezar; of Helek, the family of Helek;
And of Asriel, the family of Asrieli; and of Shekem, the family of Shekem;
And of Shemida, the family of Shemida; and of Hepher, the family of Hepher.
And Zelophechad bar Hepher had no sons, but daughters; and the names of the daughters of Zelophechad were Mahali, and Nohah, Hegelah, Milchah, and Thirzah.
These are the families of Menasheh, and their number fifty-two thousand seven hundred.
These are the sons of Ephraim by their families: of Shuthelah, the family of Shuthelah; of Bekir, the family of Bekir; of Tachan, the family of Tachan.
And these are the sons of Shuthelah: of Heran, the family of Heran.
These are the families of the Beni-Ephraim, the number of whom was thirty-two thousand five hundred. These are the sons of Joseph by their families.
The sons of Benjamin by their families: of Bela, the family of Bela; of Ashbal, the family of Ashbal; of Ahiram, the family of Ahiram;
Of Shefuphim, the family of Shefuphim; of Hupham, the family of Hupham.
And the sons of Bela, Arede and Naaman; the family of the Aredi; and of Naaman, the family of Naaman.
These are the sons of Benjamin after their families, and their number forty-five thousand six hundred.
These are the children of Dan, after their families: of Shuham, the families of Shuham. These are the families of Dan after their families,
And the number of the families of Shuham sixty-four thousand four hundred.
The sons of Asher, after their families: of Jimna, the families of Jimna; of Jeshvi, the families of Jeshvi; of Beriah, the family of Beriah.
Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the family of Heber; of Malkiel, the family of Malkiel.
But the name of the daughter of Asher was Sarach.
These are the families of the Beni Asher, by their number fifty-three thousand four hundred.
The sons of Naphtali, after their families: of Jahziel, the families of Jahziel; of Gunni, the families of Gunni;
of Jezer, the family of Jezer; of Shelem, the family of Shelem.
These are the families of Naphtali by their families, and their number forty-five thousand four hundred.
These were the numbered of the sons of Israel, six hundred and one thousand seven hundred and thirty.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Unto these thou shalt divide the land for a possession, according to the number of their names.
To the many thou shalt make large their possession, and to the few thou shalt make their possession small; to each according to his number shalt thou give his inheritance.
Nevertheless the land shall be divided by lot, according to the names of the tribes of their fathers they shall inherit.
By the lot shall their inheritance be divided among the many and the few.
And these are the sons of Levi, after their families: of Gershon, the families of Gershon; of Kehath, the family of Kehath; of Merari, the families of Merari.
These are the families of Levi: the family of Libni, the family of Hebron, the family of Machli, the family off Mushi, the family of Korach And Kehath begat Amram.
And the name of Amram’s wife was Jokebed, a daughter of Levi, who was born to Levi, in Mizraim; and she bare unto Amram Aharon, and Mosheh, and Miriam their sister.
And unto Aharon were born Nadab and Abihu, Elazar and Ithamar.
But Nadab and Abihu died in their offering strange fire before the Lord.
And the numbered of them were twenty-three thousand of all the males from a month old and upwards: for they were not numbered among the children of Israel, because no possession was given to them among the children of Israel.
These (are they whom) Mosheh and Elazar the priest numbered of the sons of Israel, in the plains of Moab, by Jordan, (over against) Jericho.
But among these there was not a man of them whom Mosheh and Aharon the priest numbered when they counted the children of Israel in the wilderness of Sinai.
For the Lord had said to them that dying they should die in the wilderness; and not a man of them remained, except Kaleb bar Jephuneh and Jehoshua bar Nun.
And the daughters of Zelophechad bar Hepher, bar Gilead, bar Makir, bar Menasheh, of the families of Menasheh, bar Joseph, and these are the names of his daughters, Mahelah, Nohah, and Hegelah, and Milchah, and Thirzah,
Came and stood before Mosheh and Elazar the priest, and before the princes, and all the congregation, at the door of the tabernacle of ordinance, saying:
Our father died in the wilderness; but he was not among the company which gathered against the Lord in the congregation of Korach, but died through his (own) sin; and he had no sons.
Why should the name of our father be taken away from among his kindred, because he had no son? Give us an inheritance among the brethren of our father.
And Mosheh brought their cause before the Lord.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
The daughters of Zelophechad have spoken properly. Give thou to them the possession of an inheritance among the brethren of their father, and transfer to them their father’s inheritance.
And speak with the children of Israel, saying: If a man die, having no son, you shall make over his inheritance to his daughter;
And if he have no daughter, you shall give his inheritance to his brethren;
But if he have no brothers, you shall give his inheritance to the brethren of his father;
And if his father have no brothers, then shall you give his inheritance to his relative who is next (of kin) to him of his family, and he shall inherit it. And this shall be to the children of Israel for a decree of judgment, as the Lord hath commanded Mosheh.
And the Lord said unto Mosheh, Go up to this mountain of the Abaraee, and see the land which I have given to the children of Israel;
And thou shalt see it, and be gathered to thy people, thou also, as Aharon thy brother was gathered.
As ye rebelled against My Word in the desert of Zin, in the strife of the congregation, to sanctify Me at the waters before their eyes; these are the waters of strife, at Rekem, in the desert of Zin.
And Mosheh spake before the Lord, saying;
Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, appoint a man over the congregation
who may go out and go in before them, and may lead them out and bring them in; that this congregation may not be as a flock which hath no shepherd.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Take to thee Jehoshua bar Nun, a man in whom is the spirit of prophecy, and lay thy hand upon him.
And make him stand before Elazar the priest, and before all the congregation, and give him charge in their sight.
And thou shalt confer some of thy honour upon him, that all the congregation of the children of Israel may obey him.
And he shall stand before Elazar the priest, that he may ask (counsel) for him by the judgment of Uraia before the Lord: upon his word shall they go out, and upon his word shall they come in, he and all the sons of Israel with him, even all the congregation.
And Mosheh did as the Lord commanded him, and took Jehoshua, and made him to stand before Elazar the priest, and all the congregation;
And he laid his hands upon him, and gave him charge, as the Lord spake by Mosheh.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
instruct the children of Israel, and say to them: My oblation, the ordained bread for My oblations to be received with acceptance, shall you observe to offer in its time.
And thou shalt say to them: This is the oblation which you shall offer before the Lord; two lambs of the year unblemished daily, for a perpetual burnt offering.
The one lamb shalt thou perform in the morning, and the second lamb between the suns.
And with one-tenth of three seahs of flour for the mincha sprinkled with the fourth of a hin of beaten oil.
It is a perpetual burnt offering, which was made in the mountain of Sinai, to be received with acceptance (as) an oblation before the Lord.
And its libation shall be the fourth of a hin for each lamb; in the sanctuary shall the libation of old wine be poured out before the Lord.
And the second lamb shalt thou perform between the suns, as the morning offering; and thou shalt make its libation (in like manner) an oblation to be received with acceptance before the Lord.
But on the Sabbath day two lambs of the year unblemished, and two-tenths of flour for the mincha sprinkled with oil, and its libation.
It is the Sabbath burnt offering which shall be performed on the Sabbath, together with the perpetual burnt offering and its libation.
And in the beginnings of your months you shall offer a burnt offering before the Lord; two young bullocks, and one ram, lambs of the year, seven, unblemished.
And three tenths of flour sprinkled with oil for each bullock, and two-tenths of flour for a mincha sprinkled with oil for the one ram,
And a tenth of flour for a mincha sprinkled with oil for each lamb: it is a burnt offering to be received with acceptance as an oblation before the Lord.
And their libations a half hina of wine shall be for the bullock, and the third of a hina for the ram, and a quarter of a hina for a lamb: this is the burnt offering for the beginning of the month, at its renewal; so shall it be for all the beginnings of the months of the year.
And one kid of the goats for a sin offering before the Lord, beside the perpetual burnt offering, shalt thou make with its libation.
And in the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, is the Pascha before the Lord.
And on the fifteenth day of this month is the feast: seven days you shall eat unleavened (bread).
On the first day shall be a holy convocation; you shall not do any servile work;
But offer the oblation of a burnt offering before the Lord; two young bullocks and one ram, and seven lambs of the year without blemish shall you have;
And their mincha of flour mingled with oil, three tenths for the bullock and two-tenths for the ram you shall make;
a tenth shall you make for one lamb, so for the seven lambs.
And one goat for a sin offering to make atonement for you;
Besides the burnt sacrifice of the morning which is the perpetual burnt sacrifice, you shall make these.
After the manner of these you shall do by the day for seven days; it is the bread of the oblation to be received with acceptance before the Lord; (with) the perpetual burnt offering and its libation shall it be made.
And on the seventh day there shall be a holy convocation, (when) you may do no servile work.
But on the day of the Firstfruits, when you bring the new thank-offering before the Lord in your expletion, there shall be a holy convocation; no servile work shall you do,
But offer a burnt offering to be received with favour before the Lord; two young bullocks, one ram, seven lambs of the year;
And their mincha of flour mingled with oil, three tenths for one bullock,
two-tenths for the ram, a tenth for each lamb of the seven lambs;
One kid of the goats to make an atonement for you;
Beside the perpetual burnt sacrifice and its mincha you shall (make) them unblemished, and their libations.
And in the seventh month, on the first of the month, you shall have a holy convocation, and do no servile work; it shall be a day of the sounding of the trumpet to you.
And you shall make a burnt sacrifice to be received with favour before the Lord: one young bullock, one ram, lambs of the year seven, unblemished,
and their mincha of flour mingled with oil, three tenths for the bullock, two-tenths for the ram,
And one-tenth for each of the seven lambs;
And one kid of the goats for a sin offering to make an atonement for you;
Beside the offering of the month, and its mincha, and the perpetual sacrifice and its mincha, and their libations, as proper for them, to be received with favour, an oblation before the Lord.
And on the tenth of this seventh month you shall have a holy convocation, and afflict your souls; you shall do no labour,
but offer a burnt offering before the Lord to be received with favour: one young bullock, one ram, lambs of the year seven, unblemished shall you have;
And their mincha of flour mingled with oil; three tenths for the bullock, two-tenths for the ram,
And a single tenth for each of the seven lambs;
One kid of the goats for a sin offering, beside the sin offering of the expiations, and the perpetual sacrifice, its mincha and their libations.
And on the fifteenth day of the seventh month you shall have a holy convocation; no servile labour shall you do, but celebrate a festival before the Lord seven days;
And offer a burnt sacrifice, an oblation to be received with favour before the Lord; thirteen young bullocks, two rams, lambs of the year fourteen, unblemished shall they be;
And their mincha of flour mingled with oil, three tenths to one bullock for the thirteen bullocks, two-tenths for each ram,
And one-tenth for each of the fourteen lambs,
And one kid of the goats for a sin offering, beside the perpetual sacrifice, its mincha and libation.
And on the second day you shall offer twelve young bullocks, two rams, fourteen unblemished lambs of the year,
and the minchas and libations for the bullocks, for the rams and the lambs, as is proper for their number;
And one kid of the goats, a sin offering, beside the perpetual sacrifice, its mincha and libation.
And on the third day eleven bullocks, two rams, fourteen unblemished lambs of the year;
And their minchas and libations for the bullocks, the rams, and the lambs, as befitteth their number;
And one kid for a sin offering, beside the perpetual sacrifice, its mincha and libation.
On the fourth day ten bullocks, two rams, lambs of the year unblemished fourteen;
Their minchas and libations for the bullocks, rams, and lambs by their number, as it is proper;
And one kid of the goats for a sin offering, beside the perpetual sacrifice, its mincha and libation.
And on the fifth day nine bullocks, two rams, lambs of the year unblemished fourteen;
The minchas and libations for the bullocks, rams, and lambs after their number, as it is proper;
And one kid for a sin offering, beside the perpetual sacrifice and its libation.
And on the sixth day eight bullocks, two rams, lambs of the year unblemished fourteen;
The minchas and libations for the bullocks, rams, and lambs by their number, as is proper;
And one kid for the sin offering, beside the perpetual sacrifice, its mincha and libation.
And on the seventh day seven bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs of the year unblemished;
The minchas and libations for the bullocks, rams, and lambs by their number, as is proper;
And one kid for the sin offering, beside the perpetual sacrifice, its mincha and libation.
On the eighth day you shall have all assembly; no servile work shall you do,
But offer a sacrifice, all oblation to be received with favour before the Lord; one bullock, one ram, seven Iambs of the year unblemished;
The minchas and libations for the bullock, the ram, and the lambs, as proper, according to their number;
And one kid for a sill offering, beside the perpetual sacrifice, its mincha and libation.
These shall you offer before the Lord in your solemnities, beside your vows and your free-will offerings with your burnt sacrifices, their minchas and their libations, and with your sanctified victims.
And Mosheh spake to the sons of Israel according to all that the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And Mosheh spake with the heads of the tribes of the Beni Israel, saying: This is the word which the Lord hath commanded:
When a man shall make a vow before the Lord, or swear an oath to bind a bond upon his soul, he shall not make void his word; according to all that hath come out of his mouth he shall perform.
And if a woman make a vow before the Lord, and bind (herself) with a bond in her father’s house, (being) in her youth,
And her father shall hear her vow, and the obligation she hath bound upon her soul, and her father be silent to her, then all her vows shall stand, and every bond that she hath bound upon her soul shall be confirmed.
But if her father prohibit (or undo) them on the day that he heareth, all the vows and the bonds that she hath bound upon her soul shall not stand, and she shall be forgiven before the Lord, because her father undid them.
And if she hath a husband, and taketh a vow upon her, or if her lips pronounce that which becometh binding upon her soul,
and her husband heard and was silent to her on the day that he heard, her vows shall stand, and the obligation she hath bound upon her soul be confirmed:
But if her husband on the day that he heareth shall prohibit them, the vows which are on her and the utterance of her lips which became binding on her soul shall be void, and be forgiven her before the Lord.
But every vow of the widow, or of one divorced, which she hath bound upon her soul, shall be confirmed upon her.
And if (while in her husband’s house) she had vowed, or had bound aught upon her soul with an oath,
And her husband heard and was silent to her, and did not prohibit them, all her vows shall be confirmed, every bond with which she hath bound her soul shall be confirmed.
But if indeed her husband shall make them void in the day that he heard, that which her lips expressed in her vow and in the binding of her soul shall not be confirmed; her husband hath made them void, and she shall be absolved before the Lord.
Every vow and every covenant (oath) to chastise the soul, her husband may confirm it, or her husband may make it void.
But if her husband was entirely silent to her from day to day, then he hath confirmed all her vows, or whatever bonds (she taketh) upon her, he confirmeth them, because he was silent to her on the day that he heard.
But if he shall indeed make them void after (the day that) he had heard, then he shall bear her sin.
These are the statutes which the Lord commanded Mosheh between a man and his wife, (and) between a father and his daughter, in her youth in her father’s house.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites; afterward thou shalt be gathered to thy people.
And Mosheh spake with the people, saying: Arm, of you, men for the host against Midian, to avenge this people of the Lord upon Midian:
A thousand of a tribe, a thousand of a tribe, of all the tribes or Israel, shall you send to the host.
And from the thousands of Israel there were chosen a thousand of a tribe, twelve thousand armed for the host.
And Mosheh sent them one thousand of a tribe to array them, and Phinehas bar Elazar the priest, with the host, and the holy vessels, and the Jubela trumpets in his hand.
And the host gathered against Midian, as tile Lord had commanded Mosheh; and they slaughtered every male.
But the kings of Midian they killed with their slain, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Chur, and Reba, five kings of Midian, and Bileam bar Beor, they killed with the sword.
And the sons of Israel took the women of Midian captives, with their children and all their cattle, and all their flocks and all their goods they despoiled.
And all their cities where they dwelt, and their houses of worship, they burned with fire.
And they took all the spoil, and all the prey of man and of cattle,
and brought the captives, and the prey, and the spoil, to Mosheh, and to Elazar the priest, and to all the congregation of the Beni Israel, to the camp in the fields of Moab, by the Jordan, over against Jericho.
And Mosheh and Elazar the priest and all the princes of the congregation went out to meet them, without the camp.
But Mosheh was angry with those who had been appointed over the host, the captains of thousands and the captains of hundreds, who came from the battle.
And Mosheh said to them, Have you spared every woman?
Behold, these it was (who caused) the sons of Israel, through the counsel of Bileam, to do wickedly before the Lord in the matter of Peor, and the plague came upon the congregation of the Lord.
But now, slay every male among the children, and every woman who hath known a man you shall slay.
But all the females who have not known a man ye may preserve alive unto you.
And you, abide without the camp seven days; whoever have destroyed life or touched the dead, sprinkle yourselves on the third day, and on the seventh day yourselves and your captives.
And every garment, and whatever is made of skin, and every work of goat’s hair, and every vessel of wood you shall sprinkle.
And Elazar the priest said to the men of war who came from the battle, This is the decree of the law which the Lord hath commanded Mosheh:
Only the gold, and the silver, the brass, iron, tin, and lead,
everything that can abide in the fire, you shall make to go through fire, and it shall be clean; nevertheless it shall be sprinkled with the water of sprinkling; and whatever may not abide the fire you shall make to pass through water.
And cleanse your garments on the seventh day; purify yourselves, and afterwards come into the camp.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Take the account of the spoil of the captives, man and beast; thou, Elazar the priest, and the chief fathers of the congregation,
And divide the spoil among the men who fought the battle, who went forth in the host, and among all the congregation:
And separate a portion before the Lord from (that of) the men who fought the battle, who went forth in the host, one living thing in five hundred, of man and beast, oxen, asses, and sheep.
Take it of their half, and give it to Elazar the priest, for a separation before the Lord.
And of the half (belonging) to the children of Israel, take one of every fifty, of man, of oxen, sheep, and all cattle, and give them to the Levites who keep charge of the tabernacle of the Lord.
And Mosheh and Elazar the priest did as the Lord commanded Mosheh.
And the booty, the rest of the prey which the people who went forth to the war had taken, was, sheep six hundred and seventy-five thousand,
oxen seventy-two thousand,
asses sixty-one thousand,
persons, women who had not known man, every soul thirty-two thousand.
And the half portion of the men who had gone out to the war, the number was, sheep three hundred and thirty-seven thousand five hundred;
And that which was brought up before the Lord, of the sheep six hundred and seventy-five;
And of the thirty-six thousand oxen, the portion brought before the Lord seventy-two.
And the asses, thirty thousand five hundred, of which the portion brought before the Lord sixty-one.
And the persons sixteen thousand, those of them brought before the Lord thirty-two persons.
And Mosheh gave the separation brought up before the Lord to Elazar the priest, as the Lord had commanded Mosheh.
And of the children of Israel’s half, which Mosheh divided from (that) of the men who had gone out in the host,
And the half part for the congregation as, sheep three hundred and thirty-seven thousand five hundred,
oxen thirty-six thousand,
and asses thirty thousand five hundred,
and persons sixteen thousand:
And Mosheh took from the children of Israel’s half one portion of fifty of man and beast, and gave them to the Levites who kept charge of the Lord’s tabernacle, as the Lord had commanded Mosheh.
And they who had been appointed over the thousands of the host, the captains of thousands, and the captains of hundreds, came to Mosheh,
And said to Mosheh, Thy servants have taken the account of the men who went forth to the war with us, and there is not wanting one man of us.
And we bring an oblation before the Lord of what each man hath found, vessels of gold, chains, bracelets, rings, amulets, and brooches, to make atonement for our souls before the Lord.
And Mosheh and Elazar the priest took the gold of them, every fabricated vessel.
And all the gold of the separation which the captains of thousands and of hundreds separated before the Lord was: sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty shekels;
for the men of the host had taken spoil, every man for himself.
And Mosheh and Elazar the priest took the gold from the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and brought it into the tabernacle of ordinance, a memorial of the sons of Israel before the Lord.
Now the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad possessed much cattle, exceedingly many; and they saw the land of Jazer and the land of Gilead, and, behold, the region was a place fit for folds of cattle.
And the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben came and spake to Mosheh and to Elazar the priest, and to the heads of the congregation, saying:
Maklelta and Malbasta and the Priests of Beth-Nemrin, and Beth-Hesh-bena, and Baale Debaba, and Seath, (the sepulchre of Mosheh,) and Beon,
The land which the Lord smote before the congregation of Israel, is a country fitted for cattle folds, and thy servants have cattle.
And they said, If we have found grace in thine eyes, let this land be given to thy servants for a possession, and let us not go over the Jordan.
But Mosheh said to the sons of Gad and to the sons of Reuben, Shall your brethren go in to fight, and you sit down here?
And why turn you away the heart of the sons of Israel from going over to the land which the Lord hath given to them?
Thus did your fathers when I sent them from Rekem Giah to survey the land.
They went up to the stream of Ethkela, and saw the land, and subverted the heart of the sons of Israel, that they might not go in unto the land that the Lord had given to them;
And the Lord’s anger was kindled that day, and He sware, saying:
If the men who have come out of Mizraim, from twenty years old and upward, shall see the land which I covenanted to Abraham, to Izhak, and to Jakob; for they have not been wholly after my fear.
Only Kaleb bar Jephuneh, the Kenezite, and Jehoshua bar Nun, for they have been wholly after the fear of the Lord.
And the Lord’s anger was strong against Israel, and he made them linger in the wilderness forty years, until all the generation that did wickedly before the Lord had been consumed.
And, behold, you have risen up after your fathers, the disciples of the men of sin, to add yet to the fierce displeasure of the Lord against Israel.
For if you turn again from (following) after His service, He will yet make you remain in the wilderness, and you will destroy all this people.
And they came near to him, and said: We will build here sheepfolds for our cattle and cities for our families;
And we will go forth eagerly, armed, before the sons of Israel, to bring them into their place; and our families shall abide in cities defenced against the inhabitants of the land:
Nor will we return to our homes till the sons of Israel shall possess every man his inheritance.
For we will not inherit with them over the Jordan and beyond; for we receive our possession on the eastward side of the Jordan.
And Mosheh said to them: If you will do this; if you will go armed before the people of the Lord to war,
and (a host) of you all armed will pass the Jordan before the people of the Lord, until He shall have driven out the enemy before Him,
And the land have been subdued before the Lord’s people, then afterward you shall return, and be guiltless before the Lord and with Israel, and this land shall be to you for an inheritance before the Lord.
But if you do it not, behold, you have sinned before the Lord; and know, that your sin will find you.
Build you cities for your families, and folds for your sheep, and do that which hath come from your mouth.
And the tribe of the Beni Gad and of the Beni Reuben spake to Mosheh, saying: Thy servants will do as my lord commandeth.
Our little ones, our wives, our flocks, and all our cattle shall be here in the cities of Gilead;
But thy servants, a host all armed, will pass over before the people of the Lord to war, as our lord speaketh.
And Mosheh commanded concerning them Elazar the priest, and Jehoshua bar Nun, and the chief fathers of the tribes of the Beni Israel.
And Mosheh said to them, If the sons of Gad and of Reuben pass over the Jordan with you, all armed for war, before the Lord’s people, and the land be subdued before you, then shall you give them the land of Gilead for a possession.
But if they go not over armed with you, they shall inherit among you in the land of Kenaan.
But the sons of Gad and of Reuben answered, saying: As the Lord hath spoken to thy servants, so will we do.
We will pass over armed before the people of the Lord into the land of Kenaan, that the possession of our inheritance may be on the other side Jordan.
And Mosheh gave to them, to the sons of Gad, and to the sons of Reuben, and to the half tribe of Menasheh bar Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amoraah, and the kingdom of Og the king of Mathanan, the land with the cities thereof in the coasts, (even) the cities of the country round about.
And the sons of Gad built Dibon, and Ataroth, and Aroer,
and Ataroth Shophan, and Jazer, and Jagbeha,
and Beth-nimra, and Beth-haran, fenced cities and sheepfolds.
And the sons of Reuben built Heshbon, and Elhala, and Kirjathaim,
And Nebo, and Baal Meon, changing their names, and Sibama; and they called by their names the names of the cities which they built.
And the sons of Makir bar Menasheh went unto Gilead, and subdued it, and cast out the Amoraah who were in it.
And Mosheh gave Gilead to Makir bar Menasheh, and he dwelt therein.
And Jair bar Menasheh went and subdued their villages, and called them the villages of Jair.
And Nobach went and subdued Kenath and its villages, and called it Nobach after his name.
These are the journeys of the Beni Israel who went forth from the land of Mizraim in their hosts, by the hand of Mosheh and Aharon.
And Mosheh wrote their goings out, and by their journeys by the Word of the Lord; and these are their journeys according to their goings out.
And they went forth from Ramesis in the first month, on the fifteenth day of the first month, after the day of the Pascha, the children of Israel went out in full view of the eves of all the Mizraee.
And the Mizraee buried all the firstborn which the Lord had slain among them, and upon their idols had the Lord wrought judgments.
And the children of Israel proceeded from Ramesis, and encamped in Succoth.
And they went on from Succoth, and encamped in Etham, which is on the side of the wilderness.
And they removed from Etham, and returned upon PumHiratha, before Baal-Zephon, and pitched before Migdol.
And they departed from Pum-Hiratha, and went through the midst of the sea into the wilderness, and went, going three days in the wilderness of Etham, and pitched in Marah.
And they removed from Marah, and came to Elim; and in Elim were twelve wells of water and seventy palm trees, and they encamped there.
And they removed from Elim, and pitched by the Sea of Suph.
And they removed from the Sea of Suph, and pitched in the wilderness of Sin.
And they departed from the wilderness of Sin, and pitched in Dapheka;
and they removed from Dapheka, and encamped in Alush.
And they removed from Alush, and pitched in Rephidin; and there was no water for the people to drink.
And they removed from Rephidin, and encamped in the wilderness of Sinai.
And they removed from the wilderness of Sinai, and encamped at the Sepulchres of Desire.
And they removed from the Sepulchres of Desire, and pitched in Hazeroth;
and they removed from Hazeroth, and pitched in Rithema.
And they removed from Rithema, and pitched in Rimmon-pharez.
And they removed from Rimmon-pharez, and encamped in Libnah.
And they removed from Libnah, and pitched in Resah.
And they removed from Resah, and pitched in Kehelatha.
And they removed from Kehelatha, and encamped at Mount Shapher.
And they removed from Mount Shapher, and encamped in Harada.
And they removed from Harada, and pitched in Makheloth.
And they removed from Makheloth, and pitched in Tachath.
And they removed from Tachath, and pitched in Tharah.
And they removed from Tharah, and pitched in Mitheka.
And they removed from Mitheka, and encamped in Hashmona.
And they removed from Hashmona, and pitched in Moseroth.
And they removed from Moseroth, and encamped in Beni Jaakan.
And they removed from Beni Jaakan, and pitched at Mount Hagidgad.
And they removed from Mount Hagidgad, and pitched in Jetbatha.
And they removed from Jetbatha, and pitched in Ebrona.
And they removed from Ebrona, and pitched in Ezion-Geber.
And they removed from Ezion-Geber, and encamped in the wilderness of Zin, which is Rekem.
And they removed from Rekem, and encamped at Mount Hor, on the borders of the land of Edom.
And Aharon the priest went up on Mount Hor by the Word of the Lord, and died there in the fortieth year of the outgoing of the children of Israel from the land of Mizraim, in the fifth month, on the first of the month.
And Aharon was a son of one hundred and twenty-three years when he died on Mount Hor.
And the Kenaanite, king of Harad, who dwelt in the south, in the land of Kenaan, heard of the coming of the Beni Israel.
And they removed from Mount Hor, and encamped in Zalmona.
And they removed from Zalmona, and pitched in Phunon.
And they removed from Phunon, and pitched in Aboth.
And they removed from Aboth, and encamped at the Passing Fords on the border of Moab.
And they removed from the Fords, and pitched at Dibon Gad.
And they removed from Dibon Gad, and pitched in Elmon Diblathaimah.
And they removed from Elmon Diblathaimah, and pitched at the mountains of Abaraee, which are before Nebo.
And they removed from the mountains of Abaraee, and encamped in the plains of Moab by Jordan (over against) Jericho.
And they encamped by the Jordan from Beth Jeshimoth unto the vale of Sittin in the fields of Moab.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh in the fields of Moaba by the Jordan (near) Jericho, saying:
Speak with the sons of Israel, and say to them: When you have passed over Jordan to the land of Kenaan,
You shall cast out all the inhabitants of the land from before you, demolish all the houses of their worship, destroy all their molten images, and lay waste all their high places.
And you shall cast out the inhabitants of the land, and dwell in it; for I have given you the land to inherit.
And you shall possess the land by lot, according to your families; to the many you shall make their possession large, and to the few diminish the possession: where the lot falleth to anyone, there shall he be; according to the tribes of your fathers you shall possess.
But if you will not drive out the inhabitants of the country from before you, it will be that those who remain of them, combining, will take arms against you, and surrounding you with camps they will distress you in the land wherein you dwell.
And it shall be that what I had thought to do unto them, I will do unto you.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Command the sons of Israel, and say to them: When you have entered into the land of Kenaan, that land which shall be divided to you for a possession, the land of Kenaan by its coasts,
Then your south border shall be from the wilderness of Zin on the frontier of Edom, and your south border shall be from the extremities of the Sea of Salt eastward.
And your border shall turn from the south to the going up of Akrabbim, and shall pass over to Zin; and the going out of it shall be from the south unto Rekem Giah, and go on to Hazar-Adar, and pass over to Azemon.
And the border shall turn from Azemon to the stream of Mizraim, and its goings out shall be toward the west (Heb. the sea).
And for the western border you shall have the Great Sea; this shall be your western border.
And this shall be your northern border: from the Great Sea you shall appoint for you Mount Hor;
From Mount Hor you shall appoint to the entrance of Hamath, and the goings forth of the border shall be unto Zedad.
And the border shall be unto Zaphron, and its goings forth to Ezarenan; this shall be your north border.
And you shall appoint your eastern border from Ezarenan to Shepham;
And the border shall go down from Shepham unto Riblah, eastward of the fountain, and the border shall go down and come to the bank of the Sea of Genesar on the east.
And the border shall go down to the Jordan, and its going out be at the Sea of Salt. This shall be your land with its confines round about.
And Mosheh commanded the sons of Israel, saying: This shall be the land which you are to possess by lot, which the Lord hath commanded to give to the nine tribes and to the half tribe.
For the tribe of the Beni Reuben by the house of their fathers, and the tribe of the Beni Gad by the house of their fathers, and the half tribe of Menasheh, have received their inheritance.
The two tribes and the half tribe have received their inheritance across the Jordan by Jericho towards the east.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
These are the names of the men who shall apportion the land to you: Elazar the priest, and Jehoshua bar Nun.
And you shall take of each tribe one prince to apportion the land,
and these are the names of the men: of the tribe of Jehudah, Kaleb bar Jephuneh;
of the tribe of the Beni Shemeon, Shemuel bar Ammihud;
of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad bar Kiselon;
of the tribe of the Beni Dan, Rabba Bokki bar Jagli;
of the Beni-Joseph, of the tribe of the Beni Menasheh, Rabba Haniel bar Ephod;
of the tribe of the Beni-Ephraim, Rabba Kemuel bar Shiphtan;
of the tribe of the Beni Zebulon, Rabba Elizaphan bar Parnak;
of the tribe of the Beni Issakar, Rabba Peltiel bar Ezar;
And of that of the Beni Asher, Rabba Ahihud bar Shelomi;
and of that of the Beni Naphtali, Rabba Phadael bar Ammihud.
These are they whom the Lord commanded to divide the inheritance of the children of Israel in the land of Kenaan.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh in the plains of Moab, on the Jordan-Jericho, saying:
Command the sons of Israel that they give to the Levites of the inheritance of their possession cities to inhabit, and a space (suburb) with the cities round about shall they give to the Levites.
And the cities they shall have to inhabit, and their spaces, shall be for their cattle, and for their possessions, and for all their animals.
And the spaces of the cities which you give to the Levites (shall extend) from the wall of the city outward, a thousand cubits round about.
And you shall measure without the city, on the east side two thousand cubits, and on the south side two thousand cubits, and on the west side two thousand cubits, and on the north side two thousand cubits, and the city in the midst; this shall be for you the spaces of the cities.
And (of) the cities which you give to the Levites, six shall be cities of refuge, which you shall appoint for the (man) slayer to flee thereunto, and to them you shall add forty-two cities.
All the cities that you give to the Levites shall be forty-eight cities, they and their suburbs.
And the cities that you give shall be of the inheritance of the Beni Israel; of those who have many you shall give many, and of the few you shall give few; each according to his possession he inherits shall he give of his cities to the Levites.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
speak with the sons of Israel, and say to them: When you have passed the Jordan to the land of Kenaan,
Then shall you appoint to you cities, cities of refuge shall they be for you, that the slayer who hath killed a life unawares may flee thither.
And they shall be for you cities of refuge from the avenger of blood, that the slayer may not die until he hath stood before the congregation for judgment.
And of those cities that you give you shall have six cities of refuge:
Three cities you shall give beyond Jordan, and three cities in the land of Kenaan; cities of refuge shall they be.
For the sons of Israel, and for the sojourner among you, there shall be these six cities of refuge, that thither may flee everyone who bath slain a person unawares.
But if he hath smitten him with a weapon of iron and killed him, he is a murderer; and the murderer is to be surely put to death.
Or, if with a stone which he carried in his hand, that he who was struck with it should die, he who killed him is a murderer, and the murderer is to be surely put to death.
Or, if with a weapon of wood which he carried in his hand that he who was struck with it might die, and he killeth him, he is a murderer, and the murderer shall be verily put to death.
The avenger of blood himself shall kill the murderer, when condemned by the judgment he shall kill him.
And if he smote him in enmity, or threw at him in concealment and killed him,
Or in enmity smote him with his hand and killed him, the smiter is a murderer, he shall be surely put to death: the avenger of blood shall slay the slayer when he is condemned.
But if he have struck him suddenly without enmity, or have thrown anything upon him without lying in wait for him,
Or struck him with a stone sufficient to kill him, but cast it upon him without seeing, and have killed him without hating him or seeking to do him evil,
then the congregation shall judge between the smiter and the avenger of blood, according to these judgments.
And the congregation shall deliver the slayer from the avenger of blood, and return him to the city of his refuge to which he had fled, and he shall dwell in it until the death of the high priest who was anointed with the holy oil.
But if the slayer shall come out of the boundary of the city of his retreat to which he hath fled,
and the avenger of blood find him outside of the bounds of the city of his retreat, and the avenger of blood slay the slayer, he shall not be guilty of blood.
Because he should have abode within the city of his retreat until the death of the high priest: but after the death of the high priest the slayer may return to the land of his inheritance.
And these shall be to you a decree of judgment for your generations in all your dwellings.
Whosoever killeth a person shall die, by the mouth of witnesses; but one witness shall not testify against a man to put (him) to death.
Neither may you take money on account of a manslayer who is guilty of death, for dying he shall die.
Nor may you take money for him who hath fled to his city of refuge, so that he may return to dwell in the land till the high priest shall die.
But you shall not make guilty the land in which you are; for blood maketh the land guilty; and the land is not expiated for innocent blood that is shed therein but by the blood of him who shed it.
Defile not then the land in which you dwell, for My Shekinah dwelleth in the midst of it; for I, the Lord, by My Shekinah dwell among the children of Israel.
And the chief fathers of the families of the Beni Gilead, bar Makir, bar Menasheh, of the family of the Beni-Joseph, came and spake before Mosheh, the princes and chief fathers of the Beni Israel,
and said: The Lord commanded Rabboni to give the land an inheritance by lot to the children of Israel; and Rabboni was commanded by the Word of the Lord to give the inheritance of Zelophechad our brother to his daughters.
But if they become wives to any of the sons of the (other) tribes of the Beni Israel, then will their inheritance be taken away from the inheritance of our fathers, and added to the inheritance of the tribe which will have become theirs, and be (thus) diminished from the portion of our inheritance.
And when the Jubela of the children of Israel come, their inheritance will be added to the possession of the tribe that hath become theirs, and our possession will pass away from the inheritance of our father’s tribe.
And Mosheh commanded the sons of Israel by the Word of the Lord, saying: The tribe of the sons of Joseph have spoken well.
This is the thing which the Lord hath commanded for the daughters of Zelophechad, saying: Let them become the wives of those who are proper in their eyes, only of (men) of their father’s tribe may they become wives.
And the inheritance of the children of Israel shall not turn from tribe to tribe; for every man of the Beni Israel shall keep himself to the inheritance of his father’s tribe.
And every daughter inheriting a possession (in one) of the tribes of the children of Israel shall be wife of one of the families of her father’s tribe: that the sons of Israel may each man inherit the possession of his fathers.
And the inheritance shall not pass from one tribe to another tribe, but everyone of the tribes of the Beni Israel shall keep to its own inheritance.
As the Lord commanded Mosheh, so did the daughters of Zelophechad:
And Maalah, and Thirzah, and Hegela, and Milchah, and Nohah, the daughters of Zelophechad, became wives of sons of their father’s brethren.
They were married into the family of the Beni Menasheh bar Joseph, and their inheritance (remained) with the tribe of their father’s family.
These are the commandments and judgments which the Lord commanded by the hand of Mosheh to the children of Israel, in the plains of Moab, by Jordan, near Jericho.
These are the words which Mosheh spake with all Israel beyond the Jordan, reproving them because they had sinned in the wilderness, and had provoked (the Lord) to anger on the plains over against the Sea of Suph, in Pharan, where they scorned the manna; and in Hazeroth, where they provoked to anger on account of flesh, and because they had made the golden calf.
It is a journey of eleven days from Horeb by the way of Mount Seir unto Rekem Giah.
And it came to pass in the fortieth year, in the eleventh month, in the first day of the month, Mosheh spake with the sons of Israel according to all that the Lord had commanded him for them.
After he had slain Sihon, king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon, and Og, king of Mathnan, who dwelt at Ashtaroth in Edrehi;
On this side Jordan in the land of Moab began Mosheh to explain the doctrine of this law, saying:
The Lord our God spake with us at Horeb, saying: It is sufficient for you to have dwelt at this mountain:
Turn, and proceed, and go unto the mountain of the Amoraah, and to all its habitable places in the plains, the mountain, the valleys, and in the south, and by the side of the sea; the land of the Kenaanah and Lebanon, unto the river, the great river Phrat;
Behold, I have set the land before you; go in and possess the land which the Lord covenanted to your fathers, to Abraham, to Izhak, and to Jakob; to give it to them, and to your children after them.
And I spake to you at that time, saying: I am not able to bear you myself alone.
The Lord your God hath multiplied you; and, behold, you are this day as the stars of the heavens for multitude.
The Lord God of your fathers make you a thousand times more than you are, and bless you, as He hath said to you!
How can I bear alone your labour, your business, and your adjudgments?
Provide (then) for yourselves prudent and sagacious men of your tribes, and I will appoint them to be chiefs over you.
And you answered me, and said: The thing that thou hast spoken it is right that we should do.
And I took the heads of your tribes, wise men and masters of knowledge, and appointed them chiefs over you, captains of thousands, of hundreds, of fifties, and of tens, and officers of your tribes.
And I charged your judges at that time, saying: Hear between your brethren, and judge rightly between a man and his brother, or the sojourner.
You shall not have respect to persons in the judgment; you shall hear little words (matters) as well as great; nor be afraid of the face of man, for the judgment is of the Lord; and the matter that is too hard for you bring to me, and I will hear it;
And commanded you at that time all the things that you should do.
And we departed from Horeb, and went through all that great and fearful desert which you saw by the way of the mountain of the Amoraah, as the Lord our God commanded us, and we came unto Rekem Giah.
And I the said: You are come to the mountain of the Amoraah, which the Lord our God will give to us.
See, the Lord thy God hath set the land before thee: arise, possess (it), as the Lord the God of thy fathers hath bid thee; fear not, nor be broken.
And all of you came to me and said: We will send men before us, to explore the land for us, and bring us word about the way to go up to it, and to what cities we shall come.
And the thing was good in my eyes, and I took from you twelve men, one man for a tribe.
And they turned and went up to the mountain, and came to the brook of Ethkela, and explored it.
And they took in their hands some of the produce of the land and brought to us, and returned us word, saying: The land which the Lord will give us is good.
But you were not willing to go up, but were rebellious against the Word of the Lord your God,
and murmured in your tents, and said: Because the Lord hath hated us, He hath brought us from the land of Mizraim to deliver us into the hand of the Amoraah to destroy us.
To what shall we go up? Our brethren have broken our heart, saying: The people are greater and stronger than we; vast are the cities, and walled to the height of heaven, and we saw there also the sons of the giants.
But I said to you: Be not broken (hearted), fear them not;
The Word of the Lord, who leadeth on before you, will fight for you, according to all that He did for you in Mizraim in your sight;
And in the wilderness, where thou hast seen that the Lord thy God carrieth thee, as a man carrieth his child, in all the way you have journeyed until your coming to this place.
But in this thing you did not believe in the Word of the Lord your God,
who led on before you in the way to prepare for you (each) place of encampment for your sojournings, in the pillar of fire by night to show you in which way to go, and in the pillar of the cloud by day.
But the voice of your words was heard before the Lord, and He was angry, and made oath, saying:
If a man of the men of this evil generation shall see the good land which I sware to your fathers,
Save Kaleb bar Jephunneh. He shall see it, and I will give to him the land on which he hath trodden, and unto his children, because he hath been upright in the fear of the Lord.
Also against me was there displeasure before the Lord on your account, (He) saying: Thou too art not to go in thither;
Jehoshua bar Nun, who standeth before thee, he shall go in thither; strengthen him, for he is to make Israel to inherit;
But your little ones, who you said would be for prey, your children, who today know not good and evil, they shall enter therein, to them will I give it, and they shall possess it;
but you, turn you, and go into the wilderness by the Weedy Sea.
Then you answered, and said: We have sinned before the Lord; we will go up and wage war according to all that the Lord our God commanded; and you girded on every man his weapons of war, and began to go up to the mountain.
But the Lord said to me: Tell them, You shall not go up, neither wage war; for My Shekinah is not among you, lest you be crushed before your enemies.
And I told you, but you hearkened not, but rebelled against the Word of the Lord, and dared, and went up to the mountain;
But the Amoraah who dwelt in that mountain came out against you, and pursued you as bees are dispersed, and smote you in Seir unto Hormah.
And you returned, and wept before the Lord; but the Lord would not receive your prayer, nor hearken to your words;
And you dwelt in Rekem many days, according to the days that you abode.
And we turned, and journeyed to the wilderness by the way of the Sea of Suph, as the Lord had told us; and we encompassed the mountain of Seir many days.
And the Lord spake to me, saying:
You have been about this mountain enough for you: turn you northward;
And command the people, saying: You are going through the coasts of your brethren, the sons of Esau, who dwell in Seir; and they will be afraid of you. Take great heed,
quarrel not with them; for I will not give you of their land, not so much as you may tread upon with the sole of the foot; for the inheritance of Mount Seir I have given to Esau.
You shall buy provision of them with silver, that you may eat; and water, with silver, that you may drink;
For the Lord thy God bath blessed thee in all the works of thy hands; He bath given thee sufficient for thy need in thy going about in this great wilderness; these forty years the Word of the Lord thy God hath been thy helper, thou hast not wanted anything.
And we passed by from our brethren, the sons of Esau, who dwelt in Seir, by the way of the plain from Elath, and from Ezion-Geber; and turned and passed by the way of the wilderness of Moab.
And the Lord said to me, Distress not the Moabaee, nor stir thyself to make war with them; for I will not give thee any of their land to inherit, for I have given Lechiath unto the children of Lot for an inheritance.
The Emethanee in old times dwelt in it; a people great and many, and strong as the giants.
They were reputed as giants, and like giants also they were; but the Moabites called them Emethanee.
And in Seir dwelt the Horaee in former times; but the sons of Esau drave them out, and destroyed them, and dwelt in their places, as Israel did in the land of his inheritance which the Lord gave to them.
Now arise, (said I,) and go over the stream of Zared. And we passed over the stream of Zared.
And the days in which we were journeying from Rekem Giah until we crossed the stream of Zared were thirty and eight years, till all the generation of the men of war were consumed from the camp, as the Lord had sworn to them.
For the plague stroke from before the Lord was upon them to destroy them from among the host till they were consumed.
When all the men of war had been consumed, and had died away from among the people,
the Lord spake with me, saying:
Thou art today to pass by Lechaiath, the frontier of Moab.
But when thou comest nigh over against the Beni Ammon, be not troublesome to them, nor provoke thyself to make war with them; for I have not given to thee of the land of the Beni Ammon any inheritance; for I have given it to the children of Lot to inherit.
That also was reputed a land of giants; in old times giants did dwell in it, and the Ammonites called them Hashbanee;
A people great and many, and strong as giants, but the Lord destroyed them before them and cast them out, and they dwelt in their places.
As did the sons of Esau who dwelt in Seir, when He destroyed the Horaee from before them, and drave them out, and they have dwelt in their places unto this day.
And the Avaee, who dwelt in Pheziach unto Hazah destroyed the Kaphutkaee, who came out of Kaphutkaia, and dwelt in their place.
Arise, remove, and pass over the river of Arnon: behold, I have delivered into thy hand Sihon, king of Heshbon, the Amorite, and his land; begin to cast him out, and rouse thyself to make battle with him.
This day will I begin to put dread of thee and fear of thee upon the face of the peoples which are under the whole heavens, who shall hear thy fame, and be broken before thee.
And I sent ambassadors from the wilderness of Kedemoth unto Sihon king of Heshbon with words of peace, saying,
May I pass through thy land by the way? I will go by the way, nor turn to the right or the left:
Thou shalt sell me provision for silver, and I will eat; and give me water for silver, and I will drink; I will only go through on my feet:
As the Beni Esau who dwell in Seir, and the Moabaee who dwell in Lechaiath, did to me, until I pass over Jordan to the land which the Lord our God shall give to us.
But Sihon king of Heshbon was not willing to permit us to pass through his coasts; for the Lord thy God hardened his spirit and strengthened his heart, that He might deliver him into thy hand, as at this day.
And the Lord said to me, See, I have begun to deliver to thee Sihon and his country; begin thou to drive him out, that thou mayest inherit his land.
And Sihon came forth to meet us, he and all his people, to give battle at Jahaz;
And the Word of the Lord our God delivered him up before us, and we smote him, and his sons, and all his people.
And we subdued all his cities at that time, and consumed all the towns, and the men, women, and children, and left none to escape.
Only the cattle was a booty to us, and the spoil of the cities which we subdued.
From Aroer which is upon the bank of the river of Arnon, and the city that is by the river, even unto Gilead, there was no city too strong for us; for the Lord our God delivered all before us.
Only to the land of the Beni Ammon thou didst not come near, nor to all the side of the river Jubeka, nor the cities of the mountain, nor to any of which the Lord our God had commanded us.
And we turned, and went up the way of Mathnan; and Og king of Mathnan came out to meet us, he and all his people, to give battle at Edrehi.
And the Lord said to me, Fear him not; for I have delivered him into thy hand, with all his people and his land; and thou shalt do to him as thou hast done to Sihon king of the Amoraah, who dwelt at Heshbon.
And the Lord our God delivered Og the king of Mathnan into our hand with all his people, and we smote him until not a remnant of him escaped.
And we subdued all his cities at that time, there was not a city which we took not from them, sixty cities, all the region of the territory of the kingdom of Og in Mathnan.
All those strong cities were fortified with gates and bars, beside unwalled towns very many.
But we consumed them as we did Sihon king of Heshbon: we destroyed in all the cities the men, women, and children;
But all the cattle and the spoil of the cities were a prey to us.
And we took at that time from the hand of the two kings of the Amoraah, the country on this side of Jordana, from the river of Arnon unto the mountain of Hermon.
The Zidonaee call Hermon Sirion, but the Amoraee call it the Mount of Snow:
All the cities of the plain, all Gilead, and all Mathnan, unto Salka and Edrehi, cities of the kingdom of Og in Mathnan.
For only Og king of Mathnan remained of the remnant of the giants. Behold, his bedstead was a bedstead of iron: is it not in Rabbath of the children of Ammon, nine cubits its length, and four cubits its breadth, in the cubit of the king?
And their land (which) we took into possession at that time, from Aroer, upon the river Arnon, and half Mount Gilead, and the cities thereof, I have given to the tribe of Reuben, and to the tribe of Gad.
And the rest of Gilead, and all Mathnan, the kingdom of Og, I have given to the half tribe of Menasheh; all the surrounding country, even all Mathnan, which was called the Land of the Giants.
Jaer bar Menasheh took all the territory of Terakona, unto the border of Geshurah and Aphkiros, and called it after his name, Mathnan Kapharne-Jair, unto this day.
And to Machir I have given Gilead.
And to the tribe of Reuben, and of Gad, I have given from Gilead unto the river of Arnon (to) the middle of the river and its bound, unto the river Jubeka, which is the border of the children of Ammon.
And the plain, and the Jordan, and the border thereof, from Genezar unto the Sea of the Plain, the Sea of Salt, under the declivity of the height, eastward.
And I instructed you at that time, saying: The Lord your God hath given you this land to possess it; you shall pass over armed before your brethren the sons of Israel, all armed for the host.
Only your wives, and little ones, and your cattle, for I know that you have much cattle, shall abide in your cities which I have given you,
until the Lord hath given rest to your brethren as well as to you, and they also possess the land which the Lord your God hath given to them on the other side of Jordana: and you shall return every man to his inheritance which I have given you.
And I charged Jehoshua at that time, saying: Thine eyes have seen all that the Lord your God hath done unto these two kings; so shall the Lord do to all the kingdoms to which thou art going over.
Fear them not, for the Word of the Lord your God will fight for you.
And I prayed before the Lord at that time, saying:
O Lord God, Thou hast begun to show Thy servant Thy greatness and Thy mighty hand; for Thou art God, whose Shekinah is in the heavens above, and Thou rulest in the earth, and none can do according to Thy greatness or Thy might.
Let me, I pray, go over and see the good land that is beyond Jordan, that goodly mountain, and the place of the sanctuary.
But there was displeasure with the Lord against me on your account, and He heard me not; but said to me, It is enough for, thee; add not to speak again before Me of this thing:
Go up to the summit of the height, and lift up thy eyes to the west, the north, the south, and the east, and see with thy eyes; for thou shalt not pass over this Jordan.
But instruct Jehoshua, and fortify, and make him strong; for he shall go over before this people, and put them in possession of the land which thou wilt see.
And we dwelt in the valley over against Beth Peor.
And now, Israel, hear the statutes and the judgments which I am to teach you to do, that you may live, and go in to inherit the land which the Lord God of your fathers hath given you.
Ye shall not add to the word that I command you, nor diminish from it, to keep the commandments of the Lord your God which I command you.
Your eyes have seen what the Lord hath done with the worshippers of Baala Peor; for all the men who went after Baala Peor the Lord thy God hath destroyed from among you.
But you who have cleaved to the fear of the Lord your God, are alive all of you this day.
Behold, I have taught you statutes and judgments, as the Lord my God commanded me, that you may so do in the land to which you go to possess it.
And observe, and perform; for this is your wisdom and understanding in the eyes of the nations who will hear all these statutes, and say, Most surely this great people is a wise and understanding people.
For what people so great who hath God so nigh unto it to hearken to their prayer in the time of their tribulation, as the Lord our God (is to us) in every time that we pray before Him?
Or what people so great which hath statutes and judgments so true as all this law which I set before you this day?
Only take heed to thyself, and diligently keep thy soul, all the days of thy life, lest thou forget the things which thy eyes have seen, and they pass away from thy heart. But make them known to thy children, and to thy children’s children,
(as was said) on the day when thou stoodest before the Lord thy God at Horeb, when the Lord said to me, Gather the people together before Me, and I will make them hear My words, that they may learn to fear Me all the days which they live on the earth, and may teach their children.
And you came near, and stood at the lower parts of the mountain, and the mount burned with fire to the height of the heavens, in darkness, clouds, and shadow.
And the Lord spake with you from the midst of the fire; you heard a voice of words, but you beheld no similitude; (there was) only the Voice.
And He proclaimed to you His covenant which He commanded you to do, even the Ten Words; and He wrote them upon two tables of stone.
And the Lord commanded me at that time to teach you statutes and judgments for you to perform in the land whither you pass over to possess it.
But take heed to your souls; for you saw no likeness in the day that the Lord spake with you from the midst of the fire;
Lest you corrupt yourselves, and make you an image, or the likeness of any form, the likeness of male or female,
of any beast on the ground, or of any bird which flieth in the air of the expanse of the skies,
Of any reptile of the earth, or any fish of the waters, under the earth;
And lest thou lift up thine eyes to the heavens, and behold the sun, or moon and stars, all the host of the heavens, and go astray and worship them, and serve them, which the Lord thy God hath not appointed for any of the nations that are under the whole heavens.
But you hath the Lord drawn nigh unto His service, and brought you out from the iron furnace, (even) from Mizraim, to be unto Him a people of inheritance, as at this day.
But towards me the Lord had displeasure, on account of your words, and He sware that I should not go over Jordan, nor enter the good land which the Lord your God giveth you to inherit.
For I must die in this land; I am not to pass over the Jordan; but you are to pass over, and inherit that good land.
Take heed to yourselves, lest you forget the covenant of the Lord your God, which He hath concluded with you, and you make an image for you, the likeness of anything about which the Lord thy God hath commanded thee.
For the Word of the Lord thy God is a consuming fire: He is a jealous God.
When thou shalt have begotten sons and daughters, and have grown old in the land, and thou become corrupt, and make an image, the likeness of anything, or do what is evil before the Lord thy God, to cause displeasure before Him;
I call, this day, the heavens and earth to witness that you will surely perish from off the land whither you go over the Jordan to possess it: you will not prolong days upon it, for with destruction you will be destroyed.
And the Lord will scatter you among the nations, and you will remain a numbered people among the nations whither the Lord shall lead you.
And there will you serve the peoples who are worshippers of idols, the work of men’s hands, wood and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell.
Yet if from thence thou seek the fear of the Lord thy God, thou shalt find, if thou seek for Him with thy heart, and with all thy soul.
When thou wilt be in trouble, and all these words will have found thee, in the end of the days, and thou wilt turn unto the fear of the Lord thy God,
and be obedient to His Word, because the Lord thy God is a merciful God; He will not forsake thee, nor destroy thee, nor forget the covenant of thy fathers which He sware unto them.
For ask now of the ancient days that have been before thee, from the day that the Lord created man upon the earth, and (ask) from one end of the heavens to the other,
if there hath been so great a thing as this, or any heard like it, whether a people have heard the voice of the Word of the Lord speaking from the midst of the fire as thou didst hear, and have lived.
Or (if any have seen) like miracles which the Lord hath wrought, in being revealed to redeem to Himself a people from among a people, by miracles, signs, and wonders, and with war, and by a mighty hand and uplifted arm, and by grand visions, according to all that the Lord your God hath done for you in Mizraim before your eyes.
Unto thee hath it been shown, that thou mayest know that the Lord He is God, there is none beside Him.
From the heavens thou didst hear the voice of His Word, that He might teach thee, and upon earth He showed thee His great fire, and thou heardest His words from the midst of the fire.
And because He loved thy fathers, and had pleasure in their children after them, He brought thee out by His Word, by His mighty power, from Mizraim,
To drive out nations greater and stronger than thou from before thee, to bring thee in, to give thee their land to inherit, as at this day.
Know then, this day, and revolve it in thy heart, that the Lord He is God, whose glory is in the heavens above, and who ruleth upon the earth beneath, (and that) there is none but He;
And keep His statutes and His commandments that I teach thee this day, that it may be well with thee, and thy sons after thee, and thou mayest prolong days on the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, all the days.
Then Mosheh separated three cities on the other side of the Jordan (toward) the sunrise,
that the slayer may escape thither who may kill his neighbour unawares, not having hated him yesterday, or before it; and that, escaping to one of those cities, he may live:
Bezer, in the wilderness, in the plain land of the tribe of Reuben; Ramoth, in Gilead, of the tribe Gad; and Golan, in Mathnan, of the tribe of Menasheh.
And this is the law which Mosheh set in order before the children of Israel:
These are the testimonies, statutes, and judgments, which Mosheh spake to the children of Israel, on their coming forth from Mizraim;
On the other side of Jordan, in the vale over against Beth Peor, in the land of Sihon king of the Amoraah, who dwelt in Heshbon, whom Mosheh and the children of Israel smote when they had come out of Mizraim.
And they took possession of his land, and the land of Og king of Mathnan, two kings of the Amoraah, who were beyond Jordan, toward the sunrise;
From Aroer, upon the bank of the river Arnon to the mountain of Siaon, which is Hermon;
And all the plain beyond Jordan eastward unto the sea of the plain at the declivity of the heights.
And Mosheh called all Israel, and said to them: Listen, Israel, to the statutes and judgments which I speak before you this day, and learn them, and keep them to do them.
The Lord our God confirmed a covenant with us at Horeb.
The Lord confirmed not this covenant with our fathers, but with us who are here all of us living this day:
Word with word hath the Lord spoken with you at the mountain from the midst of the fire,
(I stood between the Word of the Lord and you, to announce to you at that time the word of the Lord; for you were afraid in presence of the fire, and went not up to the mountain,) saying:
I am the Lord thy God, who hath brought thee out of the land of Mizraim, from the house of bondage.
There shall not be with thee another god beside Me.
Thou shalt not make to thee an image or any likeness of that which is in the heavens above, or on the earth below, or in the waters under the earth;
Thou shalt not worship them or serve them: for I, the Lord thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the guilt of fathers upon rebellious children, upon the third generation and upon the fourth of them that hate Me, when the children complete the sins of their fathers;
But doing good unto (thousands of) generations of those who love Me, and keep My commandments.
Thou shalt not swear by the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not acquit him who shall swear by His Name falsely.
Keep the day of Shabbatha to sanctify it, as the Lord thy God hath commanded thee.
Six days thou shalt work, and do all thy labour;
But the seventh day is the Sabbath before the Lord thy God: thou shalt not perform any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy servant, thy handmaid, thy ox, thy ass, nor any of thy cattle, nor thy sojourner who is in thy gates; that thy servant and handmaid may rest as well as thou.
And remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Mizraim, and that the Lord brought thee out from thence with a mighty hand and uplifted arm; therefore the Lord thy God hath commanded thee to observe the Sabbath day.
Honour thy father and mother, as the Lord hath commanded, that thou mayest prolong thy days, and it may be well with thee in the land which the Lord thy God shall give thee.
Thou shalt not kill life, nor commit adultery, nor steal, nor bear false witness against thy neighbour.
Nor shalt thou desire thy neighbour’s wife, nor covet thy neighbour’s house, his field, or his servant, or his handmaid, his ox, or his ass, or anything that is thy neighbour’s.
These words spake the Lord with all your congregation at the mount, from the midst of the fire, the clouds and the darkness, with a great voice, and hath not ceased. And He wrote them upon two tables of stone, and gave them to me.
But it was, when you heard the voice from the midst of the fire and darkness, the mount burning with fire, all the chiefs of your tribes and your elders drew near to me.
And you said, Behold, the Lord our God hath showed to us His glory and His greatness, and we have heard the voice of His Word out of the midst of the fire; this day have we seen that the Lord speaketh with a man, and he liveth.
But now why should we die? For this great fire will consume us: if we go on to hear the voice of the Word of the Lord our God, we shall die.
For who is there of all flesh who can hear the voice of the Word of the Living God speaking from the midst of fire (in the manner) that we have, and can live?
Go thou near, and hear all that the Lord our God shall say, and speak thou with us all that the Lord our God shall speak with thee, and we will hearken and will do.
And the voice of your words was heard before the Lord when you spake with me, and the Lord said to me, The voice of the words of this people which they have spoken with thee is heard before Me; all (the words) they have spoken are right.
O that they may have such a heart to fear Me and keep all My commandments all days, that it may be well with them and their children forever.
Go, and say to them, Return to your tents.
But thou, stand here before Me, and I will tell thee all the commandments, the statutes, and the judgments, which thou shalt teach them, that they may do them in the land that I will give them to possess it.
And you shall observe to do as the Lord your God hath commanded you, nor decline to the right hand or to the left.
In all the way which the Lord your God hath commanded you shall ye walk, that you may live, and it may be well with you, and you may lengthen out your days in the land which you are to inherit.



And this is the commandment, (these are) the statutes and the judgments, which the Lord your God hath commanded (me) to teach you to perform in the land to which you go over to possess it,
That thou mayest fear before the Lord thy God, and keep all His statutes and His commandments which I command thee; thou, thy sons, and thy sons’ son, all the days of thy life, that thy days may be prolonged.
And thou, Israel, shalt receive, and keep, and perform, that it may be well with thee, and thou mayest increase greatly, as the Lord God of thy fathers bath said to thee, (in) the land which produceth milk and honey.
HEAR, ISRAEL; THE LORD OUR GOD IS ONE LORD:
And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy substance.
And these words that command thee this day shall be upon thy heart.
And thou shalt deliver them to thy children, and talk of them when thou art sitting in thy house, and when thou goest in the way, and in thy lying down, and thy rising up.
And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thy hand, and they shall be for tephillin between thine eyes;
And thou shalt write them upon the doorposts, and affix them to the lintels of thy house, and upon thy gates.
And it shall be, when the Lord thy God will have brought thee into the land which He covenanted to thy fathers, to Abraham, Izhak, and Jakob, to give thee great and goodly cities which thou buildedst not,
And houses full of goods that thou didst not fill, and cisterns hewn which thou hewedst not, vineyards and olive trees which thou didst not plant, and thou have eaten and be full;
Beware, lest thou forget the fear of the Lord who brought thee out from the land of Mizraim, from the house of bondage.
Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve before Him, and swear by His Name.
You shall not go after the idols of the Gentiles, the idols of the peoples who surround you
(for the Lord thy God is a jealous God, His Shekinah dwelleth in the midst of thee,) lest the anger of the Lord thy God be kindled against thee, and He destroy thee from off the face of the earth.
You shall not tempt the Lord your God as you tempted Him in the temptation:
Keeping you shall keep the commandments of the Lord your God, His testimonies, and His statutes He hath commanded thee,
and do what is right and well ordered before the Lord, that it may be well with thee, and thou mayest enter ill and possess the good land which the Lord sware unto thy fathers
to break all thy enemies before thee, as He hath said.
When thy son shall ask thee in time to come, (mehar, tomorrow,) saying, What are the testimonies, statutes, and judgments, which the Lord our God hath commanded you?
Then thou shalt say, We were servants to Pharoh in Mizraim; and the Lord brought us out of Mizraim with a mighty hand,
and put forth miracles great and sore upon Pharoh, and all the men of his house, before our eyes;
And He brought us out from thence, to bring us in, to give us the land which He sware to our fathers.
And the Lord commanded us to perform all these statutes, to fear the Lord our God, that all days it may be well with us, (and) that He may preserve us alive as at this day.
And it shall be our righteousness to observe to do all these commandments before the Lord our God, as He hath commanded us.
When the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land into which thou goest to possess it, and cast out many peoples from before thee, the Hittites Girgashites, Amorites, Kenaanites, Pherizites, Hivites, and Jebusites, seven nations, greater and mightier than thou,
and shall deliver them up before thee; then thou shalt smite and utterly consume them; thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor show mercy upon them.
Neither shalt thou intermarry with them; thou shalt not give thy daughter to his son, nor take his daughter for thy son.
For they will cause thy son to go astray from serving Me, and they will worship the idols of the Gentiles, and the anger of the Lord will be kindled against you, and He will destroy thee speedily.
But thus shall you do to them: you shall pull down their altars, break their statues in pieces, cut down their (sacred) groves and burn their images with fire.
For thou art a people consecrated before the Lord thy God, thee hath the Lord thy God chosen to be to Him a people more beloved than all peoples upon the face of the earth.
Not because you were greater than any of the peoples, bath the Lord chosen and befriended you, for you were smaller than any of the peoples;
But because the Lord had mercy on you, and that He would keep the covenant He sware to your fathers, hath the Lord brought you out with a mighty hand, and redeemed thee from the house of bondage, out of the hand of Pharoh, the king of Mizraim.
Know, then, that the Lord thy God, He is God, a faithful God, keeping covenant and mercy for them who love Him and keep His commandments to a thousand generations,
But repaying them who hate Him the good which they have done before Him in their lives, to destroy them (in the life to come?). He delayeth not to do good to His enemies for the good they may have wrought before Him in their lives, to repay them.
Thou shalt therefore observe the commandments, statutes, and judgments, which I command thee this day, to do them.
And it shall be that because thou wilt have obeyed these judgments, and have observed and performed them, the Lord thy God will keep with thee the covenant and the mercy which He sware to thy fathers.
And He will love thee, and bless thee, and multiply thee, and will bless the offspring of thy womb, the fruit of thy land, thy corn, wine, and oil, the herds of thy oxen, and the flocks of thy sheep, on the land which He sware to thy fathers to give thee.
Blessed shalt thou be above all peoples; there shall not be among thee a barren male or a barren female, neither among thy cattle.
And the Lord thy God will remove from thee all diseases, and all the plagues of Mizraim; the evil things that thou knowest He will not lay upon thee, but will put them on all that hate thee.
And thou shalt consume all the peoples that the Lord thy God will give up to thee; thine eye shall not have pity upon them, nor shalt thou serve their idols, for that will be a stumbling-block to thee.
If thou say in thy heart, These nations are greater than I am: how can I drive them out?
Thou shalt not be afraid of them; remembering thou shalt remember what the Lord thy God did to Pharoh and all Mizraim;
The great miracles which thine eye beheld, and the signs and wonders, the mighty hand and uplifted arm, by which the Lord thy God led thee forth; so shall the Lord thy God do to all the nations before whom thou art afraid.
And moreover, the Lord thy God will stir up the hornet among them, until they who remain and who hid themselves from before thee have perished.
Thou shalt not be broken down before them; for the Lord thy God dwelleth in the midst of thee, the Great and fearful God.
And the Lord thy God will put away those nations before thee by little and little; for thou mayest not consume them instantly, lest the wild beast of the field multiply against thee.
Yet will the Lord thy God deliver them up before thee, and destroy them with a great destruction, till they be consumed;
And He will deliver their kings into thy hand, and destroy their names from under the heavens, and not a man will stand before thee till thou wilt have destroyed them.
The images of their idols thou shalt burn with fire; thou shalt not desire the silver or the gold upon them, nor take (it) to thyself, lest thou offend through it, for it is an abomination before the Lord thy God.
Nor shalt thou bring what is abominable into thy house, and thou be accursed as that is; but with loathing thou shalt loathe it, and with abhorrence abhor it, for it is a thing accursed.
Every mandate that I command thee this day, you shall observe to do, that you may live and multiply, and go in and possess the land which the Lord did covenant unto your fathers.
And thou shalt remember all the way that the Lord thy God hath led thee these forty years in the wilderness, that He might humble thee, to prove thee, to know what was in thy heart, whether thou wouldst keep His commandments or not:
And He humbled (or afflicted) thee, and let thee hunger, and fed thee with the manna which thou knewest not, nor did thy fathers know; that He might make thee to know, That not by bread only is man sustained, but by every forth-coming word from before the Lord shall man live.
Thy raiment faded not away from thee, and thy shoes wore not out these forty years;
And know thou with thy heart, that as a man instructeth his son, (so) the Lord thy God instructeth thee.
Keep then the commandments of the Lord thy God, to walk in the ways which are right before Him, to fear Him.
For the Lord thy God bringeth thee into the good land; a land streaming with brooks of water, with fountain springs, and depths (of water) gushing from valleys and hills;
A land of wheat and barley, vines, figs, and pomegranates; a land of olives yielding oil, and which produceth honey;
A land where, without poverty, thou mayest eat bread, and have want of nothing; a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou mayest cast brass:
And thou shalt eat and be satisfied, and shalt bless the Lord thy God in the good land.
Beware, lest thou forget the fear of the Lord thy God, in not keeping His commandments, His judgments, and His statutes, which I command thee this day.
Lest, when thou hast eaten and art full, and bast built goodly houses and inhabited (them),
And when thy oxen and sheep have multiplied to thee, and silver and gold have increased, and whatever thou hast is increased with thee,
thy heart should be lifted up, and thou shouldest forget the fear of the Lord thy God, who brought thee up from the land of Mizraim, from the house of bondage;
Who led thee through the great and terrible desert, the place of burning serpents and scorpions, the place of thirsting, where there is no water, who brought out water for thee from the hard rock;
Who fed thee in the wilderness with manna which thy fathers knew not, that he might humble thee, and prove the, to do thee good in thy latter end.
And (lest) thou say in thy heart, My power and the might of my hand have gathered to me these possessions:
But remember the Lord thy God, for He it is who giveth thee power to acquire riches, that He may confirm his covenant which He sware to thy fathers, as at this day.
But it will be that if thou forget the fear of the Lord thy God, and walk after the idols of the Gentiles to serve and worship them, I testify against you this day that perishing you will perish.
As the nations which the Lord destroyeth from before you, so shall you perish, because you would not obey the Word of the Lord your God.
Hear, Israel: thou art this day (about) to pass over the Jordana, to enter, to drive out nations greater and stronger than thou, and (to take possession of) cities, great and fortified to the height of heaven;
A people great and mighty, the sons of the giants whom thou knowest, and (of whom) thou hast heard (it said), Who can stand before the sons of the giants?
But know this day that the Word of the Lord thy God, He it is who goeth over before thee, He who is a burning fire, He will consume them, He will break them down before thee, and thou wilt soon drive them out, as the Lord hath told thee.
Thou shalt not (therefore) speak in thy heart when the Lord thy God hath broken them before thee, saying: For the sake of my righteousness hath the Lord brought me in to inherit this land; but for the wickedness of these nations the Lord driveth them out before thee.
Not for thy righteousness or the integrity of thy heart dost thou go in to possess their land, but for the guilt of these nations the Lord thy God doth drive them out before thee, and that He may confirm the word which he sware to thy fathers, to Abraham, to Izhak, and to Jakob.
Know, then, that not for thy righteousness will the Lord thy God give thee this good land to possess it, for thou art a hard-necked people.
Be mindful, and forget not that thou didst provoke the Lord thy God to wrath in the wilderness; from the day that thou camest out from the land of Mizraim until thou hast come to this place, ye have been rebellious before the Lord.
And in Horeb (itself) you provoked the Lord, and aroused the Lord’s anger to destroy you.
When I had gone up to the mountain to receive the tables of the stones, the tables of the covenant which the Lord had made with you, and I abode in the mount forty days and forty nights I ate no bread, I drank no water.
And the Lord gave to me the two tables of stones, written upon by the finger of the Lord, according to all the words which the Lord had spoken with you on the mount from the midst of the fire, on the day of the convocation.
It was at the end of forty days and nights, when the Lord gave to me the two tables of the stones, the tables of the covenant,
That the Lord said to me, Arise, go down quickly from hence; for thy people whom I brought out from Mizraim are corrupted; they have soon turned from the way that I commanded them, and have made them a molten image.
And the Lord spake to me, saying: This people are disclosed before me, and, behold, it is a hard-necked people.
Cease from thy prayer before me, and I will destroy them, and blot out their name from under the heavens, and I will make thee for a people stronger and greater than they.
And I turned and descended from the mount; and the mountain burned with fire, and the two tables of the covenant were upon my two hands.
And I looked, and, behold, you had sinned before the Lord your God; you had made you a molten calf; you had turned quickly from the way which the Lord had commanded you.
And I took the two tables, and cast them away from my two hands, and brake them before your eyes.
And I fell down before the Lord as at the first, forty days and forty nights, bread I ate not, water I drank not, for all your sins which you sinned to do evil before the Lord, to provoke to anger before Him;
For I was afraid before the anger and indignation wherewith the Lord was angry against you to destroy you; but the Lord hearkened to my prayer on that day also.
And against Aharon was there great displeasure before the Lord to destroy him; but I prayed for Aharon also at that time.
And your sin which you had made, the calf, I took and burned it in fire, and ground it to a fine grinding till it was small as powder, and I threw the dust of it into the stream that descended from the mount.
And at the Burning, and at the Temptation, and at the Graves of Desire, you were rebellious before the Lord;
And when the Lord sent you from Rekem Giah, saying: Go up and possess the land I have given, then rebelled you against the decree of the Word of the Lord your God, and would not believe Him, nor be obedient to His Word.
You have been contumacious before the Lord from the day that I have known you.
But I fell down before the Lord the forty days and the forty nights that I was prostrate, for the Lord had spoken to consume you.
And I prayed before the Lord, and said: O Lord God, destroy not Thy people, and Thine inheritance, which Thou hast redeemed by Thy power, and brought out from Mizraim with a mighty hand.
Remember Thy servants Abraham, Izhak, and Jakob; regard not the stubbornness of this people, nor their wickedness, nor their sin:
Lest the inhabitants of the land from whence Thou hast led us should say: Because there was no power before the Lord to bring them into the land which He had told them of, or because He hated them, He led them forth to kill them in the wilderness.
But they are Thy people, and Thy inheritance, which thou hast led forth with Thy great power and Thy uplifted arm.
At that time the Lord said to me: Hew thee two tables of stones like the first, and come up before Me on the mount, and make thee an ark of wood;
And I will write upon the tables the words that were upon the former tables which thou brakest, and thou shalt put them into the ark.
And I made an ark of sittim wood, and hewed two tables of stones like the former, and went up to the mountain, and the two tables were in my hand;
And He wrote upon the tables according to the former writing, the Ten Words which the Lord spake with you on the mount from the midst of the fire on the day of the assembly; and the Lord gave them to me.
And I returned and descended from the mount, and put the tables into the ark which I had made, and they are there, as the Lord commanded me.
And the children of Israel went forward from Bearith of the Beni Jaakan unto Moserah; there Aharon died, and was buried there, and Elazar his son hath ministered in his stead.
From thence they journeyed unto Gudgod, and from Gudgod unto Jatbath, a land flowing with streams of water.
At that time the Lord had set apart the tribe of Levi, to bear the ark of the Lord’s covenant, to stand before the Lord to minister unto Him, and to bless in His Name, unto this day.
Wherefore, Levi hath no portion or inheritance with his brethren; the gifts which the Lord shall give him are his inheritance, as the Lord thy God hath told him.
And I stood on the mountain as in the former days, forty days and nights; and the Lord received my prayer at that time also, that He would not destroy thee.
And the Lord said to me: Arise, go, to proceed before the people, that they may be brought in to possess the land which I sware unto their fathers to give them.
And now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear before the Lord thy God, to walk in all the ways that are right before Him, and to love Him, and to serve before the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul;
To keep the commandments of the Lord, and His statutes which I command thee this day, that it may be well with thee?
Behold, the heavens the heavens of the heavens, are the Lord’s thy God, and all that is therein;
Only the Lord did choose thy fathers to love them, and He hath taken pleasure in their children after them, even in you, above all people, as at this day.
Put away, therefore, the foolishness of your hearts, and harden your neck no more;
For the Lord your God is the God of judges, and the Lord of kings, the Great God, mighty and terrible, before whom is no respect of persons, nor doth He accept a reward.
He executeth judgment for the orphan and the widow, and hath pity on the stranger to give him food and raiment.
Be loving then to the stranger, for you were sojourners in the land of Mizraim.
Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve before Him; to His fear thou shalt keep close, and shalt swear by His Name;
He is thy glory, and He is thy God, who hath done for thee these vast and mighty acts which thy eyes have seen.
With seventy souls went thy fathers down into Mizraim, and now the Lord thy God hath set thee as the stars of the heavens for multitude.
And thou shalt love the Lord thy God, and keeping keep His word, His statutes, His judgments, and His commandments all days.
And you know this day what your children have not known or seen, the discipline of the Lord your God, His greatness, His mighty hand and uplifted arm,
His miracles, and His works which He did in Mizraim, to Pharoh king of Mizraim, and to all his land;
And what He did to the host of the Mizraee, to their horses and their chariots, when he made the waters of the Sea of Suph to overflow their faces as they followed after you, and the Lord destroyed them unto this day;
And what He did to you in the wilderness until your coming unto this place;
And what He did unto Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab bar Reuben, when the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up with the men of their house, their tents, and all the substance they had, in the midst of all Israel;
For your eyes have seen all the great acts of the Lord which He hath wrought.
You shall observe all the precepts which I command thee this day, that you may be strengthened, and go in and possess the land unto which you are going over to inherit,
And may prolong your days upon the land which the Lord sware to your fathers to give them and their children, a land producing milk and honey;
For the land into which thou art going to possess it, is not as the land of Mizraim from which thou hast come out, where thou sowedst thy seed, and didst water it with thy feet as a garden of herbs (or a green garden);
But the land to which thou goest over to possess is a land of hills and valleys, drinking water of the rains of heaven;
Keep a land which the Lord thy God looketh after; (inquireth for;) the eyes of the Lord thy God are evermore upon it, from the beginning unto the end of the year.
And it shall be, if you will be diligently obedient to all My commandments which I command you this day to love the Lord your God, and to serve before Him with all most your heart, and with all your soul,
I will give you the rain of your land in its season, the early and the latter; and thou shalt gather in thy corn, thy wine, and thy oil;
And I will give herbage in thy field for thy cattle, and thou shalt eat and be satisfied.
Take heed to yourselves lest your heart be deceived, and you turn aside to serve the gods of the Gentiles and worship them;
And the anger of the Lord be aroused against you, and He shut up the skies that there be no rain, and the earth yield not her fruit, and you perish soon from off the good land which the Lord will give you:
But lay these my words upon your heart, and upon your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand, and let them be for tephillin between your eyes;
And teach them to your children, speaking of them when thou sittest in thy house, and when thou walkest in the way, when thou liest down, and when thou risest up;
And write them upon the posts, and fix them to the entrance of thy house, and upon thy gates;
That your days and the days of your children may be multiplied on the land which the Lord sware unto your fathers to give them, as the days of heaven upon the earth.
For if you surely keep all this precept that I command you to perform it, to love the Lord your God, to walk in all the ways that are right before Him, and keep close unto His fear,
then will the Lord drive out all these nations from before you, that you may possess (the lands) of nations greater and stronger than yourselves.
Every place on which the sole of your foot shall tread shall be yours, from the wilderness and Lebanon, from the river, the river Phrat, unto the uttermost sea shall be your border.
There shall not a man stand before you; for the Lord your God will put the fear and dread of you upon the face of all the land that you tread upon, as the Lord hath said unto you.
Behold, I set before you this day blessings and curses:
Blessings, if you obey the precepts of the Lord your God, which I command you this day;
But curses, if you obey not the precepts of the Lord your God, and turn aside from the way that I teach you this day, to go after the idols of the peoples whom you have not known.
And it shall be, when the Lord your God hath brought thee into the land which thou goest to possess, thou shalt set the blessings upon the Mount of Gerizim, and the curses upon the Mountain of Ebal.
Are they not beyond Jordan, after the way of the sun-setting, in the land of the Kenaanites, which dwell in the plains over against Gilgala, by the side of the plain of Moreh?
For you are to pass over the Jordan to enter in to inherit the land which the Lord your God will give you; and you will possess, and dwell therein.
And you shall observe to do all the statutes and judgments which I have set before you this day.
These are the commandments and judgments you shall observe to do in the land that the Lord the God of your fathers will give to thee to inherit all the days that you subsist upon the earth.
You shall destroying destroy all the places wherein the peoples (whose lands) you will inherit have served their idols, upon the high mountains, and the hills, and under every leafy tree.
And you shall lay their altars in ruin, break their statues, burn their groves with fire, cut the images of their idols in pieces, and blot out their names from that place.
Not so shall you do before the Lord your God;
But, to the place which the Lord your God will choose that His Shekinah may dwell there, unto the house of His Shekinah you shall seek,
and thither come to offer there your burnt offerings, your consecrated victims, your tenths, and the separations of your hands, your vows and free-will gifts, and the firstlings of your oxen and sheep.
And there shall you eat before the Lord your God, and rejoice in all that you have set your hand unto, you and your households, for that the Lord thy God hath blessed thee.
You shall not (then) do as we are doing here this day, every man as (seemeth) proper in his own eyes;
For you are not come as yet to the place of quietness, and to the inheritance which the Lord thy God will give thee.
But (when) you go over the Jordan, and dwell in the land which the Lord your God giveth you to inherit, and He hath given you rest from all your enemies round about, and you dwell in safety,
Then there will be a Place which the Lord your God will choose, to make His Shekinah to dwell there; thither shall you bring all that I command you, your burnt offerings and consecrated oblations, your tenths and the separations of your hands, and all the goodly things of your vows which you may vow before the Lord.
And you shall rejoice before the Lord your God, you and your sons and daughters, your servants and handmaids, and the Levite who is among you, for he hath no part or inheritance with you.
Take heed to thyself that thou offer not thy burnt offerings in every place that thou seest;
But in the Place which the Lord will choose out of one of thy tribes thou shalt offer thy sacrifices, and there do all that I command thee.
Though in any place where thy soul may desire thou mayest kill and eat flesh, according to the blessing of the Lord thy God, which He will give thee in all thy cities; the unclean and the clean may eat thereof, as the flesh of the gazelle and the deer.
Only of blood you may not eat; thou shalt pour it upon the ground like water.
It is not lawful for thee to eat in thy cities of the tithe of the produce of thy wine or oil, or the firstlings of thy bullocks or thy sheep, or of any vow which thou hast devoted, or of thy free-will offerings, or separations of thy hands;
But before the Lord thy God shalt thou eat it, in the place which the Lord thy God will choose; thou and thy son and daughter, thy servant and handmaid, and the Levite who is in thy cities; and you shall rejoice before the Lord thy God in all that thou settest thy hand unto.
Take heed to thee that thou forsake not the Levite all thy days upon thy land.
When the Lord thy God shall have enlarged thy border, as He bath said to thee, and thou sayest, I will eat flesh, when thy soul desireth to eat flesh, of all the desire of thy soul thou mayest eat flesh.
If the place which the Lord thy God will choose for His Shekinah to dwell there, be too far from thee, thou mayest kill of thy oxen and sheep which the Lord will give thee, as I have commanded thee, and eat in thy cities of all the desire of thy soul.
As the flesh of the gazelle and the deer so shalt thou eat it, the unclean and the clean may eat it alike.
Only, be steadfast in not eating the blood, for blood is life, and thou mayest not eat the life with the flesh:
Thou shalt not eat it; thou shalt pour it like water upon the ground;
Thou shalt not eat it, that it may be well with thee and with thy children after thee, when thou doest that which is right before the Lord.
Only thy consecrated things which thou hast, and thy vows, thou shalt take and bring to the place that the Lord will choose;
And make thy burnt sacrifices, the flesh and the blood, upon the altar of the Lord thy God; and the blood of thy consecrated victims thou shalt pour out at the altar of the Lord thy God, but of the flesh thou mayest eat.
Observe and obey all these commandments which I command thee, that it may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee forever, when thou doest that which is meet and right before the Lord thy God.
When the Lord thy God shall have destroyed the nations (of the land) whither thou art going to cast them out from before thee, and He cast them out, and thou dwell in their land,
take heed to thyself that thou stumble not after them when they shall have been dispersed before thee, and that thou seek not to their idols, saying, How did these nations serve their idols? For so will I do also.
Thou shalt not do so before the Lord thy God; for all that is abominable before the Lord, and that He hateth, have they done to their idols. For even their sons and daughters they have burned in the fire.
Every word I command you, that shall you observe to perform; you shall not add to it nor diminish from it.
If there shall arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and he give a sign or a wonder,
and the sign or wonder cometh to pass, (yet,) should he speak with thee, saying, Let us go after the gods of the Gentiles whom thou hast not known, and let us worship them;
Thou shalt not hearken to the words of that prophet or dreamer of dreams; for the Lord your God is proving you, to know whether you will love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul.
You shall walk after the Lord your God; Him shall ye fear, and keep His commandments, and be obedient to His Word, and serve Him, and keep close to His fear.
And that prophet, or dreamer of dreams, shall be put to death; for he hath spoken perversions against the Lord your God, who brought you out from the land of Mizraim, and delivered you from the house of bondage, to make you go astray from the path in which the Lord thy God hath commanded thee to walk; and so shalt thou put away the evil doer from the midst of thee.
If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy covenant, or thy friend who is as thy soul, shall persuade thee in secret, saying: Let us go and worship the gods of the Gentiles whom thou hast not known, nor thy fathers,
gods of the nations round about you, nigh thee, or far off, from one end of the earth to the other;
Thou shalt not consent to him, nor listen to his word, nor must thy eye have pity on him; thou shalt neither compassionate nor conceal him,
But killing thou shalt kill him; thy hand shall be upon him the first to kill him, and afterwards the hand of all the people;
And thou shalt stone him with stones that he die, because he sought to lead thee astray from the fear of the Lord thy God who brought thee out of the land of Mizraim, from the house of bondage;
And all Israel will hear and be afraid, and not add to do this evil thing among thee.
If thou hear in one of the cities which the Lord thy God will give thee to dwell in, saying:
Men, sons of wickedness, have gone forth from among thee, and led away the inhabitants of their city, saying: Let us go and worship the gods of the nations which you have not known;
Then shalt thou seek and search out, and fairly inquire; and, behold, such a thing is the truth, and this abomination is being done among thee,
thou shalt smite the inhabitants of that city with the edge of the sword, and destroy it and all that is therein and its cattle by the edge of the sword;
And thou shalt gather all the spoil of it together into the midst of its street, and burn the city and the whole spoil thereof with fire entirely before the Lord thy God, and it shall be a desolate heap forever, it shall be builded no more;
And nought of the accursed thing shall cleave to thy hand, that the Lord may turn away His anger from thee, and show mercy upon thee, and be loving towards thee, and increase thee, as He sware unto thy fathers;
When thou shalt be obedient to the Word of the Lord thy God, to observe all His commandments which I command thee this day, to do that which is right before the Lord thy God.
Children are you before the Lord your God. You shall not lacerate yourselves, nor make baldness between your eyes for the dead;
For thou art (to be) a holy people before the Lord thy God, chosen to be unto Him a people more beloved than all the nations upon the face of the earth.
Thou shalt not eat anything that is abominable.
These are the cattle that you may eat: oxen, lambs of the flock, and kids of the goats.
The hart, and the antelope, the forest deer, and the wild goat, the pygarg, the buffalo, and the chamois;
And any animal that hath the hoof cloven, and that divideth the hoof into two parts, and ruminateth the cud, among cattle, that you may eat.
Nevertheless, you shall not eat of those that (only) chew the cud, or of them that (only) separate the hoof into divided parts: the camel, the hare, and the coney, for they bring up the cud, but divide not the hoof, they are unclean to you;
And the swine, because it divideth the hoof, but doth not ruminate, shall be unclean to you; of their flesh you may not eat, nor touch their carcases.
Of all that are in the waters these you may eat: all that have fins and scales you may eat;
But any (fish) that hath not fins and scales you may not eat; it is unclean to you.
You may eat any clean bird;
But of these you shall not eat: the eagle, ossifrage, osprey,
Gleed, vulture, and kite after his kind,
and every raven after his kind;
The owl, nightbird, gull, and hawk after his kind;
The heron, swan, and stork,
the cormorant, pelican, and owl;
The bittern and ibis after his kind; the lapwing and the bat:
and no reptile may you eat whose flesh is unclean to you;
but you may eat any fowl (or winged thing) that is clean.
You shall not eat of anything that dieth of itself: thou mayest give it to the uncircumcised stranger who is in thy city, and he may eat it; or thou mayest sell it to the outward people; for thou art to be a holy people to the Lord thy God. Thou shalt not eat flesh with the milk.
Thou shalt tithe all the produce of thy seed, and all that thy field may bring forth from year to year;
And before the Lord thy God in the place which He will choose to make His Shekinah dwell there, thou shalt eat the tithe of thy corn, wine, and oil, and the firstlings of thy herd and flock, that thou mayest learn to fear before the Lord thy God all days.
But if the way be too great for thee, so that thou art not able to bring it, if the way be too distant from the place which the Lord thy God may choose to make His Shekinah to dwell there, when the Lord thy God shall have blessed thee,
then thou shalt put (change) it into silver, and bind the silver in thy hand, and go to the place which the Lord thy God will choose,
and shalt give the silver for whatever thy soul may please, for oxen, sheep, wine, new or old, or anything thy soul may desire, and shalt eat there before the Lord thy God, and rejoice, thou, the men of thy house,
and the Levite who is in thy cities; thou shalt not forsake him, for he hath no portion or inheritance with thee.
At the end of three years thou shalt bring forth all the tithes of thy produce in that year, and lay it up in thy cities.
And the Levite, because he hath no part or inheritance with thee, and the stranger, the orphan, and the widow who are in thy cities, shall come and eat and be satisfied, that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all the work of thy hand which thou shalt do.
At the end of seven years thou shalt make the Release,
and this is the sentence (word) of the Release: That every man who is a creditor shall give release to him who oweth to his neighbour; he shall not exact it from his neighbour or his brother, because the release is proclaimed before the Lord.
From a son of the Gentiles thou mayest demand; but that which is with thy brother, thou shalt release by thy hand.
Save when there shall not be the poor among thee, for the Lord in blessing will bless thee in the land which the Lord thy God will give thee for a possession to inherit.
Only if thou wilt indeed be obedient to the Word of the Lord thy God, and observe to do all these precepts which I command thee this day;
For the Lord thy God doth bless thee, as He hath said to thee: and thou shalt lend to many peoples, but thou shalt not take a loan; and thou shalt have rule over many peoples, but they shall not have rule over thee.
If there be with thee a poor man of thy brethren, in one of the cities in the land which the Lord thy God will give thee, thou shalt not harden thy heart, nor shut up thy hand from thy poor brother;
But thou shalt open thy hand to him, and lend, according to the measure of his want, of that which he may need.
Beware, lest there be a word with thy wicked heart, saying, The year of release draweth near, and thine eye be evil toward thy poor brother, and thou give not to him, and he cry against thee before the Lord, and there be guiltiness in thee.
Giving thou shalt give to him, and thy heart shall not be evil when thou givest to him: because for this thing the Lord thy God will bless thee in all thy works, and in all thou put test thy hand unto.
For the poor will not cease (to be) in the midst of thy land; therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shalt verily open thy hand to thy brother, to thy afflicted, and to thy poor in thy land.
If thy brother, a son of Israel, or a daughter of Israel, be sold to thee, and shall have served thee six years, in the seventh year let him go, a son of liberty, from thee.
And when thou let test him go free from thee, thou shalt not send him away empty.
But thou shalt separate to him from thy flock, and thy floor, and thy wine-press, and give to him of that which the Lord thy God hath blessed thee.
And thou shalt remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Mizraim, and the Lord thy God set thee free: therefore I command thee this thing today.
But if he say to thee, I will not go out from being with thee, because he loveth thee, and the men of thy house, (and) because it is good for me to be with thee,
then thou shalt take an awl, put it through his ear, and into the door, and he shall be a ministering servant to thee evermore. And also likewise shalt thou do to thy handmaid.
It shall not be a hardship in thy eyes when thou dost send him from thee to be a son of freedom, for he hath been doubly worth a hireling, serving thee six years; and the Lord thy God will bless thee in all that thou shalt do.
Every firstling male which cometh of thy cattle or thy sheep, thou shalt consecrate before the Lord thy God: thou shalt not work with the firstling of thy herd, nor shear the firstling of thy flock.
Thou shalt eat it before the Lord thy God from year to year in the place which the Lord will choose, thou and the men of thy house.
And if there be any blemish (spot) in it, (if it be) lame, or blind, or have any evil spot, thou shalt not sacrifice it before the Lord thy God:
Thou mayest eat it in thy cities, unclean (persons) and clean alike (may eat it), as the antelope and the hart.
Only thou shalt not eat the blood, but pour it out upon the ground like water.
Observe the month of Abiba, and perform the pascha before the Lord thy God; for in the month of Abiba the Lord thy God brought thee out of Mizraim, and wrought signs for thee in the night.
And thou shalt sacrifice the pascha before the Lord thy God, with the lambs (young) of thy flock, and with consecrated victims from thy herd, in the place which the Lord will choose to make His Shekinah dwell there.
Thou shalt not eat leaven with it. Seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread with it, the bread of humiliation; for in haste didst thou come out of the land of Mizraim: that thou mayest remember the day of thy coming from the land of Mizraim all the days of thy life.
And there shall not be leaven seen with thee within all thy borders seven days; neither shall any of the flesh of that which thou didst sacrifice in the evening of the first day remain until the morning.
Thou hast not liberty to sacrifice the pascha in anyone of thy cities which the Lord thy God will give thee;
But in the place which the Lord thy God will approve to make His Shekinah dwell, there thou shalt sacrifice the pascha, in the evening, at the going away of the sun; the time of thy coming out of Mizraim.
And thou shalt dress and eat it in the place which the Lord thy God shall favour, and in the morning turn and go to thy tent.
Six days thou shalt eat unleavened, and on the seventh day gather together before the Lord thy God: thou shalt do no work.
Seven weeks number to thee from the beginning (of the harvest); when the omer of the elevation is reaped with the sickle, shalt thou begin to number the seven weeks.
And thou shalt perform the festival of the weeks before the Lord thy God, with a tribute of the free-will offering of thy hand, which thou shalt give as the Lord thy God will have blessed thee.
And thou shalt rejoice before the Lord thy God, thou, thy son, thy daughter, thy man-servant, thy handmaid, the Levite who is in thy cities, the sojourner, the orphan, and the widow who are among you, in the place which the Lord thy God will choose to make His Shekinah to dwell there.
And thou shalt remember that thou wast a servant in Mizraim, and keep and perform these statutes.
The Feast of Tabernacles thou shalt make to thee seven days, when thou hast gathered in from thy threshing-floor, and from thy wine-press.
And thou shalt rejoice in thy feast, thou, thy son, thy daughter, thy servant, thy handmaid, the Levite, the stranger, the orphan, and the widow, who are in thy cities.
Seven days shalt thou hold the festival before the Lord thy God in the place the Lord shall choose, because the Lord thy God will have blessed thee in all thy produce, and in all the work of thy hands, and therefore shalt thou rejoice.
Three times in the year all thy males are to appear before the Lord thy God in the place that He will choose; at the Feast of the Unleavened, the Feast of Weeks, and the Feast of Tabernacles; and they shall not appear before the Lord empty;
But every man with the gift of his hand, according to the blessing of the Lord thy God which He hath given thee.
Judges and officers shalt thou appoint to thee in all thy cities which the Lord thy God will give thee throughout thy tribes, and they shall judge the people with true judgment.
Thou shalt not pervert judgment, nor have respect to persons, nor receive a gift; for a gift blindeth the eyes of the wise, and depraveth right words.
Thou shalt follow that which is surely true, that thou mayest live and inherit the land which the Lord thy God will give thee.
Thou shalt not plant thee a grove, nor any tree beside the altar of the Lord thy God that thou makest thee,
nor erect a statue which the Lord thy God abhorreth.
Thou shalt not sacrifice before the Lord thy God a bullock or ram which hath blemish in it, not anything that is evil; for that is abomination before the Lord thy God.
If, in anyone of the cities which the Lord thy God will give thee, there be found a man or woman who hath done evil before the Lord thy God in transgressing his covenant,
And going to do service to the idols of the Gentiles, or to the sun, moon, or all the host of the heavens, in worshipping them, which I have not commanded;
And it be told thee, and thou hast heard; thou shalt inquire fairly, and if such word be true that this abomination hath been wrought in Israel,
thou shalt bring forth that man or woman, and stone them with stones that they die.
On the word of two witnesses or, of three shall he die who is guilty of death: he shall not die on the word of one witness.
The hands of the witnesses shall be upon him first to kill him, and the hands of all the people afterward; and thou shalt put down the doer of evil from among you.
If a matter for judgment be extraordinary to thee, between blood and blood, between cause and cause, or between plague and plague, of leprosy, they being matters of divided judgment in thy cities, then thou shalt arise and go up to the place which the Lord thy God shall choose,
and come to the priests, the Levites, and to the judge who may be in those days, and inquire; and they will show thee the sentence of decision.
And thou shalt do according to the word of the sentence which they will show thee from the place which the Lord will choose, and thou shalt observe to do according to all that they will teach thee.
Upon the word of the law which they teach thee, and upon the judgment they tell thee, thou shalt act; thou shalt not swerve from the word they will have shown thee, to the right or the left.
And the man who doeth wickedly in not receiving from the priest who standeth there to minister before the Lord thy God, or from the judge, that man shall die; and thou shalt put down the evil doer from Israel.
And all the people will hear and be afraid, and do wickedly no more.
When thou art come into the land which the Lord thy God will give thee, and dost possess and dwell in it, and thou mayest say, I will appoint a king over me, like the nations who are about me;
Thou mayest verily appoint over thee a king whom the Lord thy God will choose, from among thy brethren thou shalt appoint the king over thee. Thou shalt not have power to set over thee a foreign man, who is not thy brother.
Only he shall not multiply to him horses, nor cause the people to return to Mizraim for the purpose of multiplying horses; for the Lord hath said to you, Ye shall no more return by that way.
Neither shall he multiply wives to him, that his heart be not turned away; nor shall he increase silver and gold for himself greatly.
And it shall be, when he sitteth upon the throne of his kingdom, he shall write for himself a copy of this Law in a book, out (of that which is) before the priests, the Levites.
And he shall have it with him, to read in it all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear before the Lord his God, to keep all the words of this law, and these statutes, to perform them:
That his heart may not be lifted up from his brethren, nor swerve from the precepts of the Lord to the right or to the left, and may prolong (his days) in his kingdom, he and his sons in the midst of Israel.
For the priests and Levites, (even) all the tribe of Levi, there shall be no part or inheritance with Israel; they shall eat the oblations of the Lord and his inheritance,
but have no heritage among their brethren, the gifts presented unto the Lord they are his heritage, as the Lord hath said to him.
And this is what shall appertain to the priests from the people, from them who offer a sacrifice, whether bullock or lamb; they shall give to the priest the shoulder, the cheeks, and the maw.
The first of thy corn, wine, and oil, and the first of the fleece of thy sheep, thou shalt set apart for him.
For the Lord thy God hath chosen him out of all thy tribes to stand to minister in the Name of the Lord, he, and his sons, all the days.
And if a Levite come from one of thy cities out of all Israel, where he hath dwelt, and come with all the desire of his soul, to the place which the Lord will choose,
then he shall minister in the Name of the Lord his God with his brethren the Levites who minister there before the Lord.
Portion for portion shall they eat, beside the accustomed allotment which cometh on the Sabbath, as the fathers have appointed.
When thou hast entered into the land which the Lord thy God will give thee, thou shalt not learn to do after the abominations of these peoples:
No one shall be found among thee who maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, using enchantments, observing times or augury or witchcraft,
Nor an incantator, or a consulter at a heathen oracle, or a wizard, or an inquirer from the dead:
For all who do these things are an abomination to the Lord; and because of these abominations the Lord thy God driveth them out from before thee.
Thou shalt be perfect in the fear of the Lord thy God.
For these nations which thou shalt possess hearkened to diviners and enchanters; not so hath the Lord given thee to do.
A PROPHET from among thee, of thy brethren, like me, will the Lord thy God raise up unto thee, to him shall ye hearken.
According to all that thou didst ask before the Lord thy God at Horeb on the day of the assembly, saying: Let me not again hear the voice of the Word of the Lord my God, and let me not see the great fire any more, lest I die.
And the Lord said to me, That which they have spoken is right:
I will raise up to them a Prophet from among them like unto thee, and I will put My words of prophecy upon his lips, and he will speak to them all that I shall command him.
And the man who will not hearken to My words which he will speak in My Name, My Word will require it of him.
But a prophet who shall do wickedly in speaking in My Name a word which I had not commanded him to speak, or who shall speak in the name of the gods of the Gentiles, that prophet shall die.
And if thou say in thy heart, How shall we know the word which the Lord hath not spoken?
When a prophet speaketh in the Name of the Lord, if the word come not to pass, neither be confirmed, that is a word which the Lord hath not spoken: of the prophet who hath spoken in wickedness thou shalt not be afraid.
When the Lord thy God hath destroyed the nations whose land the Lord thy God will give thee, and you possess it, and dwell in their cities and houses;
Three cities shalt thou set apart to thee within thy land, which the Lord thy God will give thee to inherit.
Thou shalt prepare for thee a way, and divide into three parts the boundary of thy land which the Lord thy God giveth thee to possess, for any manslayer to escape thither.
And this shall be the case of the manslayer who fleeth thither that he may live: he who shall have slain his neighbour unwittingly, he not having hated him yesterday or before.
As, when a man goeth with his neighbour into the thicket to cut wood, and his hand with the iron is driven aside in cutting the wood, and the iron flieth off from the handle and striketh (findeth) his neighbour, and he be killed, he shall flee to one of these cities that he may live;
Lest the avenger of blood pursue him while his heart is hot, and overtake him, because the way is long, and destroy his life; he not being guilty of death, because he had not hated him in time past.
Wherefore, I command thee, saying: Thou shalt set apart to thee three cities.
And when the Lord thy God shall enlarge thy border, as He sware to thy fathers, and give thee all the land which He said to thy fathers He would give,
if thou wilt keep all this commandment which I command thee this day, to perform it, to love the Lord thy God, and to walk in the ways that are right before Him all the days; then thou halt add yet three cities to those three,
that innocent blood may not be shed within thy land which the Lord thy God will give thee to inherit, and that the guilt of murder may not be upon thee.
But if a man bear hatred to his neighbour, and lie in wait for him, and rise up against him, and destroy his life, and he die, and he flee to one of these cities,
Then the elders of his city shall send and take him from thence, and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of blood, and he shall die.
Thine eye shall not have pity upon him, and thou shalt do away with the shedding of innocent blood from Israel, that it may be well with thee.
Thou shalt not remove the boundary of thy neighbour which he hath set for a limit in the inheritance which thou shalt possess in the land the Lord thy God will give thee to inherit.
One witness shall not rise up (alone) against a man for any iniquities or sins, or any sin by which he (may have) transgressed; but upon the word of two or of three witnesses shall the case be confirmed.
If a false witness stand up against a man to testify against him with perversity,
Then the two men to whom the cause belongeth shall stand in the presence of the Lord before the priests and judges who shall be in those days;
And the judges shall make inquest fairly, and, behold, he hath testified falsely, and the testimony is false that he bath witnessed against his brother,
then you shall do to him as he had designed to do to his brother, and so shall you put away the evil doer from among you.
And the rest shall hear and be afraid, and not do any more like this evil thing among thee.
And thine eye shall not have pity: life for life; eye for eye; tooth for tooth; hand for hand; foot for foot.
When thou goest out to war with thy adversaries, and seest horses, and chariots, and more people than thou, be not afraid of them; for thy helper is the Word of the Lord thy God, who brought thee up from the land of Mizraim.
And it shall be when you draw nigh to battle, that the priest shall approach, and speak with the people,
and say to them, Hear, Israel: you come this day to do battle with your enemies: let not your heart waver, neither be afraid, or confounded, or broken before them;
For the Lord your God (is He) who goeth before you to fight for you against your enemies, to save you.
And the officers shall speak before the people, saying: What man is there who hath built a new house, and hath not dedicated it? Let him go and return to his house, lest he be slain in the battle, and another man dedicate it.
And what man who hath planted a vineyard, but hath not made it common (for use)? Let him go and return to his house, lest he be slain in the battle, and another man make it common, (or partake of it).
And what man hath betrothed a wife, and not taken her? Let him go and return to his house, lest he be slain in the battle, and another man take her.
And the officers shall yet speak to the people, and say: What man is there who is afraid and broken-hearted? Let him return to his house, and not make the heart of his brethren to be broken as his heart.
And it shall be, when the officers have finished to speak with the people, they shall appoint captains of the host at the head of the people.
When thou drawest nigh to a city to make war against it, then proclaim to it words of peace.
And if it be that it make thee an answer of peace, and open to thee, then all the people who dwell in it shall be tributaries to thee and serve thee.
But if it will not make peace with thee, but will have war with thee, then thou shalt besiege it:
And when the Lord thy God hath delivered it into thy hand, thou mayest smite all the males thereof by the sentence of the sword;
but the women, children, cattle, and all that is in the city, even all the spoil, thou shalt make booty for thyself; and thou shalt eat the spoil of thy enemies, which the Lord thy God will have given thee.
Thus shalt thou do to all cities which are remote from thee, but are not of the cities of these nations;
For of the cities of these nations which the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not spare alive any breathing thing,
But utterly destroy them, Hittites and Amorites, Kenaanites and Pheresites, Hivites and Jebusites, as the Lord thy God hath commanded thee;
that they may not teach you to do according to all their abominations which they have done to their idols, and you sin against the Lord your God.
When thou layest siege to a city many days in making war against it to subdue it, thou shalt not destroy the trees (that are about) it, nor lift up the iron against them: for of them thou mayest eat; thou shalt not cut them down, for the tree of the field is not like a man, to come against thee in the siege.
Only a tree which thou knowest is not for food, thou mayest destroy and cut down; and thou shalt build bulwarks (palisades) against the city which maketh war with thee, until thou subdue it.
When in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee to inherit there may be found one who is slain, lying in the field, and it is not known who hath killed him,
Then thy elders and judges shall come forth and admeasure unto the cities that surround the dead man;
And the elders of the city that is nearest to the dead man shall take an heifer of the herd which hath not been worked with, nor hath drawn on the yoke.
And the elders of that city shall bring the heifer down to an uncultivated valley (or field) which is not tilled nor sown, and there cut off the heifer in the field.
And the priests the sons of Levi shall go near, for them the Lord thy God hath chosen to minister to Him, and to bless in the Name of the Lord, and on their word shall every controversy or stroke of leprosy (be adjudged);
And all the elders of that city which is nearest to the dead man shall wash their hands over the heifer which hath been cut off in the field;
And shall answer and say, Our hands have not shed this blood, and our eyes have not seen.
And the priests shall say, Forgive Thy people Israel whom Thou, O Lord, hast redeemed, and let not the guilt of innocent blood be among Thy people Israel. And it shall be forgiven them concerning the blood:
So shalt thou put away the guilt of innocent blood from among you, when thou shalt do that which is right before the Lord.
When thou goest out to war against thy enemies, and the Lord thy God doth deliver them into thy hand, and thou takest them captive;
And thou seest among the captives a woman of fair countenance, and hast a desire for her, and wouldst take her unto thee to wife;
Then thou shalt bring her into thy house, and she shall shave her head, and pare her nails,
And take off from her the dress of her captivity, and dwell in thy house, and mourn for her father and mother a month of days; and afterward thou mayest go to her and marry her, and she shall be thy wife.
But if it be that thou hast no pleasure in her, then thou mayest send her away by herself: thou shalt in no wise sell her for money, nor make merchandise of her, for thou hast afflicted her.
If a man have two wives, the one beloved and the other hated, and they have borne sons, the beloved one and the hated one, and the firstborn son belong to the hated;
Then in the day that he maketh his sons to inherit what he hath, he shall not make the son of the beloved to be (as) the firstborn over the head (face) of the son of the hated, the (actual) firstborn.
For he shall distribute to the firstborn the son of the hated by giving him two parts of all his possession; for he is the beginning of his strength, and to him pertaineth the birthright.
If a man hath a son perverse and rebellious, who will not obey the word of his father or his mother, and, though they instruct him, will not hearken to them;
then his father and mother shall lay hold of him, and bring him forth before the elders of his city at the gate of the judgment house of his place,
and shall say to the elders of the city, This our son is perverse and rebellious; he will not obey our words, he is a devourer of flesh and a taker of wine;
then all the men of the city shall stone him with stones, that he die; and thou shalt put a way the evil doer from among you, and all Israel will hear, and be afraid.
When a man guilty of the judgment of death is put to death, and thou hast hanged him on a gibbet;
his body shall not remain upon the gibbet, but thou shalt surely bury him on that day: for he was hanged because he had sinned before the Lord; and thy land which the Lord thy God hath given thee to inherit shall not be defiled.
Thou shalt not see thy brother’s ox or his lamb going astray, and turn thyself aside from them; thou shalt surely bring them back to thy brother.
And if thy brother be not near to thee, or if thou know him not, then thou shalt bring it into thy house, and it shall be with thee until thou make inquiry for thy brother, and then thou shalt restore it to him.
In like manner shalt thou do with his ass, and with his garment, and with any lost thing of thy brother’s which thou mayest have found, it is not lawful for thee to conceal it.
Thou shalt not see thy brother’s ass or his ox fallen in the way, and turn thyself away from them, thou shalt surely lift them up for him.
The adorning of a man shall not be upon a woman, nor shall the apparel of a man be like the apparel of a woman; for everyone who doeth these things is abominable before the Lord thy God.
If thou find the nest of a bird before thee on the way, in any tree, or upon the ground, with young ones, or eggs, and the mother lying over the young ones, or upon the eggs, thou shalt not take the mother with the offspring.
Thou shalt send away the mother, and take the young ones with thee; that it may be well with thee, and thou mayest prolong thy days.
When thou buildest a new house, then thou shalt make a parapet to thy roof, that thou mayest not bring the guilt of the blood of the slain upon thy house, by the falling of anyone who may fall there-from.
Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with mixed (seeds), lest what cometh from the seed which thou sowest, and the produce of thy vineyard, be unclean.
Thou shalt not plough with an ox and an ass together.
Thou shalt not dress with a contexture of woolen and of linen joined together.
Thou shalt make thee fringes (or tassels) upon the four corners of thy garment with which thou coverest thyself.
If a man take a wife, and go unto her, and dislike her,
and lay an occasion of words about her, or bring out an evil name upon her, and say, I took this woman and came to her, and I have not found her to be a virgin:
then shall the father and mother of the damsel bring forth the tokens of the damsel’s virginity before the elders of the city, at the gate of the judgment house of the place;
And the father of the damsel shall say to the elders, I gave my daughter to this man to wife, and he hateth her;
And, behold, he hath set an occasion of words, saying, I have not found the virginity of thy daughter; but these are the tokens of my daughter’s virginity. And he shall spread the cloth before the elders of the city.
And the elders of the city shall take that man and scourge him,
And fine him a hundred shekels of silver, and give to the father of the damsel, because he brought out an evil name upon a virgin of the house of Israel. And she shall be his wife, he hath no power to put her away all his days.
But if this word be true, and the tokens of virginity are not found unto the damsel,
then they shall bring out the damsel to the door of her father’s house, and the men of that city shall stone her with stones that she die; for she hath wrought shame in Israel in playing whoredom in her father’s house, and thou shalt put away the evil doer from among you.
If a man be found lying with a woman, the wife of (another) man, they shall be both of them put to death, the man who lay with the woman, and the woman; and thou shalt put away the evil doer from Israel.
If a man find in the city a damsel, a virgin, who is betrothed to a man, and lie with her,
then shall you bring them both out to the gate of that city, and stone them with stones that they die; the damsel because she cried not out in the city, and the man because he humiliated his neighbour’s wife; and thou shalt put away the evil doer from among you.
But if a man find the betrothed damsel in the field, and prevail against her, and lie with her, then only the man who lay with her shall be put to death;
But unto the damsel thou shalt not do anything; there is not with the damsel guilt of the judgment of death; for as when a man riseth up against his neighbour and killeth him, even so is this matter;
He found her in the field, the betrothed damsel cried, but there was none to deliver.
If a man find a damsel, a virgin who is not betrothed, and lay hold of her and lie with her, and they be found,
then the man who lay with her shall give to the damsel’s father fifty shekels of silver, and she shall be his wife; because he had humbled her, he shall not have power to send her away all his days.
A man shall not take his father’s wife, nor uncover the skirt of his father.
He who is castrated or ruptured shall not be clean so as to enter into the congregation of the Lord.
A bastard or mixed person (mamzer) shall not be clean, so as to enter into the congregation of the Lord; his offspring also to the tenth generation shall not be clean, so as to enter into the congregation of the Lord.
An Ammonite or a Moabite shall not be clean, so as to enter into the congregation of the Lord; neither to the tenth generation shall they be clean ever to enter the congregation of the Lord;
Because they met you not with bread and water in the way, when you came up from Mizraim; and because they hired Bilaam bar Beor from Pethor Aram, upon the Phrat, to curse thee.
But the Lord thy God would not hearken to Bileam, and the Lord thy God turned the curses into blessings, because the Lord thy God loved thee.
Thou shalt not seek their peace nor their prosperity all thy days forever.
Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite, for he is thy brother; thou shalt not abhor a Mizraite, for thou wast a sojourner in his land.
The children that are begotten of them of the third generation shall be clean, so as to enter into the congregation of the Lord.
When thou goest forth a host against thy enemies, then beware of every wicked thing.
If there be among thee a man who is not clean, by an accident of the night, let him go forth without the camp, let him not enter into the midst of the camp,
but at eventide let him wash with water, and at sunset he may come into the camp.
And a place shall be appointed for thee outside of the camp, that thou mayest go thither without.
And thou shalt have a blade upon thy weapon, that when thou sittest abroad thou mayest dig with it, and cover that which cometh from thee.
For the Shekinah of the Lord thy God walketh amid thy camp to save thee and deliver up thy enemies before thee, and thy camp shall be sacred, that nothing that offendeth may be seen among thee, lest His Word turn away from doing thee good.
Thou shalt not deliver up a slave of the Gentiles into the hand of his master, when he hath escaped to thee from his master;
He shall dwell with thee in thy midst in the place that he may choose in one of thy cities where it may be best for him; thou shalt not oppress him.
No woman of the children of Israel may be the wife of a man who is a slave; neither shall any man of the sons of Israel take a bondwoman to wife.
Thou shalt not bring the hire of fornication nor the price of a dog into the house of the sanctuary of the Lord thy God, for any vow; for even both of them are an abomination before the Lord thy God.
Thou shalt not make usury of thy brother; the usury of money, of corn, or of anything that produceth usury.
From a son of the Gentiles thou mayest take usury, but from thy brother thou shalt not take it; for the Lord thy God will bless thee in all that thou put test thy hand unto in the land to which thou goest to possess it.
When thou vowest a vow before the Lord thy God, thou shalt not delay to fulfil it; for the Lord thy God requiring will require it of thee, and it would become sin in thee.
Yet if thou shouldst forbear to vow, it will not be sin in thee.
What hath gone forth from thy lips thou shalt observe and perform; as thou hast vowed before the Lord thy God, (thou shalt perform) freely what thou hast spoken with thy lips.
If thou comest for hire into thy neighbour’s vineyard, thou mayest eat grapes for the satisfying of thy life; but thou shalt not put (them) into thy vessel.
If thou comest into thy neighbour’s ripe corn, thou mayest pluck the full ears with thy hand, but not put in the sickle upon thy neighbour’s corn.
When a man shall have taken a wife, and become her husband, and she hath not found favour in his eyes, because he hath found something wrong in her, then he may write for her a bill of divorcement, and give it into her hand, and send her from his house.
And when she hath departed from his house, she may go and become (the wife) of another man.
And if the latter husband dislike her, and write her a bill of divorce, and put it into her hand, and dismiss her from his house; or if the latter husband who had taken her to be his wife shall die,
the first husband who had put her away hath no power to return to take her to be his wife, after that she hath been defiled; for that is an abomination before the Lord; and thou shalt not cause the land to sin, which the Lord thy God giveth thee to inherit.
When a man hath taken a new wife, he shall not go forth with the army, nor shall any transaction be (laid) upon him; he shall be free in his house for a year, that he may cheer (or, may enjoy himself with) his wife whom he hath taken.
No man shall take as a pledge the millstones either lower or upper; for by them is made the subsistence of every living man.
If a man be found stealing a person of his brethren of the sons of Israel, to make merchandise of him, or to sell him, that man shall be put to death, and thou shalt put away the evil doer from among thee.
Take heed, in the plague of leprosy, to observe and perform entirely all that the priests, the Levites, shall teach you; as I have commanded them, you shall observe to do.
Remember what the Lord the God did unto Miriam, in the way when you came out of Mizraim.
When thou hast lent the use of anything to thy neighbour, thou shalt not enter into his house to take his pledge.
Thou shalt stand without, and the man to whom thou hast lent shall bring out the pledge to thee.
And if the man be poor, thou shalt not sleep with his pledge;
Thou shalt return him his pledge at sunset, that he may sleep in his garment, and may bless thee, and it shall be righteousness before the Lord thy God.
Thou shalt not oppress a hireling who is needy and poor, (whether he be) of thy brethren, or of thy sojourners who are in thy land or thy cities.
In his day thou shalt give him his hire; thou shalt not let the sun go down upon it, for he is needy, and to it he delivereth his life (soul); that he cry not against thee before the Lord, and it be sin in thee.
The fathers shall not die for the children, nor shall children die for the fathers; a man shall die for his own sin.
Thou shalt not wrest the judgment of the stranger or the orphan, nor take the garment of the widow for a pledge;
But thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Mizraim, and that the Lord thy God redeemed thee from thence; therefore I command thee to do this thing.
When thou art harvesting thy harvest in thy field, and hast forgotten a sheaf in the field, thou shalt not return to take it; let it be for the stranger, the orphan, and the widow, that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all the work of thy hands.
When thou beatest thy olive (trees), thou shalt not make search for what thou bast left behind thee; let it be for the stranger, the orphan, and the widow.
When thou art gathering thy vineyard, thou shalt not glean the grapes that are left behind thee; let them be for the stranger, the orphan, and the widow;
And remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of Mizraim; therefore have I commanded thee to do this thing.
If there be (a case for) judgment between men, let them bring it to the, judges, that they may adjudicate; and they shall justify the innocent, and condemn the guilty.
And if the guilty be condemned to be scourged, the judge shall cause him to lie down, and have him scourged before him (with stripes), in number according to the measure of his guilt.
Forty (times) he may smite him, not more, lest he should go on to smite him above these with many stripes, and thy brother be made vile in thy eyes.
Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox while he treadeth out (the corn).
If brothers dwell together, and one of them die, having no son, the wife of the deceased shall not marry another man without; her husband’s brother shall go to her, and take her to him to wife, and marry her for his brother.
And the first-born that she beareth shall keep up the name of his deceased brother, that his name be not blotted out from Israel.
But should the man be unwilling to take the wife of his brother, his brother’s wife shall go up to the gate of the house of judgment, and say before the elders, My husband’s brother refuseth to keep up a name to his brother in Israel; he is not willing to marry me.
Then the elders of his city shall call him, and speak with him; and if he rise up and say, It is not my pleasure to take her;
Then shall his brother’s wife approach him in the presence of the elders, and loose his shoe from off his foot, and spit in his face, and answer, and say, Thus let it be done to the man who will not build up the house of his brother.
And his name shall be called in Israel, The house of the loosed shoe.
If men strive together, a man and his brother, and the wife of one (of them) come nigh to save her husband from the hand of him who smiteth him, and put forth her hand and seize the place of his shame,
then thou shalt cut off her hand, thine eye shall have no pity on her.
Thou shalt not have in thy bag weight and weight, great and small.
Thou shalt not have in thy house measure and measure, great and small:
Perfect weights and true shalt thou have, perfect measures and true shalt thou have, that thy days may be prolonged upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee:
For everyone who doeth these things, everyone who acteth falsely, is an abomination before the Lord thy God.
Remember what Amalek did to thee in the way, when thou camest up out of Mizraim;
How he overtook thee in the way, and slew of thee all who were following behind thee when thou wast faint and weary; and he was not afraid before the Lord.
Therefore when the Lord thy God shall have given thee rest from all thy enemies round about, in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee for a possession to inherit, thou shalt blot out the memory of Amalek from under the heavens: thou shalt not be forgetful.
And when thou hast entered into the land which the Lord thy God will give thee for possession, and thou inherit and dwell in it,
Thou shalt take of the first of all the produce of the earth which thou shalt bring up from the land the Lord thy God will give thee, and put it into a basket, and go to the place which the Lord thy God will choose to make His Shekinah to dwell there.
And thou shalt come unto the priest who will be in those days, and say to him: I profess this day before the Lord thy God, that I have come into the land which the Lord did covenant to our fathers to give them.
And the priest shall take the basket from thy hand, and lay it down before the altar of the Lord thy God.
And thou shalt answer and say before the Lord thy God: Laban the Aramite sought to destroy my father, I and he went down to Mizraim, and dwelt there with a few people, but became there a people great and strong.
But the Mizraee maltreated and afflicted us, and laid hard labour upon us.
And we prayed before the Lord, the God of our fathers; and the Lord heard our prayer, and our travail, weariness, and oppression were manifest before Him;
And the Lord brought us out of Mizraim with a mighty hand and uplifted arm, with great visions, signs, and wonders,
And brought us to this place, and gave us this land, a land producing milk and honey.
And now, behold, I have brought the firstfruits of the land which Thou, O Lord, hast given me. And thou shalt set it down before the Lord thy God, and worship before the Lord thy God.
And thou shalt rejoice in all the good which the Lord thy God hath given thee, with the men of thy house, the Levite and the stranger who is among you.
When thou hast made an end of tithing all the tithe of thy produce in the third year, the year of the tithes, and hast given it to the Levite, the stranger, the orphan, and the widow, that they may eat within thy cities and be satisfied,
then thou shalt say before the Lord thy God: I have set apart the consecrated tenth from my house, and have given also to the Levite, the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, according to all Thy commandment which Thou hast commanded me. I have not transgressed Thy commandment, nor been forgetful.
I have not eaten of it in my mourning, nor exchanged ally of it for what is unclean, nor given of it for the dead. I have been obedient to the Word of the Lord my God, and have done according to all that Thou hast commanded me.
Look down from the heavens, the habitation of Thy holiness, and bless Thy people Israel, and the land which Thou hast given us, as Thou didst swear to our fathers, a land producing milk and honey.
This day doth the Lord thy God command thee to do these statutes and judgments, and to keep and perform them with all thy heart, and with all thy soul.
This day hast thou declared (or avouched) the Lord to be thy God, and to walk in the ways that are right before Him, and to keep His statutes, His commandments, and His judgments, and to be obedient to His word.
And the Lord hath declared thee this day to be His beloved people, as He hath said unto thee, that thou mayest observe all His commandments,
And that He may set thee above all the nations whom He hath made, in praise, and in name, and in greatness, and that thou mayest be a holy people before the Lord thy God, as He hath spoken.
And Mosheh and the elders of Israel instructed the people, saying: Observe all the commandments which I command you this day.
In the day that you pass over the Jordan to the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shalt set thee up great stones, and cover them with plaster (or lime),
And write upon them all the words of this law, when thou hast passed over to go into the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, a land producing milk and honey, as the Lord God of thy fathers hath said to thee.
When you have passed the Jordan, you shall set up those stones which I command you this day, on the mountain of Ebal, and plaster them with lime;
And thou shalt build an altar before the Lord thy God, an altar of stones: thou shalt not lift up iron upon it.
With perfected stones shalt thou build the altar of the Lord thy God, and offer sacrifices thereon before the Lord thy God.
And thou shalt sacrifice consecrated victims, and eat there, and rejoice before the Lord thy God;
And thou shalt write upon the stones all the words of this law, distinctly and beautifully.
And Mosheh, and the priests, the Levites, spake to all Israel: Listen and hear, O Israel: Today art thou a people before the Lord thy God
and thou shalt hearken to the Word of the Lord thy God, and do His commandments and His statutes which I command thee this day.
And Mosheh charged the people on that day, saying:
These shall stand to bless the people on the mountain of Gerizim, when you have passed the Jordan; Shemeon and Levi, Jehudah, Issakar, Joseph, and Benjamin.
And these shall stand to accurse upon the mountain of Ebal; Reuben and Asher, Zebulon, Dan, and Naphtali.
And the Levites shall answer and say to all the men of Israel, with a high voice:
Accursed be the man who shall make an image or molten (one), an abomination before the Lord, the work of an artificer’s hand, and place it in secret. And all the people shall respond and say, Amen.
Accursed be he who contemneth his father or his mother. And all the people shall say, Amen.
Accursed he who changeth the boundary of his neighbour. And all the people shall say, Amen.
Accursed he who maketh the blind wander in the way. And all the people shall say, Amen.
Accursed he who perverteth the judgment of the stranger, the orphan, or the widow. And all the people shall say, Amen.
Accursed he who lieth with his father’s wife: he uncovereth the skirt of his father. And all the people shall say, Amen.
Accursed is he who lieth with any beast. And all the people shall say, Amen.
Accursed is he who lieth with his sister, the daughter of his father or the daughter of his mother. And all the people shall say, Amen.
Accursed is he who lieth with his mother-in-law. And all the people shall say, Amen.
Accursed is he who smiteth his neighbour in secret. And all the people shall say, Amen.
Accursed is he who receiveth hire to kill the life, and (shed the) blood of the innocent. And all the people shall say, Amen.
Accursed is he who confirmeth not the words of this law to do them. And all the people shall say, Amen.
And if thou wilt indeed be obedient to the Word of the Lord thy God, to observe and to do all His commandments which I command thee this day, the Lord thy God will set thee on high above all the peoples of the earth;
And all these blessings shall come upon thee and keep with thee, if thou wilt be obedient to the Word of the Lord thy God.
Blessed (shalt) thou (be) in the city, and blessed in the field.
Blessed shall be the offspring of thy womb, and the produce of thy land, the increase of thy cattle, the oxen of thy herd, and the flocks of thy sheep.
Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store.
Blessed shalt thou be in thy coming in, and blessed in thy going out.
The Lord shall cause thy adversaries that rise up against thee to be shattered before thee; they will come out to thee in one way, but in seven ways shall they flee from before thee.
The Lord will command blessing upon thee in all thy storehouses, and on all that thou settest thy hand unto, and will bless thee in the land which the Lord thy God giveth to thee.
The Lord shall confirm thee for Himself to be a holy people, as He hath sworn to thee, if thou wilt keep the commandments of the Lord thy God, and walk in the ways which are right before Him.
And all the nations of the earth shall see that the Name of the Lord is invoked upon thee, and they will be afraid of thee.
And the Lord will make thee to abound in good, in the offspring of thy womb, and of thy cattle, and in the produce of thy ground, in the land which the Lord sware to thy fathers to give thee.
The Lord will open for thee His good treasure, the heavens, to give rain to thy land in its season, and to bless all the works of thy hand; and thou shalt lend unto many nations, but not borrow;
And the Lord will make thee strong and not weak, and thou shalt evermore be upper and not under, if thou wilt obey the commandments of the Lord thy God which I command thee this day to keep and to perform.
And you shall not go astray from any of the things I command you this day, right or left, to walk after the gods of the Gentiles to serve them.
But if thou wilt not obey the Word of the Lord thy God to observe and do all His commandments, and His statutes which I command you this day, all these curses shall come upon thee and cleave to thee.
Accursed shalt thou be in the city, and accursed in the field;
Accursed thy basket and thy store;
Accursed the generation of thy womb, the produce of thy ground, the oxen of thy herd, and the folds of thy sheep.
Accursed shalt thou be in thy coming in, and accursed in thy going out.
The Lord shall send upon thee malediction and trouble and rebuke (or menace) in all that thou settest thine hand unto for to do, until thou art consumed and perish quickly, on account of the wickedness of thy works, when thou hast forgotten to fear Me (or, whereby thou hast forgotten My fear).
The Lord shall make the pestilence cleave to thee, until He have destroyed thee from off the land into which thou art going to possess it.
The Lord will smite thee with wasting, with fever, with inflammation, with dryness, and with the sword, and with jaundice (or mildew?). And they shall follow thee till thou art destroyed.
And the heavens over thy head will be obdurate as brass in withholding rain, and the ground under thee obstinate as iron in producing no fruit.
The Lord will give thee ashes for the rain of thy land; and dust will come down from the heavens upon thee, until thou be consumed.
The Lord will deliver thee up to be broken before thy enemies; thou wilt go out to them by one way, but by seven ways shalt thou flee before them, and thou shalt be dispersed in all the kingdoms of the earth.
And thy carcase shall be cast out for food for all the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of the earth, and there shall be none to drive (them) away.
And the Lord will smite thee with the ulcer of the Mizraee, with emerods, soreness, and the dry scurvy, from which thou canst not be healed.
And the Lord will smite thee with distraction, and blindness, and with bewilderment of heart;
And thou shalt grope in the noonday as the blind gropeth in darkness; and thou shalt not prosper in thy way, but be only oppressed and despoiled always, and no man will be able to save.
Thou wilt betroth a wife, but another man shall have her; thou wilt build a house, but not dwell in it, and plant a vineyard, but have no use thereof.
Thy ox will all be killed in thy sight; but thou shalt not eat of it; thy ass shall be taken away from thee, and not be returned to thee; thy sheep will be delivered to thy enemies, and thou wilt have no one to rescue them;
Thy sons and daughters will be given up to another people, and thy eyes look and fail (with longing) for them all the day, and there shall be no power in thy hand.
The produce of thy land and all thy labours a people whom thou knowest not shall devour, and thou wilt only be oppressed and crushed all the days.
And thou wilt be mad through the sight of thy eyes which thou seest.
The Lord will smite thee with an evil ulcer upon thy knees and thy thighs, from which thou wilt not be able to be healed from the sole of thy foot unto thy brain.
The Lord will make thee and thy king whom thou mayest have set over thee to be captive to a people whom thou and thy fathers have not known; and there shalt thou serve a people, worshippers of idols of wood and stone;
And thou wilt become a ruin, a proverb, and a history, among all nations whither the Lord shall make thee go.
Much seed wilt thou carry out into the field, but little shalt thou gather in, for the locust will consume it;
Thou wilt plant and till vineyards, but wilt not drink the wine, nor gather in, for the worm shall eat it;
Thou wilt have olive trees in all thy borders, but with the oil thou wilt not anoint, for thy olive trees shall waste;
Thou wilt beget sons and daughters, but wilt not have them (with thee), for they shall go into captivity.
The locust will consume all the fruitage and the trees of thy land.
The uncircumcised stranger who is among thee will rise up high above thee, but thou shalt be brought down very low:
He shall lend to thee, but thou wilt not lend to him; he will be strong, and thou wilt be weak.
And all these curses shall come upon thee, and follow thee, and cleave to thee till thou art consumed, because thou wast not obedient to the Word of the Lord thy God, to keep His commandments and His statutes which He hath commanded thee.
And they will be upon thee for a sign and a wonder, and upon thy children forever.
Because thou wouldst not worship before the Lord thy God with cheerfulness and comeliness of heart for the abundance of all (His benefits):
But thou shalt serve thy enemies whom the Lord will send against thee, in hunger, thirst, nakedness, and want of all things; and He will put a yoke of iron upon thy neck until He hath destroyed thee.
And the Lord will bring upon thee a nation from afar, from the ends of the earth, like the flying eagle, a people whose language thou wilt not understand,
a people of mighty presence, who will not regard the old man, nor have mercy on the infant.
And he will eat up the increase of thy cattle, and the fruitage of thy ground, until he hath consumed thee; for he will not leave thee corn, wine, nor oil, the oxen of thy herd, nor the sheep of thy flock, until he hath brought thee to ruin.
And he will shut thee up in all thy cities, till he hath brought down thy high and fenced walls, wherein thou didst confide to be saved by them throughout all thy land; and he will besiege thee in all thy cities in all thy land which the Lord thy God did give thee.
And thou wilt eat the offspring of thy womb, the flesh of thy sons and daughters whom the Lord thy God had given thee, in the siege and straitness with which thy enemies shall straiten thee.
The man who is gentle among you, and very delicate, will look with an evil eye upon his brother, and upon the wife of his covenant, and upon the remnant of his children whom he will leave;
He will not give to one of them of the flesh of his children which he shall eat, for that nothing remaineth to him of all, in the siege and the straitness with which thy enemies shall straiten thee in all thy cities.
She who is tender among you, and delicate, who had not (been used to) put the sole of her foot upon the ground under her, from delicateness and tenderness, will look with an evil eye upon the husband of her covenant, and upon her son and her daughter,
and against her little children who have been brought forth of her, and against her children whom she hath borne; for she will eat them in secret, in the want of all things, in the siege and the straitness with which thy enemies shall straiten thee in thy cities.
If thou wilt not observe to perform all the words of this law which are written in this book, to reverence this glorious and fearful Name, THE LORD THY GOD.
And the Lord will make thy plagues to be manifest (distinguished), and the plagues of thy children great plagues and continuous, afflictions evil and abiding.
And He will lay upon thee all the strokes of Mizraim of which thou wast afraid, and they shall cleave to thee.
All the diseases also and all the plagues that are not written in the book of this law, will the Lord lay upon thee till He hath destroyed thee.
And you, who had been as the stars of heaven for multitude, will be left a small people, because you would not be obedient to the Word of the Lord your God.
And as the Lord rejoiced over you to do you good and to multiply you, so will the Lord rejoice over you to destroy and consume you, and to carry you away from off the land which you are entering to possess it.
And the Lord will scatter thee among all nations unto the ends of the earth; and thou shalt there serve peoples who worship idols of wood and stone, which neither thou nor thy fathers have known.
But among those nations thou wilt have no repose, nor will the sole of thy foot have rest, but the Lord will give thee there a timorous heart, darkness of eyes, and feebleness of mind;
And thou wilt hold thy life in suspense, and be afraid by night and day, for thou wilt be never sure of thy life.
In the morning thou wilt say, O that it were evening I but in the evening thou wilt say, O that it were morning! From the fearfulness of thy heart with which thou wilt fear, and the sight of thy eyes which thou shalt see.
And the Lord will cause thee to return to Mizraim, in ships, by the way of which I spake with thee, thou shalt see it no more: and there shall you be offered for sale for bondmen and bondwomen, but none shall buy.
These are the words of the covenant which the Lord commanded Mosheh to ratify with the children of Israel in the land of Moab; besides the covenant which He ratified with them at Horeb.
And Mosheh called unto all Israel, and said to them: You have seen all that the Lord wrought before your eyes in the land of Mizraim on Pharoh, and all his servants, and on all his land;
The great temptations, the signs and grand portents which thy eyes beheld;
Yet the Lord hath not given you a heart to understand, nor eyes to discern, nor ears to hear, unto this day.
And I have led you forty years in the wilderness; your raiment hath not become old upon you, and thy shoes have not worn away from off thy feet;
You have not eaten bread, nor drunk wine, either new or old, that you may know that I am the Lord your God.
And you came to this place; and Sihon the king of Heshbon and Og the king of Mathnan came out to meet us, to wage battle; and we smote them,
And subdued their land, and gave it for an inheritance to the tribe of Reuben and Gad, and the half tribe of Menasheh.
Keep ye the words of this covenant, and perform them, that you may prosper in all that you do.
You stand this day an of you before the Lord your God, the princes of your tribes, your elders, and your officers, every man of Israel;
Your children, your wives, and thy sojourner who is within thy camp, from the hewer of thy wood to the filler of thy water;
To enter into the covenant of the Lord thy God, and into His oath which the Lord thy God doth ratify with thee this day,
That He may establish thee this day to be a people before Him, and that He may be a God unto thee, as He promised thee, and as He sware unto Abraham, and to Izhak, and to Jakob.
And I ratify this covenant and oath not with you only,
But with him who is standing here with us this day: before the Lord our God, and with him also who is not here with us this day.
For you know how we dwelt in the land of Mizraim, and how we came through the midst of the nations by whom we have passed.
And you have seen their abominations, and their idols of wood and stone, silver and gold, which (were found) among them;
Lest there should be among you a man, woman, family, or tribe whose heart is turned away this day from the fear of the Lord our God, to go after the worship of these Gentiles; lest there should be with you a man who imagineth wickedness or pride,
that, when he heareth the words of this oath, he should reckon in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I go on in the imagination of my heart to multiply sins of ignorance with (sin of) presumption.
The Lord will not absolve him, but now will the anger and indignation of the Lord break forth against that man, and all the curses which are written in this book will cleave to him, and his name will be blotted out from under the heavens.
And the Lord will separate him from all the tribes of Israel unto evil, according to all the curses of the covenant which are written in the book of this law.
And the generation that cometh after, and your children who will arise after you, and the son of the Gentiles who may come from a land afar off, when they see the plagues of that land, and the afflictions with which the Lord will afflict it,
The whole land, brimstone and salt and burning, with no sowing, or growth, or any herbage springing up therein, even as the overthrow of Sedom and Amorah, Admah and Zeboim, which the Lord overthrew in His anger and indignation,
even all the nations will say, Why did the Lord thus to this land? What caused the fury of this wrath?
Then shall they say, Because they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord, the God of their fathers, which He ratified with them when He brought them out of the land of Mizraim.
For they went and served the idols of the Gentiles, and worshipped fearful things which they knew not, and which could do them no good.
And the anger of the Lord waxed strong against this land to bring upon it all the curses that are written in this book.
And the Lord cast them away from off their land in anger, indignation, and great violence, and drave them captive into another land as at this day.
The things which are secret are before the Lord our God; and those which are revealed are ours, and our children’s forever, that we may do all the words of this law.
And it will be that when all these words of blessings or of maledictions which I have set before thee have come upon thee, and thou turn unto thy heart among all the nations whither the Lord thy God will have led thee captive,
and return to the fear of the Lord thy God, and obey His Word, according to all that I command thee this day, thou and thy children, with all thy heart and all thy soul,
that the Lord thy God will turn thy captivity, and have mercy upon thee, and will return, and gather thee from all the nations among which the Lord thy God hath dispersed thee.
If any of thy dispersed be (scattered) unto the ends of the heavens, from thence will the Lord thy God gather thee, and lead thee.
And the Lord thy God will bring thee into the land which thy fathers did inherit, and thou shalt possess it: and he will do thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers.
And the Lord thy God will take away the foolishness of thy heart, and the foolishness of thy children’s heart, to love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and all thy soul, that thou mayest live.
And the Lord thy God will put all these curses upon thy enemies and upon them who hated and persecuted thee;
But thou shalt return and be obedient to the Word of the Lord, and do all the commandments which I command thee this day.
And the Lord thy God will make thee to abound in all the works of thy hand, the offspring of thy womb, the increase of thy cattle, and the produce of thy land, unto good; for the Lord will return to rejoice over thee for good, as He rejoiced over thy fathers;
When thou shalt be obedient to the Word of the Lord thy God, to keep His commandments and statutes which are written in the book of this law, if thou return unto the fear of the Lord thy God with all thy heart and all thy soul.
For this commandment which I command thee this day is not apart from thee, nor is it far away.
It is not in the heavens, that thou shouldst say, Who shall ascend for us into heaven, that he may bring it to us, that we may hear and do it?
Nor is it beyond the sea, that thou shouldst say, Who will go over for us beyond the sea, and bring it to us, that we may hear and do it?
For the word is very nigh thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it.
Behold, I have set before thee this day life and good, and death and evil;
For I command thee this day to love the Lord thy God, to walk in the ways that are right in His presence, and to keep His commandments, statutes, and judgments, that thou mayest live and multiply, and the Lord God may bless thee in the land into which thou art going, to possess it.
But if thy heart be averse, and thou wilt not obey, but wilt go astray, and worship the idols of the Gentiles, and serve them,
I have shown you this day that perishing you shall perish. You will not prolong your days upon the land whither thou passest over Jordan to enter in and possess it.
I call heaven and earth to attest in you this day that I have set before thee life and death, blessings and curses: but choose for life, that thou mayest live, thou and thy children,
To love the Lord thy God, to be obedient to His word, and to keep close unto His fear, for He is thy life, and the prolonged of thy days, to abide upon the land which the Lord sware to thy fathers, to Abraham, Izhak, and Jakob, to give unto them.
And Mosheh went and spake these words with all Israel.
And he said to them, I am the son of a hundred and twenty years this day. I am no more able to go out and to come in; and the Lord hath said to me, Thou shalt not pass over this Jordan.
The Lord thy God, He goeth over before thee; He will destroy these nations from before thee, and thou shalt inherit them. Jehoshua, he goeth over before thee, as the Lord hath said.
And the Lord will do to them as He did to Sihon and to Og, kings of the Amorites, and to the lands of them whom He destroyed.
The Lord will deliver them up, and you shall do to them according to all the commandments that I have commanded you.
Be strong and of good courage, fear not, nor be broken before them; for the Word of the Lord thy God will be the leader before thee, He will not forsake thee, nor be far off from thee.
And Mosheh called Jehoshua, and said to him before the eyes of all Israel, Be strong and of good courage; for thou art to go in with this people to the land which the Lord hath sworn to their fathers to give it to them, and thou shalt cause them to inherit.
But the Lord, He is the leader before thee; His Word shall be thy helper, for He will not forsake thee, nor be far from thee; fear not, nor be dismayed.
And Mosheh wrote this law, and gave it to the priests, the sons of Levi, who bare the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, and to all the elders of Israel.
And Mosheh commanded them, saying: At the end of seven years, at the time of the year of release, at the Feast of Tabernacles,
When all Israel cometh to appear before the Lord thy God, in the place that He will choose, thou shalt read this law before all Israel, and make them hear.
Gather the people together, the men, the women, and children, and thy sojourners who are in thy cities, that they may hear, and learn, and fear before the Lord your God, and observe and perform all the words of this law,
and that their children who have not known may hear and learn to fear before the Lord all the days that you abide upon the land to which you pass over the Jordan to possess it.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Behold, the days are drawing near for thee to die: call Jehoshua, and let him stand in the tabernacle of ordinance, and I will give him commandment. And Mosheh and Jehoshua went and stood in the tabernacle of ordinance.
And the Lord was revealed at the tabernacle in the pillar of the cloud, and the pillar of the cloud stood over the door of the tabernacle.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Behold, thou art to sleep with thy fathers; and this people will rise up and go astray after the idols of the peoples of the land among whom they are going, and will forsake My fear, and remove (or change) from My covenant which I have made with them.
And my anger will be kindled against them at that time, and I will drive them afar off, and remove My Shekinah from them to consume them, and many evils and troubles shall befall them. And they will say in that day, Is it not because the Shekinah of my God is not among me, that these evils have befallen me?
But I will remove My Shekinah from them at that time on account of the evils they had done; for they will have turned away after the idols of the nations.
And now, write for you this hymn, and teach it to the children of Israel; put it upon their lips, that this hymn may be a witness for Me against the children of Israel.
For when they will have entered into the land which I promised to their fathers, (a land) producing milk and honey, and they have eaten and been satisfied, and have become luxurious, they will turn away after the idols of the nations, and serve them, and provoke to anger before Me, and change from My covenant.
And when many evils and troubles have fallen on them, this song shall answer against them, for it will not be forgotten from the mouth of their children, because their imagination which they will do is manifest before Me this day, while (as yet) I have not brought them into the land which I have promised.
And Mosheh wrote this hymn on that day, and taught it to the children of Israel.
And he commanded Jehoshua bar Nun, and said, Be strong, and of good courage; for thou shalt bring the sons of Israel into the land which I have promised to them, and His Word shall be thy helper.
And it was, when Mosheh had finished to write the words of this law upon a book until they were completed,
that Mosheh commanded the Levites who bare the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, saying,
Take this book of the law, and put it in the side of the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, and it shall be there for a witness against thee.
For I know thy rebelliousness, and the stiffness of thy neck: behold, while I am alive with you this day, you have rebelled against the Lord; but (how much) also after that I am dead?
Gather to me all the elders of your tribes, and your officers, and I will speak these words before you, and will call the heavens and earth to witness:
For I know that after I am dead you will corrupt yourselves, and decline from the way which I have commanded you, and that evil will befall you at the end of the days; for you will do evil before the Lord to provoke Him to anger by the works of your hands.
And Mosheh spake before all the congregation of Israel the words of this hymn, until he had finished it.
Listen, ye heavens, and I will speak; give ear, O earth, to the words of my mouth.
My doctrine shall be soft as rain; let it be received as the dew, and my word be as the breath of the rain that breathes upon the grass, and as the showers of the latter rain upon the herbage.
For in the Name of the Lord do I invoke: Ascribe ye greatness unto our God;
The Mighty One whose works are perfect; for all His ways are justice; a faithful God from whom no iniquity proceedeth, just and true is He.
They have corrupted themselves, and not Him; children who worship idols, a generation that changeth its work, and maketh it another.
Behold, render you this before the Lord, ye people who have received the law, but have not become wise? Is He not thy Father, and thou art His who made thee and bought thee?
Remember the days of old, consider the years of generation and generation; ask thy fathers, and they will show thee, thy elders, and they will tell thee.
When the Most High gave the nations their inheritance, when He made the distribution of the children of men, He ordained the boundaries of the nations after the numbers of the son of Israel.
For the Lord’s portion is His people, Jakob is the lot of His inheritance.
He satisfied their wants in the land of the wilderness, in the dry place where there was no water; He placed them round about His Shekinah; He taught them the words of His law; He kept them as the apple of His eye.
As the eagle which hasteneth to his: nest, and spreadeth himself over his young ones, stretching out his wings, taketh them, upbeareth them with the strength of his pinions,
So did the Lord alone prepare them to dwell in the world which He will renew (set right), while the worship of idols shall not be established before Him.
He made them to dwell in the strong places of the earth, to eat the spoil of their enemies: He gave them the spoil of the rulers of cities, and the wealth of them who dwelt in strong defenses.
He gave them the spoil of their kings and sultans, with the riches of their princes, and the strength of the people of their lands, their possessions, the booty of their hosts and camps, and the blood of their heroes was poured out like water.
But Israel waxed fat and kicked, he prospered, grew strong and got rich, and forgot the worship of Eloha who made him, and provoked the Almighty who redeemed him.
They provoked Him by the worship of idols, by abominations they made Him angry.
They sacrificed to demons in whom there is no help, (nothing that is needed,) and fearful things that they had not known, new (gods) that were lately made, with which your fathers had no dealings;
Of the Awful One and the Omnipotent who created thee, thou art forgetful; thou hast forsaken the worship of Eloha who made thee.
And it was seen before the Lord, and His anger was kindled by the provocation of His sons and daughters before Him.
And He said: I will take away (take up) My Shekinah from among them; what will be their latter end is manifest to Me; for they are a perverse generation, children in whom is no faith.
They have moved Me to jealousy by that which is not worshipful, they have angered Me by their idolatries; and I will make them jealous by what hath not been a people, by a foolish nation will I provoke them.
For a burning, strong as fire, shall go forth before Me in fury consuming unto the lowest hell, to make an end of the earth and its produce, and to destroy the mountains to the end;
And I will multiply calamities upon them, My plagues will I send forth among them;
They shall be swollen with hunger, and be eaten by the fowl, and be vexed with evil spirits; and the teeth of wild beasts will I appoint among them with the venom of serpents that crawl in the dust.
Without will the sword devour, and within the chambers be the slaughter-work of death, the youths and the maidens, the sucklings with the aged.
I said I would make My anger to remain upon them and consume them; I will abolish their memorial from (among) the children of men:
Only that the wrath of the enemy would be condensed, and the adversary make himself great, and would say: Our hand hath prevailed, and all this is not from the Lord.
For they are a people that letteth counsel go, and there is no understanding in them.
O that they were wise, that they had understanding in this, and would consider what will be in their end!
How would one Pursue a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, unless the Mighty One had delivered them up, and the Lord had requited them!
For their strength is not as our Strength, and our enemies are the judges.
For as the punishment of the people of Sedom will their punishment be, and their stroke like (that) of the people of Amorah; their plagues will be evil as the heads of serpents, and the retribution of their works like their venom.
As the poison of dragons is the cup of their punishment, and as the heads of the cruel basilisks.
Are not all their works manifest before Me, laid up in My treasures against the day of judgment?
Their punishment is before Me, and I will repay; in the time of their dispersion from their land; for the day of their ruin draweth near, and that which is prepared for them maketh haste.
For the Lord shall decide the judgment of His people, and the avengement of His righteous servants shall be avenged; for it is seen before Him, that in the time when the stroke of their enemies would prevail against them, they will be wavering (as those who) are forsaken.
And He will say: Where are their idols, the mighty things in which they had trusted,
which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drink the wine of their libations? Let them now rise up and help you, let them be a shield over you.
See, now, that I, even I, am He, and there is no God beside Me. I kill and make alive, I wound but also heal, and there is none who can deliver out of My hand.
For I have prepared in the heavens the abode of My Shekinah, and have said, I live forevermore.
When My sword is revealed like the sight of twofold lightning from one end of the heavens to another, and My hand taketh hold on judgment, I will render vengeance on My enemies, and My adversaries will I repay;
I will make My arrows drunk with blood, and My sword shall slay the peoples, that by the blood of the slain, and the captives, I may take the crowns from the head of the foe and the enemy.
Give praise, ye Gentiles, with His people, because the avengement of His righteous servants will have been made; for He will bring retribution on them who hate Him, and will show mercy unto His land and His people.
And Mosheh came and spake all the words of this hymn before the people, he and Jehoshua bar Nun.
And Mosheh concluded to speak all these words with all Israel,
and said to them, Set your heart upon all the words that I have witnessed to you this day, that you may instruct your children to observe and perform all the words of this law.
For the word is not (given) in vain to you; it is your life, and by this word will you prolong your days upon the land which you pass over Jordan to inherit.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh the same day, saying:
Go up to this mountain of Abaraee, the mountain of Nebo, which is in the land of Moab, over against Jericho, and see the land of Kenaan which I have given to the sons of Israel for possession;
And, dying on the mountain to which thou goest up thou shalt be gathered to thy people, as Aharon thy brother died on Mount Hor, and was gathered to his people;
Because thou wast perverse with My Word in the midst of the children of Israel, at the Waters of Contradiction, at Rekem, in the desert of Zin, and because thou didst not sanctify Me among the children of Israel.
For, though thou mayest see the land, yet from thence thou shalt not go in unto the land which I have given to the children of Israel.
And this is the benediction wherewith Mosheh, the prophet of the Lord, blessed the children of Israel before his death;
And he said: The Lord was revealed from Sinai, and the brightness of His glory appeared to us from Seir. He was revealed in His power upon the mountain of Pharan, and with Him were ten thousand saints; He gave us, written with His own right hand, the law from the midst of the fire.
He loved the tribes, all the holy ones of the house of Israel; with power He led them out of Mizraim, and they were conducted under Thy Cloud, they journeyed by Thy Word.
Mosheh gave to us the law and delivered it an inheritance to the congregation of Jakob.
And he was the king in Israel, when the heads of the people were gathered with the tribes of Israel.
Let Reuben live in life eternal, and not die the second death; and let his children receive their inheritance according to their numbers.
And of Jehudah he said this: Hear, O Lord, the prayer of Jehudah when he goeth forth to battle, and let him return to his people in peace; let his hands do vengeance upon his enemies, and be Thou to him a help against his foes.
And of Levi he said: With perfections and lights, clothe Thou the man who is found holy before Thee whom Thou didst try in the temptation, and he was upright, and whom Thou didst prove at the Waters of Contention, and he was faithful.
Who, when they had sinned, had no mercy in the judgment upon his father or his mother, and no respect to his brother or his children; for they have kept the charge of Thy word, and Thy covenant have they not altered.
These are worthy to teach Thy judgments unto Jakob, and Thy law unto Israel. They shall set the sweet incense before Thee, and the full free-will offerings upon Thy altar.
Bless, Lord, his substance, and the oblation of his hands receive Thou with favour; break the loins of his enemies and of his adversaries, that they may not arise.
Of Benjamin he said: The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by Him: the shield will be over him all the days, and the Shekinah will dwell in his land.
And of Joseph he said: Blessed be his land from before the Lord; let it make fruit by the dew of the heavens from above, and from the fountain springs, and the depths which flow from the abysses of the earth beneath,
Let it make fruit and produce which the sun causeth to grow; let it make fruit from the beginning of month after month;
And firstfruits from the mountain tops, and goodly things from the unfailing hills,
With the good of the earth and its fulness, and the favour of Him Those glory is in the heavens, and who was revealed unto Mosheh at the Bush: let all these come upon the head of Joseph, and upon the man who was separated from his brethren.
The greatness of his children will be his beauty, and the mighty works wrought for him from before the Omnipotent and the Most High, by whose strength he will slay nations together unto the ends of the earth; and these are the myriads of the house of Ephraim, and these are the thousands of the house of Menasheh.
And unto Zebulon he said: Rejoice, Zebulon, when thou goest out to war against thy adversaries, and thou, Issakar, when thou goest to compute the time of the festivals in Jerusalem.
They shall assemble the tribes of Israel at the mountain of the sanctuary, to offer there the holy sacrifices with free-will; for they will eat the victims of the Gentiles, and the treasures hidden in the sand shall be disclosed for them.
And of Gad he said: Blessed is He who enlargeth Gad. He dwelleth as a lioness; he will kill sultans with kings:
And he shall receive his own at the beginning: for there, in his inheritance, Mosheh the scribe-prince of Israel is (to be) buried; he who came out and went in at the head of the people, who hath wrought righteousness before the Lord and His judgments with Israel.
And of Dan he said: Dan is strong as a lion’s whelp; his land is watered by the streams that flow from Mathnan.
And of Naphtali he said: Naphtali, satisfied with favour and full of blessings from the Lord, shall inherit from the western sea, Genesar, unto the south.
And of Asher he said: Blessed shall be Asher with the blessings of children: let him be acceptable to his brethren, and be nourished with the dainties of kings:
Strong shalt thou be as iron and brass, and as the days of thy youth shall be thy strength.
There is no God like the God of Israel, whose Shekinah in the skies is thy help, and whose power is in the heaven of heavens.
The habitation of Eloha is from eternity, and the world was made by His Word; and He will drive out thy enemies from before thee, and will say, Destroy.
And Israel shall dwell securely by themselves, according to the benediction with which Jakob their father blessed them in the land producing corn and wine; the heavens also above them shall drop down with dew.
Happy art thou, Israel; none is like unto thee, a people whose salvation is from the Lord, who is the strength of thy help, and from whom is the might of thy victory: thy enemies shall be liars unto thee, and thou shalt tread upon the necks of their kings.
And Mosheh went up from the plains of Moab to the mountains of Nebo, to the summit of the height which is over against Jericho; and the Lord showed him all the land of Gilead unto Dan,
And all Naphtali, and the land of Ephraim and Menasheh, and all the land of Jehudah to the hinder sea,
And the south, and the country of the plain of Jericho, the city of palm trees, unto Zoar.
And the Lord said to him, This is the land which I covenanted unto Abraham, Izhak, and Jakob, saying, To thy children will I give it; thou hast seen it with thine eyes, but unto it thou art not to pass over.
And Mosheh the servant of the Lord died there, in the land of Moab, by the Word of the Lord.
And He buried him in a valley (or cavity, becheltha) in the land of Moab, over against Beth Peor: but no man knoweth his sepulchre unto this day.
And Mosheh was a son of a hundred and twenty years when he died: his eye had not dimmed, neither was the radiance of his face changed.
And the children of Israel wept for Mosheh in the fields of Moab thirty days; and the days of the mourning for Mosheh were completed.
And Jehoshua bar Nun was filled with the spirit of wisdom; for Mosheh had laid his hands upon him, and the children of Israel obeyed him, and did as the Lord had commanded (by) Mosheh.
But no prophet hath arisen in Israel like unto Mosheh, unto whom the Lord revealed Himself face to face,
in all the signs and wonders which the Lord sent him to perform in the land of Mizraim upon Pharoh, and on all his servants, and on all his land,
and all the Mighty Hand, and all the great manifestations which Mosheh wrought in the eyes of all Israel. END OF THE TARGUM OF ONKELOS ON THE TORAH.














































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































