












































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































The book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham.
Abraham was the father of Isaac, Isaac was the father of Jacob, Jacob was the father of Judah and his brothers,
Judah was the father of Perez and Zerah by Tamar, Perez was the father of Hezron, Hezron was the father of Ram,
Ram was the father of Amminadab, Amminadab was the father of Nahshon, Nahshon was the father of Salmon,
Salmon was the father of Boaz by Rahab, Boaz was the father of Obed by Ruth, Obed was the father of Jesse,
and Jesse was the father of David the king. David the king was the father of Solomon by the wife of Uriah,
Solomon was the father of Rehoboam, Rehoboam was the father of Abijah, Abijah was the father of Asa,
Asa was the father of Jehoshaphat, Jehoshaphat was the father of Joram, Joram was the father of Uzziah,
Uzziah was the father of Jotham, Jotham was the father of Ahaz, Ahaz was the father of Hezekiah,
Hezekiah was the father of Manasseh, Manasseh was the father of Amon, Amon was the father of Josiah,
and Josiah was the father of Jechoniah and his brothers, at the time of the Babylonian resettlement.
After the Babylonian resettlement, Jechoniah was the father of Shealtiel, Shealtiel was the father of Zerubbabel,
Zerubbabel was the father of Abiud, Abiud was the father of Eliakim, Eliakim was the father of Azor,
Azor was the father of Zadok, Zadok was the father of Achim, Achim was the father of Eliud,
Eliud was the father of Eleazar, Eleazar was the father of Matthan, Matthan was the father of Jacob,
and Jacob was the father of Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ.
So in all there were fourteen generations from Abraham to David, fourteen generations from David to the Babylonian resettlement, and fourteen generations from the Babylonian resettlement to the Christ.
Now the birth of Jesus Christ took place in this way. When his mother Mary had been betrothed to Joseph, before they came together, she was found to be with child from the Holy Spirit.
Because her husband Joseph was a righteous man and did not want to shame her publicly, he intended to send her away privately.
But as he thought about these things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said, “Joseph, Son of David, do not be afraid to receive Mary as yoʋr wife, for the child that is conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit.
She will give birth to a son, and yoʋ shall name him Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins.”
All this took place to fulfill what the Lord had spoken through the prophet:
“Behold, the virgin will conceive and give birth to a son, and they will name him Immanuel” (which means, “God with us”).
When Joseph awoke from his sleep, he did as the angel of the Lord had commanded him. He took his wife
but had no marital relations with her until she had given birth to her firstborn son. And he named him Jesus.
After Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea, in the days of Herod the king, behold, wise men from the east arrived in Jerusalem,
saying, “Where is the child who has been born king of the Jews? For we saw his star in the east and have come to worship him.”
When Herod the king heard this, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.
So he assembled all the chief priests and scribes of the people, and inquired of them where the Christ was to be born.
They told him, “In Bethlehem of Judea, for so it is written by the prophet,
‘But yoʋ Bethlehem, in the land of Judah, are by no means least among the rulers of Judah; for from yoʋ will come a ruler who will shepherd my people Israel.’ ”
Then Herod secretly called the wise men and ascertained from them what time the star had appeared.
He sent them to Bethlehem and said, “Go search diligently for the child, and when you have found him, bring me word so that I too may go and worship him.”
They listened to the king and went on their way, and behold, the star they had seen in the east went before them until it came and stopped over the place where the child was.
When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceedingly great joy.
As they came into the house and saw the child with his mother Mary, they fell down and worshiped him. Then they opened their treasures and offered him gifts: gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
And being warned in a dream not to return to Herod, they departed for their own country by another way.
After they were gone, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying, “Rise, take the child and his mother and flee to Egypt, and stay there until I tell yoʋ, for Herod is about to seek the child, to destroy him.”
So Joseph rose, took the child and his mother by night, and departed for Egypt,
where he stayed until the death of Herod. This was to fulfill what the Lord had said through the prophet: “Out of Egypt I called my son.”
When Herod saw that he had been fooled by the wise men, he was greatly enraged and sent men to kill all the boys in Bethlehem and in its vicinity who were two years old and under, according to the time that he had ascertained from the wise men.
Then what had been spoken by the prophet Jeremiah was fulfilled:
“A voice was heard in Ramah, wailing, weeping, and great lamentation, Rachel weeping for her children, and she refused to be comforted, because they are no more.”
After Herod died, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt,
saying, “Rise, take the child and his mother, and go to the land of Israel, for those who were seeking the child's life are dead.”
So Joseph rose, took the child and his mother, and went to the land of Israel.
But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning over Judea in place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there. And being warned in a dream, he withdrew to the district of Galilee
and came and dwelt in a town called Nazareth, so that what had been spoken by the prophets might be fulfilled: “He will be called a Nazarene.”
In those days John the Baptist came preaching in the wilderness of Judea, saying,
“Repent, for the kingdom of heaven has drawn near.”
This is the one who was spoken of by the prophet Isaiah, who said, “The voice of one crying out in the wilderness, ‘Prepare the way for the Lord; make his paths straight.’ ”
Now John wore a garment of camel's hair and a leather belt around his waist, and his food was locusts and wild honey.
Then Jerusalem was going out to him, and so were all Judea and all the region around the Jordan.
They were being baptized by him in the Jordan, confessing their sins.
But when John saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his baptism, he said to them, “You brood of vipers, who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
Produce fruit consistent with repentance.
And do not think that you can say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father,’ for I tell you that God is able from these stones to raise up children for Abraham.
Even now the axe is laid to the root of the trees. Every tree therefore that does not produce good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.
“I baptize you with water for repentance, but he who is coming after me is mightier than I, whose sandals I am not worthy to carry. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit.
His winnowing fork is in his hand, and he will thoroughly clean out his threshing floor and gather his wheat into the barn, but the chaff he will burn up with unquenchable fire.”
Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to be baptized by John.
But John tried to prevent him, saying, “I need to be baptized by yoʋ, and yet yoʋ are coming to me?”
But Jesus answered him, “Permit it for now, for thus it is fitting for us to fulfill all righteousness.” Then John permitted him.
After being baptized, Jesus immediately went up from the water. And behold, the heavens were opened to him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and alighting on him.
And behold, a voice from heaven said, “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.”
Then Jesus was led up into the wilderness by the Spirit to be tempted by the devil.
After fasting for forty days and forty nights, he was hungry.
Then the tempter came up to him and said, “If yoʋ are the Son of God, command these stones to become bread.”
But Jesus answered, “It is written, ‘Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that comes from the mouth of God.’ ”
Then the devil took him to the holy city, set him on the pinnacle of the temple,
and said to him, “If yoʋ are the Son of God, throw yoʋrself down, for it is written, ‘He will command his angels concerning yoʋ,’ and, ‘In their hands they will lift yoʋ up, so that yoʋ do not strike yoʋr foot against a stone.’ ”
Jesus said to him, “Again it is written, ‘Yoʋ shall not put the Lord yoʋr God to the test.’ ”
Again, the devil took him to a very high mountain and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and their glory.
And he said to him, “All these things I will give yoʋ, if yoʋ will fall down and worship me.”
Then Jesus said to him, “Get behind me, Satan! For it is written, ‘Yoʋ shall worship the Lord yoʋr God, and him only shall yoʋ serve.’ ”
Then the devil left him, and behold, angels came and ministered to him.
Now when Jesus heard that John had been put in prison, he withdrew to Galilee.
And leaving Nazareth, he went and dwelt at Capernaum by the sea, in the region of Zebulun and Naphtali,
so that what had been spoken by the prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled:
“Land of Zebulun and land of Naphtali, way of the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles,
the people sitting in darkness have seen a great light, and on those sitting in the region and shadow of death light has dawned.”
From that time Jesus began to preach, “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven has drawn near.”
As Jesus was walking by the Sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers, Simon (who is called Peter) and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea, for they were fishermen.
Jesus said to them, “Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.”
So they immediately left their nets and followed him.
Going on from there, he saw two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee and John his brother, in the boat with their father Zebedee, mending their nets, and he called them.
So they immediately left the boat and their father and followed him.
Then Jesus went throughout all of Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every disease and every sickness among the people.
So the news about him went out into all of Syria, and the people brought to him all who were sick with various diseases, those suffering severe pain, the demon-possessed, epileptics, and paralytics. And he healed them.
And large crowds followed him from Galilee, the Decapolis, Jerusalem, Judea, and from beyond the Jordan.
When Jesus saw the crowds, he went up on the mountain. And when he sat down, his disciples came to him.
Then he opened his mouth and taught them, saying,
“Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted.
Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth.
Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they will be filled.
Blessed are the merciful, for they will receive mercy.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see God.
Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called sons of God.
Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are you when others reproach you, persecute you, and say all kinds of evil against you falsely on my account.
Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven; for in the same way they persecuted the prophets who were before you.
“You are the salt of the earth, but if salt loses its flavor, with what shall it be seasoned? It is no longer fit for anything but to be thrown out and trampled under people's feet.
“You are the light of the world. A city set on a hill cannot be hidden,
nor do people light a lamp and put it under a basket, but on a lampstand, and it shines for all who are in the house.
Let your light shine before others in such a way that they may see your good works and glorify your Father in heaven.
“Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets. I have not come to abolish them, but to fulfill them.
For truly I say to you, until heaven and earth pass away, not one letter or stroke of a letter will by any means pass from the law until all is accomplished.
Therefore whoever does away with one of the least of these commandments and teaches others to do likewise will be called least in the kingdom of heaven, but whoever practices them and teaches them will be called great in the kingdom of heaven.
For I tell you, unless your righteousness surpasses that of the scribes and Pharisees, you will certainly not enter the kingdom of heaven.
“You have heard that it was said to those of old, ‘Yoʋ shall not murder,’ and, ‘Whoever murders will be subject to judgment.’
But I say to you that everyone who is rashly angry with his brother will be subject to judgment. Whoever says to his brother, ‘Yoʋ idiot,’ will be subject to the Sanhedrin. And whoever says, ‘Yoʋ fool,’ will be subject to the fires of hell.
So if yoʋ are offering yoʋr gift at the altar and there remember that yoʋr brother has something against yoʋ,
leave yoʋr gift there before the altar and go. First be reconciled to yoʋr brother, and then come and offer yoʋr gift.
Make friends with yoʋr adversary quickly while yoʋ are on the way with him, lest yoʋr adversary hand yoʋ over to the judge, and the judge hand yoʋ over to the guard, and yoʋ be thrown into prison.
Truly I say to yoʋ, yoʋ will certainly not come out of there until yoʋ have paid the last penny.
“You have heard that it was said, ‘Yoʋ shall not commit adultery.’
But I say to you that anyone who looks at a woman to lust after her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
So if yoʋr right eye causes yoʋ to stumble, pluck it out and throw it away from yoʋ. For it is better for yoʋ to have one of yoʋr members perish, than for yoʋr whole body to be thrown into hell.
And if yoʋr right hand causes yoʋ to stumble, cut it off and throw it away from yoʋ. For it is better for yoʋ to have one of yoʋr members perish, than for yoʋr whole body to be thrown into hell.
“It was also said, ‘Whoever divorces his wife must give her a certificate of divorce.’
But I say to you that whoever divorces his wife, apart from a matter of fornication, makes her commit adultery. And whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery.
“Again, you have heard that it was said to those of old, ‘Yoʋ shall not break an oath, but shall keep yoʋr oaths to the Lord.’
But I say to you, do not swear at all, neither by heaven, for it is the throne of God;
nor by the earth, for it is the footstool of his feet; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King.
Neither shall yoʋ swear by yoʋr head, for yoʋ cannot make one hair white or black.
But let your ‘Yes’ be ‘Yes’ and your ‘No’ be ‘No’; for whatever is more than these is from the evil one.
“You have heard that it was said, ‘An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.’
But I say to you, do not resist one who is evil. Rather, if anyone slaps yoʋ on the right cheek, turn to him the other also.
If anyone wants to sue yoʋ and take away yoʋr tunic, let him have yoʋr cloak also.
And if anyone presses yoʋ into service for one mile, go with him two.
Give to everyone who asks of yoʋ, and do not turn away from anyone who wants to borrow from yoʋ.
“You have heard that it was said, ‘Yoʋ shall love yoʋr neighbor and hate yoʋr enemy.’
But I say to you, love your enemies, bless those who curse you, do good to those who hate you, and pray for those who mistreat you and persecute you,
so that you may be sons of your Father in heaven. For he makes his sun rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous.
For if you love those who love you, what reward do you have? Do not even the tax collectors do the same?
And if you greet only your friends, what are you doing that is out of the ordinary? Do not even the tax collectors do that?
You therefore shall be perfect, just as your Father in heaven is perfect.
“Be careful not to give to the needy in front of others to be seen by them, otherwise you have no reward from your Father in heaven.
So when yoʋ give to the needy, do not sound a trumpet before yoʋ, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, so that they may be praised by others. Truly I say to you, they have received their reward.
But when yoʋ give to the needy, do not let yoʋr left hand know what yoʋr right hand is doing,
so that yoʋr giving may be in secret. Then yoʋr Father who sees in secret will himself reward yoʋ openly.
“When yoʋ pray, do not be like the hypocrites. For they love to pray standing in the synagogues and at the street corners so that they may be seen by others. Truly I say to you, they have received their reward.
But when yoʋ pray, go into yoʋr inner room, shut yoʋr door, and pray to yoʋr Father who is in secret. Then yoʋr Father who sees in secret will reward yoʋ openly.
“And when you pray, do not babble on repetitiously like the Gentiles do, for they think they will be heard because of their use of many words.
Do not be like them, for your Father knows what you need before you ask him.
Pray then like this: Our Father in heaven, hallowed be yoʋr name.
Yoʋr kingdom come. Yoʋr will be done, on earth as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For yoʋrs is the kingdom and the power and the glory forever. Amen.
For if you forgive others their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you.
But if you do not forgive others their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.
“When you fast, do not be gloomy like the hypocrites, for they disfigure their faces so that others will see that they are fasting. Truly I say to you, they have received their reward.
But when yoʋ fast, anoint yoʋr head and wash yoʋr face,
so that no one will see that yoʋ are fasting except yoʋr Father who is in secret. Then yoʋr Father who sees in secret will reward yoʋ.
“Do not store up treasures on earth, where moth and rust destroy, and where thieves break in and steal.
But store up treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust destroys, and where thieves do not break in and steal.
For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
“The lamp of the body is the eye. If then yoʋr eye is clear, yoʋr whole body will be full of light.
But if yoʋr eye is bad, yoʋr whole body will be full of darkness. If then the light within yoʋ is darkness, how great is the darkness!
“No one can serve two masters, for either he will hate one and love the other, or he will be devoted to one and despise the other. You cannot serve God and money.
“Therefore I tell you, do not be anxious about your life, what you will eat and what you will drink, or about your body, what you will wear. Is not life more than food and the body more than clothing?
Look at the birds of the sky: They do not sow or reap or gather into barns, yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not of more value than they?
Which of you by being anxious can add a single moment to yoʋr span of life?
And why are you anxious about clothing? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow: They do not toil or spin,
yet I tell you that not even Solomon in all his glory was clothed like one of these.
Now if God so clothes the grass of the field, which is alive today and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, will he not much more clothe you, O you of little faith?
Therefore do not be anxious, saying, ‘What will we eat?’ or, ‘What will we drink?’ or, ‘What will we wear?’
For the Gentiles seek after all these things, and your heavenly Father knows that you need them all.
But seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things will be added to you.
“Therefore do not be anxious about tomorrow, for tomorrow will be anxious about its own matters. Sufficient for the day is its own trouble.
“Do not judge, so that you will not be judged.
For with the judgment you pronounce you will be judged, and with the measure you use it will be measured to you.
Why do yoʋ see the speck in yoʋr brother's eye, but do not consider the beam in yoʋr own eye?
Or how will yoʋ say to yoʋr brother, ‘Let me take the speck out of yoʋr eye,’ when there is a beam in yoʋr own eye?
Hypocrite! First take the beam out of yoʋr own eye, and then yoʋ will see clearly to take the speck out of yoʋr brother's eye.
“Do not give what is holy to dogs, and do not throw your pearls before pigs, lest they trample them with their feet, and then turn and tear you to pieces.
“Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and the door will be opened for you.
For everyone who asks receives; and he who seeks finds; and for him who knocks, the door will be opened.
Or what man is there among you, who, if his son asks him for bread, will give him a stone;
and if he asks for a fish, will give him a serpent?
If you then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give good things to those who ask him!
“Therefore whatever you wish that others would do to you, do the same also to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets.
“Enter through the narrow gate, for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and there are many who enter through it.
How narrow is the gate, and restricted the way that leads to life, and there are few who find it!
“Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing but inwardly are ravenous wolves.
By their fruits you will know them. Do people gather grapes from thorns, or figs from thistles?
In the same way, every good tree produces good fruit, but a bad tree produces bad fruit.
A good tree cannot produce bad fruit, neither can a bad tree produce good fruit.
Every tree that does not produce good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.
Therefore by their fruits you will know them.
“Not everyone who says to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter the kingdom of heaven, but only he who does the will of my Father in heaven.
Many will say to me on that day, ‘Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in yoʋr name, and in yoʋr name cast out demons, and in yoʋr name do many miracles?’
Then I will declare to them, ‘I never knew you; depart from me, you who practice lawlessness.’
“Everyone then who hears these words of mine and does them I will compare to a wise man who built his house on the rock.
The rain fell, the floods came, and the winds blew and beat on that house, but it did not fall, for it was founded on the rock.
But everyone who hears these words of mine and does not do them will be compared to a foolish man who built his house on the sand.
The rain fell, the floods came, and the winds blew and beat against that house, and it fell, and great was its fall.”
When Jesus finished saying these things, the crowds were astonished at his teaching,
because he was teaching them as one who had authority, and not as the scribes.
When Jesus came down from the mountain, large crowds followed him.
And behold, a leper came and bowed down before him, saying, “Lord, if yoʋ are willing, yoʋ can make me clean.”
So Jesus stretched out his hand and touched him, saying, “I am willing; be made clean.” Immediately his leprosy was cleansed.
Then Jesus said to him, “Be sure not to tell anyone about this, but go show yoʋrself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, as a testimony to them.”
When Jesus entered Capernaum, a centurion came to him and pleaded with him,
saying, “Lord, my servant is lying paralyzed at home, suffering terribly.”
Jesus said to him, “I will come and heal him.”
But the centurion replied, “Lord, I am not worthy to have yoʋ enter under my roof, but just say the word, and my servant will be healed.
For I too am a man under authority, with soldiers under me. I say to this one, ‘Go,’ and he goes; and to another, ‘Come,’ and he comes; and to my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.”
When Jesus heard this, he was amazed and said to those who were following him, “Truly I say to you, not even in Israel have I found such great faith.
I tell you that many will come from east and west, and recline with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob at the banquet table in the kingdom of heaven,
but the sons of the kingdom will be cast into the outer darkness; in that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”
Then Jesus said to the centurion, “Go; it will be done for you just as yoʋ have believed.” And his servant was healed in that hour.
When Jesus came into Peter's house, he saw Peter's mother-in-law lying in bed with a fever.
So he touched her hand, and the fever left her. Then she rose and began to serve him.
When evening came, many who were possessed by demons were brought to him, and he cast out the spirits with a word and healed all who were sick.
This was to fulfill what had been spoken by the prophet Isaiah: “He took our infirmities and bore our diseases.”
When Jesus saw the large crowds around him, he gave orders to depart to the other side of the sea.
Then a scribe came up and said to him, “Teacher, I will follow yoʋ wherever yoʋ go.”
Jesus said to him, “Foxes have holes, and the birds of the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head.”
Then another of his disciples said to him, “Lord, let me first go and bury my father.”
But Jesus said to him, “Follow me, and let the dead bury their own dead.”
Then he got into the boat, and his disciples followed him.
And behold, a great storm arose on the sea, so that the boat was being swamped by the waves. But Jesus was asleep.
So the disciples came to him and woke him, saying, “Lord, save us! We are perishing!”
But he said to them, “Why are you afraid, O you of little faith?” Then he rose and rebuked the winds and the sea, and there was a great calm.
And the men were amazed, saying, “What kind of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him?”
When Jesus came to the other side of the sea, to the region of the Gergesenes, he was met by two demon-possessed men who had come out of the tombs. They were so fierce that no one could pass by that way.
And behold, they cried out, “What do yoʋ have to do with us, Jesus, Son of God? Have yoʋ come here to torment us before the appointed time?”
Now at a distance from them there was a herd of many pigs feeding.
So the demons begged Jesus, “If yoʋ cast us out, let us go into the herd of pigs.”
He said to them, “Go.” So they came out and went into the herd of pigs, and behold, the whole herd of pigs rushed down the steep bank into the sea and died in the water.
Those who had been feeding the pigs then ran off, went into the city, and reported everything, including what had happened to the demon-possessed men.
And behold, the whole city went out to meet Jesus. And when they saw him, they begged him to depart from their region.
After getting into the boat, Jesus went back across the sea and came to his own city.
And behold, some men brought to him a paralytic lying on a bed. When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic, “Take courage, son; yoʋr sins are forgiven yoʋ.”
And behold, some of the scribes said to themselves, “This man is blaspheming.”
Perceiving their thoughts, Jesus said, “Why are you thinking evil things in your hearts?
Which is easier, to say, ‘Yoʋr sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Rise and walk’?
But so that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins”—then he said to the paralytic—“Rise, pick up yoʋr bed, and go to yoʋr house.”
So he rose and went to his house.
When the crowds saw it, they were amazed and glorified God, who had given such authority to men.
As Jesus went on from there, he saw a man named Matthew sitting at the tax booth. Jesus said to him, “Follow me,” so Matthew rose and followed him.
Later, as Jesus reclined at the table in Matthew's house, behold, many tax collectors and sinners came and reclined with him and his disciples.
When the Pharisees saw this, they said to his disciples, “Why is your teacher eating with tax collectors and sinners?”
When Jesus heard this, he said to them, “It is not the healthy who need a physician, but the sick.
Go and learn what this means: ‘I desire mercy and not sacrifice,’ for I did not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.”
Then the disciples of John came to Jesus and said, “Why is it that we and the Pharisees fast often, but yoʋr disciples do not fast?”
Jesus said to them, “Can the bridegroom's attendants mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them? But the days are coming when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then they will fast.
No one puts a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment, for the patch would pull away from the garment, and a worse tear would be made.
Neither do people put new wine into old wineskins. For the wineskins would burst, spilling the wine and ruining the wineskins. But new wine is put into new wineskins, and both are preserved.”
As he said these things to them, behold, a ruler came and bowed down before him, saying, “My daughter has just now died, but come and lay yoʋr hand on her, and she will live.”
So Jesus rose and followed him, and so did his disciples.
And behold, a woman who had suffered from a flow of blood for twelve years came up behind him and touched the fringe of his garment.
For she said to herself, “If only I touch his garment, I will be healed.”
But when Jesus turned around and saw her, he said, “Take courage, daughter; yoʋr faith has healed yoʋ.” And the woman was healed from that hour.
When Jesus came to the house of the ruler and saw the flute players and the crowd making a commotion,
he said to them, “Go away, for the girl is not dead but sleeping.” And they began laughing at him.
But when the crowd had been put outside, he went in and took hold of the girl's hand, and she arose.
And news of this spread throughout that entire region.
As Jesus went on from there, two blind men followed him, crying out, “Have mercy on us, Son of David!”
When he went into the house, the blind men came to him, and Jesus said to them, “Do you believe that I am able to do this?” They said to him, “Yes, Lord.”
Then he touched their eyes, saying, “Let it be done for yoʋ according to your faith.”
And their eyes were opened. Then Jesus sternly warned them, “Make sure no one finds out about this.”
But they went out and spread the news about him throughout that entire region.
As they were going away, behold, a mute man possessed by a demon was brought to Jesus.
When the demon had been cast out, the mute man spoke, and the crowds were amazed, saying, “Such a thing has never been seen in Israel.”
But the Pharisees said, “By the ruler of demons he casts out demons.”
Then Jesus went throughout all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues, preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every disease and every sickness among the people.
When he saw the crowds, he was moved with compassion for them, because they were harassed and helpless, like sheep without a shepherd.
Then he said to his disciples, “The harvest is plentiful, but the workers are few.
Therefore ask the Lord of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.”
Then Jesus summoned his twelve disciples and gave them authority to cast out unclean spirits and to heal every disease and every sickness.
Now these are the names of the twelve apostles: first, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother;
Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew the tax collector; James the son of Alphaeus, and Lebbaeus, who was given the name Thaddaeus;
Simon the Cananite, and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed him.
These twelve Jesus sent out, instructing them, “Do not go anywhere among the Gentiles, and do not enter any town of the Samaritans,
but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
As you go, preach that the kingdom of heaven has drawn near.
Heal the sick, cleanse lepers, and cast out demons. Freely you have received; freely give.
Take no gold, silver, or copper in your belts.
Take no knapsack for your journey, no extra tunic, sandals, or staffs, for the worker is worthy of his food.
Whenever you enter a town or village, inquire who in it is worthy, and stay there until you leave that place.
As you enter the house, greet the people who live there.
If the household is worthy, let your peace come upon it; but if it is not worthy, let your peace return to you.
If anyone will not receive you or listen to your words, shake off the dust from your feet as you go out from that house or town.
Truly I say to you, it will be more tolerable on the day of judgment for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah than for that town.
“Behold, I am sending you out like sheep in the midst of wolves, so be as wise as serpents and as innocent as doves.
But beware of men, for they will deliver you up to councils and flog you in their synagogues.
For my sake you will even be brought before governors and kings as witnesses to them and to the Gentiles.
When they hand you over, do not be anxious about how to speak or what to say, for what you are to say will be given to you in that hour.
For it will not be you speaking, but the Spirit of your Father speaking through you.
Brother will deliver up brother to death, and a father his child, and children will rise up against their parents and have them put to death.
You will be hated by all because of my name, but he who endures to the end will be saved.
When they persecute you in one town, flee to another, for truly I say to you, you will certainly not finish going through the towns of Israel before the Son of Man comes.
“A disciple is not above his teacher, nor is a servant above his master.
It is sufficient for a disciple to be like his teacher and for a servant to be like his master. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebul, how much more will they malign the members of his household!
“So do not be afraid of them, for there is nothing covered that will not be revealed, and nothing hidden that will not be made known.
What I tell you in the darkness, speak in the light; and what you hear whispered in your ear, proclaim on the housetops.
Do not be afraid of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul, but rather fear him who can destroy both the soul and the body in hell.
Are not two sparrows sold for a penny? Yet not one of them will fall to the ground without your Father's consent.
And even the hairs of your head are all numbered.
So do not be afraid; you are of more value than many sparrows.
“Therefore everyone who acknowledges me before men, I will also acknowledge before my Father in heaven.
But whoever denies me before men, I will also deny before my Father in heaven.
“Do not think that I have come to bring peace to the earth. I have not come to bring peace, but a sword.
For I have come to set a man against his father, a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.
And a man's enemies will be the members of his own household.
Whoever loves his father or mother more than me is not worthy of me; whoever loves his son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.
And whoever does not take up his cross and follow me is not worthy of me.
Whoever finds his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake will find it.
“Whoever receives you receives me, and whoever receives me receives him who sent me.
Whoever receives a prophet in the name of a prophet will receive a prophet's reward; whoever receives a righteous person in the name of a righteous person will receive a righteous person's reward.
And whoever gives one of these little ones even a cup of cold water to drink in the name of a disciple, truly I say to you, he will certainly not lose his reward.”
When Jesus had finished instructing his twelve disciples, he departed from there to teach and preach in the cities of Galilee.
Now when John heard in prison about the works Christ had done, he sent two of his disciples
to ask him, “Are yoʋ the one who is to come, or should we wait for another?”
Jesus answered them, “Go tell John what you hear and see:
The blind receive their sight and the lame walk, lepers are made clean and the deaf hear, the dead are raised and the poor have good news preached to them.
And blessed is anyone who does not take offense at me.”
As these men went away, Jesus began to speak to the crowds about John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind?
What then did you go out to see? A man clothed in soft garments? Behold, those who wear soft garments are in the palaces of kings.
But what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet.
For this is the one of whom it is written, ‘Behold, I am sending my messenger ahead of yoʋ, who will prepare yoʋr way before yoʋ.’
Truly I say to you, among those born of women there has arisen no one greater than John the Baptist, but whoever is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.
From the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven has been suffering violence, and the violent try to take it by force.
For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John.
And if you are willing to accept it, he is Elijah who is to come.
He who has ears to hear, let him hear.
“But to what should I compare this generation? It is like children sitting in the marketplaces and calling out to their companions,
‘We played the flute for you, but you did not dance; we sang a lament for you, but you did not mourn.’
For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, ‘He has a demon.’
The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, ‘Behold, a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’ Yet wisdom is vindicated by her children.”
Then Jesus began to reproach the cities in which most of his miracles had been done, because they did not repent:
“Woe to yoʋ, Chorazin! Woe to yoʋ, Bethsaida! For if the miracles that were done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
But I tell you, it will be more tolerable on the day of judgment for Tyre and Sidon than for you.
And yoʋ, Capernaum, who have been exalted to heaven, will be brought down to Hades. For if the miracles that were done in yoʋ had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day.
But I tell you, it will be more tolerable on the day of judgment for the land of Sodom than for yoʋ.”
At that time Jesus said, “I praise yoʋ, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because yoʋ have hidden these things from the wise and intelligent, and revealed them to infants.
Yes, Father, for so it was well-pleasing in yoʋr sight.
All things have been delivered to me by my Father. No one knows the Son except the Father, and no one knows the Father except the Son, and anyone to whom the Son chooses to reveal him.
Come to me, all of you who labor and are burdened, and I will give you rest.
Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am gentle and lowly in heart, and you will find rest for your souls.
For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.”
At that time Jesus went through the grainfields on the Sabbath. His disciples were hungry and began to pluck heads of grain and eat them.
When the Pharisees saw this, they said to him, “Behold, yoʋr disciples are doing what is not lawful to do on the Sabbath.”
He said to them, “Have you not read what David did when he was hungry, he and those who were with him,
how he entered the house of God and ate the bread of the Presence, which was not lawful for him or those who were with him to eat, but only for the priests?
Or have you not read in the law that on the Sabbath the priests in the temple profane the Sabbath and yet are guiltless?
But I tell you that something greater than the temple is here.
But if you had known what this means: ‘I desire mercy and not sacrifice,’ you would not have condemned the guiltless.
For the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.”
Then he departed from there and went into their synagogue.
And behold, there was a man who had a withered hand. In order to accuse Jesus, the Pharisees asked him, “Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath?”
He said to them, “What man among you who has a sheep that falls into a pit on the Sabbath will not take hold of it and lift it out?
Of how much more value is a person than a sheep! So then, it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath.”
Then he said to the man, “Stretch out yoʋr hand.” So he stretched it out, and it was restored, becoming as sound as the other.
But the Pharisees went out and took counsel against Jesus as to how they might destroy him.
Aware of this, Jesus withdrew from there. Large crowds followed him, and he healed them all
and warned them not to make him known.
This was to fulfill what had been spoken through the prophet Isaiah:
“Behold, my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved, in whom my soul is well pleased. I will put my Spirit upon him, and he will declare justice to the Gentiles.
He will not quarrel or cry out, nor will anyone hear his voice in the streets.
A bruised reed he will not break, and a smoldering wick he will not extinguish, until he brings justice to victory.
And in his name the Gentiles will hope.”
Then a demon-possessed man who was blind and mute was brought to him, and Jesus healed him, so that the man who was blind and mute could speak and see.
All the crowds were amazed and said, “Can this be the Son of David?”
But when the Pharisees heard this, they said, “It is only by Beelzebul, the ruler of demons, that this man casts out demons.”
Knowing their thoughts, Jesus said to them, “Every kingdom divided against itself is laid waste, and no city or house divided against itself will stand.
So if Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against himself. How then will his kingdom stand?
And if I cast out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your followers cast them out? Therefore they will be your judges.
But if I cast out demons by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God has come upon you.
Or how can anyone enter the house of a strong man and plunder his goods unless he first binds the strong man? Then he will plunder his house.
Whoever is not with me is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters.
Therefore I tell you, people will be forgiven for every sin and blasphemy, but they will not be forgiven for blasphemy against the Spirit.
Whoever speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven, neither in the present age nor in the age to come.
“A tree is known by its fruit. If a tree is good, its fruit will also be good. If a tree is bad, its fruit will also be bad.
You brood of vipers, how can you speak good things, when you are evil? For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.
The good person brings good things out of his good treasure, and the evil person brings evil things out of his evil treasure.
But I tell you, on the day of judgment people will give an account for every idle word they speak.
For by yoʋr words yoʋ will be justified, and by yoʋr words yoʋ will be condemned.”
Then some of the scribes and Pharisees responded, “Teacher, we want to see a sign from yoʋ.”
But Jesus answered them, “An evil and adulterous generation asks for a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of the prophet Jonah.
For just as Jonah was in the belly of the great sea creature for three days and three nights, so will the Son of Man be in the heart of the earth for three days and three nights.
The men of Nineveh will rise up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, for they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold, something greater than Jonah is here.
The queen of the South will rise up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, something greater than Solomon is here.
“When an unclean spirit has gone out of a person, it goes through waterless places seeking rest, but does not find any.
Then it says, ‘I will return to the house I left.’ When it arrives, it finds the house unoccupied, swept, and put in order.
Then it goes and takes with it seven other spirits more evil than itself, and they go in and dwell there, and the last state of that person becomes worse than the first. So will it be with this evil generation also.”
While Jesus was still speaking to the crowds, behold, his mother and his brothers stood outside, asking to speak to him.
Then someone said to him, “Behold, yoʋr mother and yoʋr brothers are standing outside, asking to speak to yoʋ.”
But he replied to the one who spoke to him, “Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?”
And stretching out his hand toward his disciples, he said, “Behold, my mother and my brothers!
For whoever does the will of my Father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother.”
On that day Jesus went out of the house and sat by the sea,
and large crowds gathered around him. So he got into the boat and sat down, while the entire crowd stood on the shore.
Then he told them many things in parables, saying, “Behold, a sower went out to sow.
As he sowed, some seeds fell along the path, and the birds came and devoured them.
Other seeds fell on rocky ground, where they did not have much soil, and they sprang up immediately because they had no depth of soil.
But when the sun rose, they were scorched. And because they had no root, they withered away.
Other seeds fell among the thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked them.
But other seeds fell on good soil and produced fruit, some a hundred, some sixty, and some thirty times more than what was sown.
He who has ears to hear, let him hear.”
Then the disciples came and said to him, “Why do yoʋ speak to the people in parables?”
Jesus answered them, “To you it has been given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it has not been given.
For whoever has will be given more, and he will have an abundance. But whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.
That is why I speak to them in parables, because ‘they see but do not perceive, and they hear but do not listen or understand.’
In them is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah, which says, ‘Yoʋ will hear but never understand, and you will see but never perceive.
For the heart of this people has become calloused; with their ears they have barely heard, and their eyes they have closed, lest they should see with their eyes, hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts and turn back, and I would heal them.’
But blessed are your eyes because they see, and your ears because they hear.
For truly I say to you, many prophets and righteous people desired to see the things you see but did not see them, and to hear the things you hear but did not hear them.
“So hear what the parable of the sower means:
When anyone hears the word of the kingdom and does not understand it, the evil one comes and snatches away what was sown in his heart. This is the seed sown along the path.
The seed sown on rocky ground is he who hears the word and immediately receives it with joy.
Yet he has no root in himself, but is only temporary. When tribulation or persecution arises on account of the word, he immediately falls away.
The seed sown among the thorns is he who hears the word, but the cares of this world and the deceitfulness of riches choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.
But the seed sown on the good soil is he who hears the word and understands it, who bears fruit and produces a hundred, sixty, or thirty times more than what was sown.”
Jesus presented another parable to them, saying, “The kingdom of heaven can be compared to a person who sowed good seed in his field,
but while people were sleeping, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and then went away.
When the plants sprouted and produced grain, the tares also appeared.
So the servants of the master of the house came and said to him, ‘Master, did yoʋ not sow good seed in yoʋr field? How then does it have tares?’
He said to them, ‘An enemy has done this.’ So the servants said to him, ‘Do yoʋ want us to go and gather them up?’
He said, ‘No, lest in gathering the tares you uproot the wheat with them.
Let them both grow together until the harvest, and at the time of the harvest I will say to the reapers, “Gather the tares first and bind them into bundles to burn them up, but gather the wheat into my barn.” ’ ”
He presented another parable to them, saying, “The kingdom of heaven is like a grain of mustard seed that a man took and sowed in his field.
Although it is the smallest of all seeds, it grows larger than the other garden plants and becomes a tree, and the birds of the sky come and nest in its branches.”
He spoke to them another parable: “The kingdom of heaven is like leaven that a woman took and mixed into three measures of flour until it had all been leavened.”
All these things Jesus spoke to the crowds in parables; he did not speak to them without using a parable.
This was to fulfill what had been spoken through the prophet: “I will open my mouth in parables; I will declare things hidden from the foundation of the world.”
Then Jesus left the crowds and went into the house, and his disciples came to him and said, “Explain to us the parable of the tares of the field.”
So he said to them in response, “He who sows the good seed is the Son of Man.
The field is the world, and the good seeds are the sons of the kingdom. The tares are the sons of the evil one,
and the enemy who sowed them is the devil. The harvest is the end of the age, and the reapers are angels.
Therefore, just as the tares are gathered and burned with fire, so it will be at the end of this age.
The Son of Man will send his angels, and they will gather out of his kingdom all stumbling blocks and those who practice lawlessness.
They will throw them into the fiery furnace. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
Then the righteous will shine like the sun in the kingdom of their Father. He who has ears to hear, let him hear.
“Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a treasure hidden in a field, which a man found and hid again, and in his joy he went and sold all that he had and bought the field.
“Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant seeking fine pearls.
When he found one pearl of great price, he went and sold all that he had and bought it.
“Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a dragnet that was cast into the sea, catching all kinds of fish.
When it was full, the fishermen drew it to shore. Then they sat down and put the good fish into containers, but the bad ones they threw away.
So it will be at the end of the age. The angels will come and separate the evil from the righteous
and throw them into the fiery furnace. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”
Jesus said to them, “Do you understand all these things?” They said to him, “Yes, Lord.”
Then he said to them, “Every scribe that has been trained as a disciple for the kingdom of heaven is like a master of a house who brings out of his treasure things new and old.”
When Jesus had finished these parables, he departed from there.
Then he went to his hometown and taught the people in their synagogue. They were astonished and said, “Where did this man get this wisdom and these miraculous powers?
Is this not the carpenter's son? Is not his mother's name Mary, and are not his brothers James, Joses, Simon, and Judas?
Are not all his sisters with us? Where then did this man get all these things?”
And they took offense at him. Then Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor except in his hometown and in his own household.”
And he did not do many miracles there because of their unbelief.
At that time Herod the tetrarch heard the report about Jesus
and said to his servants, “This man is John the Baptist; he has been raised from the dead, and that is why these mighty powers are at work in him.”
For Herod had arrested John, bound him, and put him in prison on account of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife.
For John had been saying to him, “It is not lawful for yoʋ to have her.”
Although Herod wanted to kill John, he was afraid of the crowd, because they regarded John as a prophet.
But when Herod's birthday was celebrated, the daughter of Herodias danced before the guests and pleased Herod.
So he promised with an oath to give her whatever she might ask.
Prompted by her mother, she said, “Give me here on a platter the head of John the Baptist.”
The king was grieved, but because of his oaths and his guests, he commanded it to be given
and sent orders to have John beheaded in prison.
John's head was then brought on a platter and given to the girl, and she brought it to her mother.
Later, John's disciples came and took his body and buried it. Then they went and brought word to Jesus.
When Jesus heard this, he withdrew from there in a boat to a desolate place by himself. But the crowds heard about it and followed him on foot from the towns.
And when Jesus went ashore and saw a large crowd, he was moved with compassion for them and healed their sick.
As evening approached, his disciples came to him and said, “This place is desolate, and the hour is now late. Send the crowds away so that they can go into the villages and buy themselves some food.”
But Jesus said to them, “They have no need to go away; you give them something to eat.”
They said to him, “We have here only five loaves and two fish.”
He said, “Bring them here to me.”
Then he commanded the crowds to sit down on the grass, and taking the five loaves and the two fish, he looked up to heaven and said the blessing. Then he broke the loaves and gave them to the disciples, and the disciples gave them to the crowds.
They all ate and were filled, and the disciples picked up what was left over of the broken pieces, twelve baskets full.
Now those who had eaten were about five thousand men, besides women and children.
Immediately Jesus compelled the disciples to get into the boat and go ahead of him to the other side of the sea, while he sent the crowds away.
After sending the crowds away, he went up on the mountain by himself to pray. When evening came, he was there alone.
Meanwhile, the boat was already in the middle of the sea, being tossed by the waves, for the wind was against them.
And in the fourth watch of the night Jesus went to them, walking on the sea.
When the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were terrified and said, “It is a ghost!” And they cried out in fear.
But Jesus immediately said to them, “Take courage! It is I; do not be afraid.”
In response Peter said to him, “Lord, if it is yoʋ, command me to come to yoʋ on the water.”
So he said, “Come.” Then Peter got down from the boat and walked on the water to go to Jesus.
But when he saw the strong wind, he became frightened, and beginning to sink, he cried out, “Lord, save me!”
Immediately Jesus reached out his hand, took hold of him, and said to him, “O yoʋ of little faith, why did yoʋ doubt?”
And when they had gotten into the boat, the wind ceased.
Then those who were in the boat came and worshiped him, saying, “Truly yoʋ are the Son of God.”
When they had crossed the sea, they came to the land of Gennesaret.
And when the men of that place recognized Jesus, they sent word into the entire surrounding region, and people brought to him all who were sick.
They begged him to let the sick touch even the fringe of his garment, and all who touched it were completely healed.
Then the scribes and Pharisees from Jerusalem came to Jesus and said,
“Why do yoʋr disciples break the tradition of the elders? For they do not wash their hands when they eat bread.”
He answered them, “And why do you break the commandment of God for the sake of your tradition?
For God commanded, ‘Honor yoʋr father and yoʋr mother,’ and, ‘Whoever speaks evil of his father or mother must surely die.’
But you say, ‘If anyone says to his father or mother, “Whatever benefit yoʋ might have received from me is now a gift devoted to God,” then he certainly need not honor his father or his mother.’
You have nullified the commandment of God for the sake of your tradition.
Hypocrites! Isaiah prophesied rightly about you when he said,
‘This people draws near to me with their mouth and honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
They worship me in vain, teaching as doctrines the commandments of men.’ ”
Then Jesus called the crowd over and said to them, “Listen and understand:
It is not what goes into the mouth that defiles a person; it is what comes out of the mouth that defiles a person.”
Then his disciples came and said to him, “Do yoʋ know that the Pharisees were offended when they heard what yoʋ said?”
Jesus answered, “Every plant that my heavenly Father has not planted will be uprooted.
Leave them be; they are blind guides of the blind. And if one blind person guides another, both will fall into a pit.”
Then Peter said to him in response, “Explain this parable to us.”
Jesus said, “Are you also still without understanding?
Do you not yet understand that everything that goes into the mouth passes into the stomach and is expelled into the latrine?
But the things that come out of the mouth come from the heart, and these defile a person.
For from the heart come evil thoughts, murder, adultery, fornication, theft, false testimony, and slander.
These are what defile a person, but to eat with unwashed hands does not defile a person.”
Then Jesus went away from there and withdrew to the district of Tyre and Sidon.
And behold, a Canaanite woman from that region came and cried out to him, “Have mercy on me, Lord, Son of David! My daughter is severely demon-possessed.”
But he did not respond to her at all. So his disciples came to him and urged him, “Send her away, for she is crying out after us.”
In response Jesus said, “I was sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.”
But she came and bowed down before him, saying, “Lord, help me.”
He replied, “It is not good to take the children's bread and throw it to the dogs.”
She said, “Yes, Lord, yet even the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from the table of their masters.”
Then Jesus answered her, “O woman, great is yoʋr faith; it will be done for yoʋ as yoʋ wish.” And her daughter was healed from that hour.
Departing from there, Jesus went along the Sea of Galilee. Then he went up on the mountain and sat down.
Large crowds came to him, having with them the lame, blind, mute, crippled, and many others. They put them at the feet of Jesus, and he healed them.
So the crowds were amazed when they saw the mute speaking, the crippled made well, the lame walking, and the blind seeing. And they glorified the God of Israel.
Then Jesus called his disciples over and said, “I have compassion on the crowd because they have stayed with me now for three days and have nothing to eat. I do not want to send them away without having eaten, lest they faint on the way.”
His disciples said to him, “Where can we get so many loaves in such a desolate place to fill such a large crowd?”
Jesus said to them, “How many loaves do you have?” They said, “Seven, and a few small fish.”
So he commanded the crowds to sit down on the ground,
and taking the seven loaves and the fish, he gave thanks, broke them, and gave them to his disciples, and the disciples gave them to the crowd.
They all ate and were filled, and the disciples picked up what was left over of the broken pieces, seven baskets full.
Besides women and children, there were four thousand men who had eaten.
After sending the crowds away, Jesus got into the boat and went to the region of Magdala.
Now the Pharisees and Sadducees came and tested Jesus, asking him to show them a sign from heaven.
But he answered them, “When evening comes you say, ‘It will be fair weather, for the sky is red.’
And in the morning you say, ‘There will be a storm today, for the sky is red and threatening.’ Hypocrites! You know how to discern the appearance of the sky, but you cannot discern the signs of the times?
An evil and adulterous generation asks for a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of the prophet Jonah.” Then he left them and went away.
When his disciples reached the other side of the sea, they realized that they had forgotten to bring bread.
Then Jesus said to them, “Watch out and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
So they discussed this among themselves, saying, “He must have said this because we brought no bread.”
Aware of this, Jesus said to them, “Why are you discussing among yourselves, O you of little faith, the fact that you brought no bread?
Do you not yet understand? Do you not remember the five loaves for the five thousand, and how many baskets you collected?
Or the seven loaves for the four thousand, and how many baskets you collected?
How could you not understand that I was not talking about bread when I told you to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees?”
Then they understood that he had not told them to beware of the leaven of bread, but of the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
Now when Jesus came into the district of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, “Who do people say that I, the Son of Man, am?”
They said, “Some say John the Baptist, others say Elijah, and others say that yoʋ are Jeremiah or one of the prophets.”
He said to them, “But who do you say that I am?”
Simon Peter answered, “Yoʋ are the Christ, the Son of the living God.”
And Jesus answered him, “Blessed are yoʋ, Simon Bar-Jonah, for flesh and blood has not revealed this to yoʋ, but my Father in heaven.
And I tell yoʋ that yoʋ are Peter, and on this rock I will build my church, and the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it.
I will give yoʋ the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatever yoʋ bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever yoʋ loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.”
Then he commanded his disciples to tell no one that he was Jesus the Christ.
From that time Jesus began to show his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things at the hands of the elders, chief priests, and scribes, and that he must be killed and on the third day be raised up.
So Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him, saying, “God forbid, Lord! This shall certainly not happen to yoʋ.”
But he turned around and said to Peter, “Get behind me, Satan! Yoʋ are a stumbling block to me, for yoʋ are not thinking about the things of God, but the things of men.”
Then Jesus said to his disciples, “If anyone wants to be one of my disciples, he must deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me.
For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake will find it.
For what does it benefit a person if he gains the whole world but forfeits his soul? Or what can a person give in exchange for his soul?
For the Son of Man will come with his angels in the glory of his Father, and then he will repay each person according to what he has done.
Truly I say to you, there are some standing here who will certainly not taste death until they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom.”
After six days Jesus took Peter, James, and John the brother of James, and led them up on a high mountain by themselves.
There he was transfigured before them; his face shone like the sun, and his garments became as white as light.
And behold, Moses and Elijah appeared to them, talking with him.
So Peter said to Jesus, “Lord, it is good for us to be here. If yoʋ want, we will make three shelters here, one for yoʋ, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.”
While he was still speaking, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them, and a voice from the cloud said, “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; listen to him!”
When the disciples heard this, they fell on their faces and were utterly afraid.
But Jesus came over and touched them, saying, “Rise; do not be afraid.”
And lifting up their eyes, they saw no one but Jesus.
As they were coming down from the mountain, Jesus commanded them, “Do not tell anyone about the vision you saw until the Son of Man has risen from the dead.”
Then his disciples asked him, “Why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?”
Jesus answered them, “Elijah does indeed come first, and he will restore all things.
But I tell you that Elijah has already come, and they did not recognize him, but did to him whatever they wanted. Even so the Son of Man is about to suffer at their hands.”
Then the disciples understood that he was speaking to them about John the Baptist.
When they came to the crowd, a man approached Jesus, kneeling before him
and saying, “Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is an epileptic and suffers terribly. For often he falls into the fire, and often into the water.
I brought him to yoʋr disciples, but they could not heal him.”
Jesus answered, “O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you? How long shall I bear with you? Bring him here to me.”
Then Jesus rebuked the demon, and it came out of the boy, and he was healed from that hour.
Afterward the disciples came to Jesus privately and said, “Why could we not cast it out?”
Jesus said to them, “Because of your unbelief. For truly I say to you, if you have faith like a grain of mustard seed, you will say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move. Nothing will be impossible for you.
But this kind does not go out except by prayer and fasting.”
While they were staying in Galilee, Jesus said to them, “The Son of Man is about to be delivered up into the hands of men.
They will kill him, and on the third day he will be raised up.” And the disciples were greatly distressed.
When they came to Capernaum, the collectors of the two-drachma tax came to Peter and said, “Your teacher pays the two-drachma tax, doesn't he?”
He said, “Yes.” And when Peter came into the house, Jesus spoke to him first, saying, “What do yoʋ think, Simon? From whom do the kings of the earth receive toll or tax? From their own sons or from strangers?”
Peter said to him, “From strangers.” And Jesus said to him, “Then the sons are free.
But so that we may not offend them, go to the sea, cast a hook, and take the first fish yoʋ catch. When yoʋ open its mouth, yoʋ will find a stater coin. Take it and give it to them for yoʋ and me.”
In that hour the disciples came to Jesus and said, “Who is greater in the kingdom of heaven?”
So Jesus called over a little child, placed him among them,
and said, “Truly I say to you, unless you change and become like little children, you will certainly not enter the kingdom of heaven.
Therefore, whoever humbles himself like this little child is greater in the kingdom of heaven.
And whoever receives one little child such as this in my name receives me.
But if anyone causes one of these little ones who believe in me to stumble, it would be better for him to have a heavy millstone hung around his neck and to be drowned in the depths of the sea.
“Woe to the world because of stumbling blocks! It is necessary that stumbling blocks come, yet woe to that man through whom the stumbling block comes!
If yoʋr hand or yoʋr foot causes yoʋ to stumble, cut them off and throw them away from yoʋ. It is better for yoʋ to enter life lame or crippled than to have two hands or two feet and be thrown into the eternal fire.
And if yoʋr eye causes yoʋ to stumble, pluck it out and throw it away from yoʋ. It is better for yoʋ to enter life with one eye than to have two eyes and be thrown into the fires of hell.
“Be careful not to despise one of these little ones, for I tell you that their angels in heaven continually see the face of my Father in heaven.
For the Son of Man came to save the lost.
What do you think? If a man has a hundred sheep, and one of them goes astray, does he not leave the other ninety-nine and go seek on the mountains the one that has gone astray?
And if he happens to find it, truly I say to you, he rejoices more over it than over the ninety-nine that have not gone astray.
In the same way, it is not the will of your Father in heaven that one of these little ones should perish.
“If yoʋr brother sins against yoʋ, go show him his fault between yoʋ and him alone. If he listens to yoʋ, yoʋ have gained yoʋr brother.
But if he does not listen, take one or two others with yoʋ, so that every matter may be established by the mouth of two or three witnesses.
If he refuses to listen to them, tell it to the church. And if he refuses to listen even to the church, treat him as you would a pagan or a tax collector.
Truly I say to you, whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.
Again, truly I say to you, if two of you agree on earth about anything you ask, it will be done for you by my Father in heaven.
For where two or three are gathered together in my name, I am there among them.”
Then Peter came to Jesus and said, “Lord, how many times must I forgive my brother when he keeps sinning against me? Up to seven times?”
Jesus said to him, “Not, I tell yoʋ, up to seven times, but up to seventy times seven.
“For this reason the kingdom of heaven may be compared to a king who wished to settle accounts with his servants.
As he began to settle accounts, one servant who had a debt of ten thousand talents was brought to him.
But since he did not have anything with which to repay the debt, his master commanded him to be sold along with his wife, his children, and all that he had, so that the debt could be repaid.
So the servant fell down and bowed before him, saying, ‘Master, be patient with me, and I will repay yoʋ all that I owe.’
Moved with compassion, the master of that servant released him and forgave him the debt.
But that servant went out and found one of his fellow servants who owed him a hundred denarii. He grabbed him and began to choke him, saying, ‘Repay me what yoʋ owe.’
So his fellow servant fell down at his feet and begged him, ‘Be patient with me, and I will repay yoʋ.’
But he was not willing to do so. Instead, he went and threw him into prison until he should repay what was owed.
When his fellow servants saw what had taken place, they were greatly distressed and went and reported to their master all that had happened.
Then the master summoned the servant and said to him, ‘Yoʋ evil servant! I forgave yoʋ all that debt because yoʋ begged me to do so.
Should yoʋ not also have had mercy on yoʋr fellow servant, even as I had mercy on yoʋ?’
And in anger his master handed him over to the jailers to be tortured until he should repay all that was owed him.
My heavenly Father will also do the same to you if each one of you, from your hearts, does not forgive his brother for his trespasses.”
When Jesus had finished saying these things, he departed from Galilee and came into the region of Judea beyond the Jordan.
Large crowds followed him, and he healed them there.
Then the Pharisees came up to Jesus and tested him by asking him, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any reason?”
He answered them, “Have you not read that he who made them from the beginning ‘made them male and female,’
and said, ‘For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife, and the two will become one flesh’?
So then, they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore what God has joined together, let no one separate.”
They said to him, “Why then did Moses command us to give her a certificate of divorce and send her away?”
He said to them, “Because of your hardness of heart Moses allowed you to divorce your wives, but from the beginning it was not so.
I tell you that whoever divorces his wife, except for fornication, and marries another, commits adultery. And whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery.”
His disciples said to him, “If such is the case of a man with his wife, it is better not to marry.”
But Jesus said to them, “Not all men can accept this statement, but only those to whom it is given.
For there are eunuchs who were born that way from their mother's womb, and there are eunuchs who have been made eunuchs by men, and there are eunuchs who have made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. Whoever is able to accept this should accept it.”
Then little children were brought to Jesus so that he might lay his hands on them and pray, but the disciples rebuked those who brought them.
Yet Jesus said, “Let the little children come to me and do not hinder them, for the kingdom of heaven belongs to such as these.”
And after laying his hands on them, he departed from there.
And behold, a man came and said to him, “Good Teacher, what good thing must I do to have eternal life?”
Jesus said to him, “Why do yoʋ call me good? No one is good except God alone. But if yoʋ wish to enter life, keep the commandments.”
The man said to him, “Which ones?” Jesus said, “Yoʋ shall not murder, Yoʋ shall not commit adultery, Yoʋ shall not steal, Yoʋ shall not give false testimony,
Honor yoʋr father and yoʋr mother, and, Yoʋ shall love yoʋr neighbor as yoʋrself.”
The young man said to him, “I have kept all these commandments from the time I was a young boy; what do I still lack?”
Jesus said to him, “If yoʋ wish to be perfect, go sell what yoʋ have and give to the poor, and yoʋ will have treasure in heaven; then come follow me.”
But when the young man heard this, he went away sorrowful, for he had many possessions.
Then Jesus said to his disciples, “Truly I say to you, only with difficulty will a rich person enter the kingdom of heaven.
Again I say to you, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich person to enter the kingdom of God.”
When his disciples heard this, they were greatly astonished and said, “Who then can be saved?”
Jesus looked at them and said to them, “With men it is impossible, but with God all things are possible.”
Then Peter said to him in response, “Behold, we have left everything and followed yoʋ; what then will there be for us?”
Jesus said to them, “Truly I say to you, when all things are made new and the Son of Man sits on his throne of glory, you who have followed me will also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
And everyone who has left houses, brothers, sisters, father, mother, wife, children, or fields for my name's sake, will receive a hundred times more and will inherit eternal life.
But many who are first will be last, and many who are last will be first.
“For the kingdom of heaven is like a master of a house who went out early in the morning to hire workers for his vineyard.
After agreeing with the workers that they would each receive a denarius for the day, he sent them into his vineyard.
About the third hour he went out and saw others standing idle in the marketplace.
He said to them, ‘You go into my vineyard as well, and I will give you whatever is right.’
So they went. He went out again about the sixth hour and the ninth hour and did likewise.
About the eleventh hour he went out and found others standing idle and said to them, ‘Why have you been standing here idle all day?’
They said to him, ‘Because no one has hired us.’ He said to them, ‘You go into my vineyard as well, and you will receive whatever is right.’
“When evening came, the owner of the vineyard said to his foreman, ‘Call the workers and pay them their wages, beginning with the last and going on to the first.’
When those who had been hired about the eleventh hour came, they each received a denarius.
So when those who had been hired first came, they thought they would receive more, but they also received a denarius each.
When they received it, they grumbled against the master of the house,
saying, ‘These last men worked for one hour, and yoʋ have made them equal to us, who have borne the burden of the day and the scorching heat.’
But he replied to one of them, ‘Friend, I am doing yoʋ no wrong. Did yoʋ not agree with me to work for a denarius?
Take what is yoʋrs and go. I wish to give to this last man just as I gave to yoʋ.
Or is it not lawful for me to do what I wish with what is mine? Are yoʋ envious because I am good?’
So the last will be first, and the first will be last. For many are called, but few are chosen.”
As Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve disciples aside privately on the way and said to them,
“Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be delivered up to the chief priests and scribes. They will condemn him to death
and hand him over to the Gentiles to be mocked, flogged, and crucified. But on the third day he will rise again.”
Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee came with her sons to Jesus, and bowing down she asked him for a favor.
So he said to her, “What do yoʋ want?” She said to him, “Declare that one of these two sons of mine may sit on yoʋr right and the other on yoʋr left in yoʋr kingdom.”
Jesus answered, “You do not know what you are asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I am about to drink, or to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?” The two brothers said to him, “We are able.”
So he said to them, “You will indeed drink my cup and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with, but to sit on my right and on my left is not mine to give, but is for those for whom it has been prepared by my Father.”
When the ten heard this, they were indignant with the two brothers.
So Jesus called them over and said, “You know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their great men exercise authority over them.
But it shall not be so among you. Instead, whoever wants to be great among you must be your servant,
and whoever wants to be first among you must be your slave,
just as the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.”
As they were leaving Jericho, a large crowd followed him.
And behold, there were two blind men sitting by the road. When they heard that Jesus was passing by, they cried out, “Have mercy on us, Lord, Son of David!”
But the crowd rebuked them, telling them to be silent. Yet they cried out even more loudly, “Have mercy on us, Lord, Son of David!”
So Jesus stopped, called them over, and said, “What do you want me to do for you?”
They said to him, “Lord, let our eyes be opened.”
Moved with compassion, Jesus touched their eyes, and immediately their eyes received sight, and they followed him.
When they drew near to Jerusalem and came to Bethsphage, at the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two disciples ahead,
telling them, “Go into the village ahead of you, and immediately you will find a donkey tied there and a colt with it. Untie them and bring them to me.
If anyone says anything to you, say, ‘The Lord has need of them.’ And immediately he will send them.”
Now all this took place to fulfill what the Lord had spoken through the prophet:
“Say to the daughter of Zion, ‘Behold, yoʋr king is coming to yoʋ, humble and mounted on a donkey, and a colt, the foal of a beast of burden.’ ”
So the disciples went and did just as Jesus had directed them.
They brought the donkey and the colt and laid on them their garments, and Jesus sat on them.
A very large crowd spread their garments on the road, and others cut down branches from the trees and also spread them on the road.
The crowds that went ahead of him and those that followed were crying out, “Hosanna to the Son of David! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!”
As he came into Jerusalem, the whole city was stirred up, saying, “Who is this?”
So the crowds were saying, “This is the prophet Jesus, who is from Nazareth of Galilee.”
Then Jesus entered the courts of God's temple and drove out all who were selling and buying there. He overturned the tables of the money changers and the seats of those who were selling doves.
And he said to them, “It is written, ‘My house shall be called a house of prayer,’ but you have made it a den of robbers.”
Then the lame and the blind came to him in the temple courts, and he healed them.
But when the chief priests and the scribes saw the wonderful things that he did and the children crying out in the temple courts, “Hosanna to the Son of David,” they were indignant
and said to him, “Do yoʋ hear what these children are saying?” Jesus said to them, “Yes, have you never read, ‘Out of the mouths of babies and nursing infants yoʋ have prepared praise’?”
And leaving them, he went out of the city to Bethany and spent the night there.
Early in the morning, as Jesus was returning to the city, he was hungry.
Seeing a lone fig tree by the road, he came to it and found nothing on it but leaves. Then he said to it, “May there never be any fruit from yoʋ again!” And at once the fig tree withered.
When the disciples saw it, they were amazed, saying, “How did the fig tree wither all at once?”
Jesus answered them, “Truly I say to you, if you have faith and do not doubt, not only will you do what has been done to the fig tree, but even if you say to this mountain, ‘Be taken up and thrown into the sea,’ it will happen.
And if you have faith, you will receive whatever you ask for in prayer.”
When he entered the temple courts, the chief priests and the elders of the people came up to him as he was teaching and said, “By what authority are yoʋ doing these things? And who gave yoʋ this authority?”
Jesus answered them, “I will also ask you one question. If you tell me the answer, I will also tell you by what authority I am doing these things.
Where did John's authority to baptize come from? From heaven or from men?” So they discussed it among themselves, saying, “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say to us, ‘Why then did you not believe him?’
But we are afraid of what the crowd might do if we say, ‘From men,’ for everyone regards John as a prophet.”
So they answered Jesus, “We do not know.” Then he said to them, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I am doing these things.
“But what do you think? A man had two sons. He went to his first son and said, ‘Son, go work today in my vineyard.’
His son answered, ‘I will not,’ but afterward he changed his mind and went.
Then the man went to his second son and said the same thing. His second son answered, ‘I will go, sir,’ but he did not go.
Which of the two did the will of his father?” They said to him, “The first.” Jesus said to them, “Truly I say to you, tax collectors and prostitutes are entering the kingdom of God ahead of you.
For John came to you in the way of righteousness, and you did not believe him, but tax collectors and prostitutes believed him. Yet even after you saw it, you did not change your minds and believe him.
“Listen to another parable: There was a master of a house who planted a vineyard, put a fence around it, dug a winepress in it, built a tower, leased it to farmers, and left the country.
When the season for fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the farmers to receive his fruit.
But the farmers seized his servants; they beat one, killed another, and stoned yet another.
Again he sent other servants, more than the first group. But the farmers treated them in the same way.
Last of all, he sent them his son, saying, ‘They will have respect for my son.’
But when the farmers saw the son, they said among themselves, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him and take possession of his inheritance.’
So they took him, threw him out of the vineyard, and killed him.
Now when the owner of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those farmers?”
They said to him, “He will bring those wretches to a wretched end and lease the vineyard to other farmers who will give him the fruits in their seasons.”
Jesus said to them, “Have you never read in the Scriptures, ‘The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone; this was the Lord's doing, and it is amazing in our eyes’?
Therefore I tell you that the kingdom of God will be taken away from you and given to a people who will produce its fruit.
He who falls on this stone will be broken to pieces, but anyone on whom it falls will be crushed.”
When the chief priests and the Pharisees heard Jesus' parables, they knew he was speaking about them.
Although they were looking for a way to arrest him, they were afraid of the crowds, because the people regarded him as a prophet.
Once again Jesus spoke to them in parables, saying,
“The kingdom of heaven can be compared to a king who prepared a wedding feast for his son.
He sent his servants to call those who had been invited to the wedding feast, but they would not come.
Again he sent other servants, saying, ‘Tell those who are invited, “Behold, I have prepared my dinner, my oxen and the fattened cattle have been slaughtered, and everything is ready. Come to the wedding feast.” ’
But they paid no attention and went away, one to his own field and another to his business.
The rest seized his servants, mistreated them, and killed them.
When the king heard about it, he was furious. So he sent his armies, who destroyed those murderers and burned down their city.
Then he said to his servants, ‘The wedding feast is ready, but those who were invited were not worthy.
Go therefore to where the roads exit the city and invite to the wedding feast anyone you find.’
So the servants went out to the roads and gathered together all whom they found, both evil and good, and the wedding feast was filled with guests.
“But when the king came in to see the guests, he saw a man there who was not clothed with a wedding garment.
So he said to him, ‘Friend, how did yoʋ get in here without a wedding garment?’ But the man was speechless.
Then the king said to the servants, ‘Bind his feet and hands, take him away, and throw him into the outer darkness. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’
For many are called, but few are chosen.”
Then the Pharisees went and took counsel as to how they might ensnare Jesus in what he said.
They sent their disciples to him, along with the Herodians, who said to him, “Teacher, we know that yoʋ are true and teach the way of God in truth and defer to no one, for yoʋ do not show partiality.
Tell us then, what do yoʋ think? Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar or not?”
But Jesus knew their evil intent and said, “Why are you testing me, you hypocrites?
Show me the coin for the tax.” So they brought him a denarius.
Then he said to them, “Whose image and inscription is this?”
They said to him, “Caesar's.” So he said to them, “Then render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's.”
When they heard this, they were amazed. Then they left him and went away.
On that day some Sadducees (who say there is no resurrection) came to Jesus and asked him,
“Teacher, Moses said, ‘If a man dies without having children, his brother must marry the widow and raise up offspring for him.’
Now there were seven brothers among us. The first married and died, and having no offspring, he left his wife to his brother.
The same thing happened to the second and to the third, down to the seventh.
Last of all, the woman also died.
In the resurrection, therefore, which of the seven will she be the wife of? For they all had her.”
Jesus answered them, “You are in error because you know neither the Scriptures nor the power of God.
For in the resurrection people neither marry nor are they given in marriage. Instead, they are like angels of God in heaven.
But as for the resurrection of the dead, have you not read what God said to you:
‘I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’? He is not the God of the dead, but of the living.”
And when the crowds heard this, they were astonished at his teaching.
Now when the Pharisees heard that Jesus had silenced the Sadducees, they gathered together.
And one of them, a lawyer, asked Jesus a question to test him:
“Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the law?”
Jesus said to him, “ ‘Yoʋ shall love the Lord yoʋr God with all yoʋr heart, with all yoʋr soul, and with all yoʋr mind.’
This is the most important and greatest commandment.
And a second is like it: ‘Yoʋ shall love yoʋr neighbor as yoʋrself.’
All the Law and the Prophets hang on these two commandments.”
While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them,
“What do you think about the Christ? Whose son is he?” They said to him, “David's.”
He said to them, “How is it then that David, in the Spirit, calls him ‘Lord,’ saying,
‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at my right hand until I make yoʋr enemies a footstool for yoʋr feet” ’?
If David calls him ‘Lord,’ how is he his son?”
No one was able to say anything in reply, nor did anyone dare to ask him questions anymore from that day forward.
Then Jesus said to the crowds and to his disciples,
“The scribes and the Pharisees sit on Moses' seat.
Therefore observe and do all that they tell you to observe. But do not do what they do, for they say things and do not do them.
They bind burdens that are heavy and hard to bear and lay them on people's shoulders, but they themselves are not willing to lift a finger to move them.
They do all their works to be seen by others. They make their phylacteries wide and the fringes of their garments long.
They love the place of honor at banquets, the best seats in the synagogues,
greetings in the marketplaces, and when others call them ‘Rabbi, Rabbi.’
But you are not to be called ‘Rabbi,’ for there is one who is your instructor, the Christ, and you are all brothers.
And do not call anyone on earth your father, for there is one who is your Father, he who is in heaven.
Neither are you to be called instructors, for there is one who is your instructor, the Christ.
But he who is greater among you must be your servant.
For whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.
“But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you devour widows' houses and for a pretense make long prayers. Therefore you will receive a more severe judgment.
“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you shut people out of the kingdom of heaven. You yourselves do not enter, nor do you let in those who are trying to enter.
“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you cross sea and land to make a single convert, and when he has become one, you make him twice as much a son of hell as yourselves.
“Woe to you, blind guides, who say, ‘If anyone swears by the temple, it is nothing; but if anyone swears by the gold of the temple, he is bound by his oath.’
You fools and blind men! Which is greater, the gold or the temple that makes the gold sacred?
You also say, ‘If anyone swears by the altar, it is nothing; but if anyone swears by the gift on the altar, he is bound by his oath.’
You fools and blind men! Which is greater, the gift or the altar that makes the gift sacred?
Therefore, whoever swears by the altar swears by it and by everything on it.
And whoever swears by the temple swears by it and by him who dwells in it.
And whoever swears by heaven swears by the throne of God and by him who sits upon it.
“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you tithe mint, dill, and cumin, yet you have neglected the weightier matters of the law: justice, mercy, and faith. These you ought to have practiced without neglecting the other things.
You blind guides, who strain out a gnat but swallow a camel!
“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you cleanse the outside of the cup and the dish, but the inside is filled with the fruits of your robbery and unrighteousness.
Yoʋ blind Pharisee! First clean the inside of the cup and the dish, and then the outside of them will also be clean.
“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you are like whitewashed tombs, which appear beautiful on the outside, but inside they are full of the bones of the dead and all uncleanness.
In the same way, you also appear righteous to others on the outside, but inside you are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.
“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you build the tombs of the prophets and adorn the graves of the righteous,
and you say, ‘If we had been alive in the days of our fathers, we would not have been participants with them in shedding the blood of the prophets.’
Therefore you bear witness against yourselves that you are the sons of those who murdered the prophets.
Fill up, then, the measure of your fathers.
You serpents, you brood of vipers! How will you escape being sentenced to hell?
Therefore, behold, I am sending you prophets, sages, and scribes. Some of them you will kill and crucify, and some of them you will flog in your synagogues and persecute from town to town.
As a result, all the righteous blood that has been shed on earth will come upon you, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah son of Barachiah, whom you murdered between the temple and the altar.
Truly I say to you, all these things will come upon this generation.
“O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the city that kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to yoʋ! How often I have wanted to gather yoʋr children together as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, but you were not willing!
Behold, your house is left to you desolate.
For I tell you, from now on you will certainly not see me until you say, ‘Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!’ ”
As Jesus came out from the temple courts and was walking away, his disciples came to him to show him the buildings of the temple.
But Jesus said to them, “You see all these buildings? Truly I say to you, not one stone will be left here upon another; all of them will be torn down.”
Later, as Jesus was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples came to him privately and said, “Tell us, when will these things happen? And what will be the sign of yoʋr coming and of the end of the age?”
Jesus answered them, “Make sure no one leads you astray.
For many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am the Christ,’ and they will lead many astray.
You will hear of wars and rumors of wars. Do not be alarmed, for all these things must take place, but the end is not yet.
For nation will rise up against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. There will be famines, plagues, and earthquakes in various places.
But all these things are the beginning of the labor pains.
“Then they will hand you over to be tortured and will put you to death, and you will be hated by all nations because of my name.
Many will fall away and will betray one another and hate one another.
Many false prophets will rise up and lead many astray.
Because lawlessness will be increased, the love of many will grow cold,
but he who endures to the end will be saved.
And this gospel of the kingdom will be proclaimed in the whole world as a testimony to all nations, and then the end will come.
“So when you see the abomination of desolation, which was spoken of by the prophet Daniel, standing in the holy place” (let the reader understand),
“then those who are in Judea must flee to the mountains.
He who is on the housetop must not come down to get anything out of his house.
And he who is in the field must not turn back to get his garments.
Woe to those who are with child and to those who are nursing infants in those days!
Pray that your flight will not happen in winter or on a Sabbath.
For at that time there will be a great tribulation unlike any other from the beginning of the world until now, and it will never be equaled again.
If those days had not been cut short, no flesh would be saved. But for the sake of the chosen those days will be cut short.
If anyone says to you at that time, ‘Behold, here is the Christ!’ or, ‘Here he is!’ do not believe him.
For false christs and false prophets will rise up and perform great signs and wonders so as to lead astray, if possible, even the chosen.
Behold, I have told you in advance.
So if they say to you, ‘Behold, he is in the wilderness,’ do not go out, or, ‘Behold, he is in the inner rooms,’ do not believe it.
For just as lightning comes from the east and shines to the west, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.
For where the carcass is, there the vultures will be gathered together.
“But immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light. The stars will fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
Then the sign of the Son of Man will appear in the heavens, and all the tribes of the earth will mourn when they see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.
And he will send his angels with a loud trumpet call, and they will gather together his chosen from the four winds, from one end of the heavens to the other.
“Now learn this lesson from the fig tree: As soon as its branches become tender and put out leaves, you know that summer is near.
So also, when you see all these things, know that he is near, at the very gates.
Truly I say to you, this generation will certainly not pass away until all these things have taken place.
Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will certainly not pass away.
“No one knows about that day or hour, not even the angels of heaven, but only my Father.
As were the days of Noah, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.
For in the days before the flood, people were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day when Noah went into the ark.
They knew nothing about what would happen until the flood came and took them all away. So will it be at the coming of the Son of Man.
Two men will be in the field; one will be taken and one will be left.
Two women will be grinding grain at the mill; one will be taken and one will be left.
Therefore keep watch, for you do not know in what hour your Lord is coming.
But know this: If the master of the house had known at what time of night the thief was coming, he would have kept watch and not allowed his house to be broken into.
Therefore you also must be ready, for the Son of Man is coming at an hour when you do not expect him.
“Who then is the faithful and wise servant, whom his master has set over his household, to give them their food at the proper time?
Blessed is that servant whom his master finds doing so when he comes.
Truly I say to you, he will set him over all his possessions.
But if that evil servant says in his heart, ‘My master is delayed in coming,’
and begins to beat his fellow servants and to eat and drink with the drunkards,
the master of that servant will come on a day when he does not expect him and at an hour he does not foresee,
and will cut him in two and assign his portion to be with the hypocrites. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
“At that time the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom.
Five of them were wise, and five were foolish.
When those who were foolish took their lamps, they did not take oil with them,
but the wise took oil in their flasks along with their lamps.
When the bridegroom was delayed, they all became drowsy and slept.
But in the middle of the night there was a shout: ‘Behold, the bridegroom is coming! Come out to meet him.’
Then all the virgins rose and trimmed their lamps.
And the foolish ones said to the wise, ‘Give us some of your oil, for our lamps are going out.’
But the wise replied, ‘No, there will not be enough for us and for you. Instead, go to those who sell oil and buy some for yourselves.’
But while they were on their way to buy it, the bridegroom came, and those who were ready went in with him to the wedding feast. Then the door was shut.
Afterward the other virgins also came, saying, ‘Lord, Lord, open the door for us.’
But he answered, ‘Truly I say to you, I do not know you.’
Therefore keep watch, for you do not know the day or the hour in which the Son of Man is coming.
“For it is just like a man about to go on a journey, who called his servants and entrusted his possessions to them.
To one he gave five talents, to another two talents, and to another one talent, each according to his ability. And he immediately went on his journey.
The man who had received the five talents went and traded with them, and made five more talents.
In the same way, the man who had received the two talents also earned two more.
But the man who had received the one talent went and dug a hole in the ground and hid his master's money.
“After a long time the master of those servants came and settled accounts with them.
The man who had received the five talents came to him and brought the other five talents, saying, ‘Master, yoʋ entrusted me with five talents; behold, I have earned five more talents besides them.’
His master said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant! Yoʋ have been faithful over a few things; I will set yoʋ over many things. Enter into the joy of yoʋr master.’
The man who had received the two talents also came to him and said, ‘Master, yoʋ entrusted me with two talents; behold, I have earned two more talents besides them.’
His master said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant! Yoʋ have been faithful over a few things; I will set yoʋ over many things. Enter into the joy of yoʋr master.’
Then the man who had received the one talent came to him and said, ‘Master, I knew that yoʋ were a hard man, reaping where yoʋ did not sow and gathering where yoʋ scattered no seed.
So I was afraid and went and hid yoʋr talent in the ground. Behold, yoʋ have what is yoʋrs.’
But his master answered him, ‘Yoʋ evil and lazy servant! Yoʋ knew, did yoʋ, that I reap where I have not sown and gather where I have scattered no seed?
Then yoʋ should have deposited my money with the bankers, and when I came I would have received what is mine with interest.
Therefore take the talent from him and give it to the one who has ten talents.
For everyone who has will be given more, and he will have an abundance. But the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.
And throw that worthless servant into the outer darkness. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’
“When the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, he will sit down on his throne of glory.
All the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate them from one another as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
He will set the sheep on his right and the goats on his left.
Then the King will say to those on his right, ‘Come, you who are blessed by my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
For I was hungry, and you gave me something to eat; I was thirsty, and you gave me something to drink; I was a stranger, and you took me in;
I was naked, and you clothed me; I was sick, and you looked after me; I was in prison, and you came to visit me.’
Then the righteous will answer him, ‘Lord, when did we see yoʋ hungry and feed yoʋ, or thirsty and give yoʋ something to drink?
When did we see yoʋ as a stranger and take yoʋ in, or naked and clothe yoʋ?
When did we see yoʋ sick or in prison and come to visit yoʋ?’
The King will answer them, ‘Truly I say to you, inasmuch as you did it to one of the least of these my brothers, you did it to me.’
“Then he will say to those on his left, ‘Depart from me, you who are accursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels.
For I was hungry, and you did not give me anything to eat; I was thirsty, and you did not give me anything to drink;
I was a stranger, and you did not take me in; I was naked, and you did not clothe me; I was sick and in prison, and you did not look after me.’
Then they too will answer, ‘Lord, when did we see yoʋ hungry or thirsty or as a stranger or naked or sick or in prison, and not take care of yoʋ?’
He will answer them, ‘Truly I say to you, inasmuch as you did not do it to one of the least of these, neither did you do it to me.’
And these will go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life.”
When Jesus had finished saying all these things, he said to his disciples,
“You know that after two days the Passover is coming, and the Son of Man will be delivered up to be crucified.”
Then the chief priests, the scribes, and the elders of the people were gathered together in the courtyard of the high priest, whose name was Caiaphas,
and they plotted together to arrest Jesus secretly and kill him.
But they said, “Not during the feast, lest there be a riot among the people.”
Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,
a woman came to him with an alabaster jar of very expensive ointment, and she poured it on his head as he reclined at the table.
When his disciples saw it, they were indignant and said, “Why this waste?
This ointment could have been sold for a large sum, and the money could have been given to the poor.”
Aware of this, Jesus said to them, “Why are you causing trouble for this woman? She has done a good deed to me.
You always have the poor with you, but you will not always have me.
She has put this ointment on my body to prepare me for burial.
Truly I say to you, wherever this gospel is preached in the whole world, what this woman has done will also be spoken of as a memorial to her.”
Then one of the twelve, the one called Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests
and said, “What are you willing to give me if I deliver him up to you?” So they set out for him thirty pieces of silver.
And from then on he was looking for an opportunity to betray Jesus.
On the first day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread, the disciples came to Jesus and said to him, “Where do yoʋ want us to make preparations for yoʋ to eat the Passover?”
He said, “Go into the city to a certain man and say to him, ‘The Teacher says, “My time is near. I am going to keep the Passover with yoʋ, along with my disciples.” ’ ”
So the disciples did as Jesus had directed them and prepared the Passover.
When evening came, Jesus was reclining at the table with the twelve.
As they were eating, he said, “Truly I say to you, one of you will betray me.”
Greatly distressed, they began to say to him one after another, “Surely not I, Lord?”
Jesus answered, “The one who has dipped his hand with me into the dish will betray me.
The Son of Man indeed goes just as it is written of him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would have been better for that man if he had not been born.”
Then Judas, who betrayed him, replied, “Surely not I, Rabbi?” Jesus said to him, “Yoʋ have said it yoʋrself.”
As they were eating, Jesus took the bread, and when he had given thanks, he broke it, gave it to the disciples, and said, “Take and eat this bread; this is my body.”
Then he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them, saying, “Drink of it, all of you,
for this is my blood of the new covenant, which is poured out for many for the remission of sins.
But I tell you, from this point forward I will certainly not drink again from this fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it with you anew in the kingdom of my Father.”
And after singing a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
Then Jesus said to them, “All of you will fall away because of me this night. For it is written, ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.’
But after I have been raised up, I will go ahead of you to Galilee.”
Peter answered him, “Even if everyone else falls away because of yoʋ, I will never fall away.”
Jesus said to him, “Truly I say to yoʋ that on this night, before a rooster crows, yoʋ will deny me three times.”
But Peter said to him, “Even if I must die with yoʋ, I will certainly not deny yoʋ.” And all the disciples said the same thing.
Then Jesus went with them to a place called Gethsemane, and he said to the disciples, “Sit here while I go over there and pray.”
And taking with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, he began to be sorrowful and distressed.
Then Jesus said to them, “My soul is very sorrowful, even to the point of death; stay here and keep watch with me.”
And going a little farther, he fell on his face and prayed, “My Father, if possible, let this cup pass from me; nevertheless, not as I will, but as yoʋ will.”
Then he came to the disciples and found them sleeping, and said to Peter, “So you could not keep watch with me for one hour?
Keep watch and pray, lest you enter into temptation. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.”
Again, he went away for a second time and prayed, “My Father, if this cup cannot pass from me unless I drink it, may yoʋr will be done.”
Then he came and found them sleeping again, for their eyes were heavy.
So he left them and went away again and prayed for a third time, saying the same thing.
Then he came to his disciples and said to them, “Sleep on now and take your rest! Behold, the hour has drawn near, and the Son of Man is delivered up into the hands of sinners.
Rise, let us go. Behold, my betrayer has drawn near.”
While he was still speaking, behold, Judas, one of the twelve, came. With him was a large crowd with swords and clubs, sent from the chief priests and elders of the people.
Now his betrayer had given them a sign, saying, “Whomever I kiss, he is the one; arrest him.”
Immediately he went up to Jesus and said, “Greetings, Rabbi!” And he kissed him.
Jesus said to him, “Friend, why have yoʋ come?” Then they came forward, took hold of Jesus, and arrested him.
And behold, one of the men with Jesus stretched out his hand, drew his sword, and struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his ear.
Then Jesus said to him, “Put yoʋr sword back in its place, for all who take the sword will die by the sword.
Or do yoʋ think that I cannot call on my Father right now, and he will provide me with more than twelve legions of angels?
How then would the Scriptures be fulfilled that say it must happen this way?”
In that hour Jesus said to the crowds, “Have you come out to arrest me with swords and clubs as you would against a robber? I sat daily with you, teaching in the temple courts, and you did not arrest me.
But all this has taken place so that the Scriptures of the prophets would be fulfilled.” Then all the disciples left him and fled.
Now those who had arrested Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled.
But Peter was following him at a distance, coming as far as the courtyard of the high priest. After going inside, he sat with the officers to see the outcome.
Now the chief priests, the elders, and the whole Sanhedrin were seeking false testimony against Jesus, so that they could put him to death,
but they did not find any. Even though many false witnesses came forward, they did not find any.
But at last two false witnesses came forward and declared, “This man said, ‘I am able to destroy the temple of God and rebuild it in three days.’ ”
So the high priest stood up and said to him, “Do yoʋ make no answer? What are these men testifying against yoʋ?”
But Jesus was silent. Then the high priest said to him, “I adjure yoʋ by the living God to tell us if yoʋ are the Christ, the Son of God.”
Jesus said to him, “Yoʋ have said it yoʋrself. Nevertheless I say to you, from now on you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of Power and coming on the clouds of heaven.”
Then the high priest tore his garments and said, “He has blasphemed! What further need do we have of witnesses? Behold, you have now heard his blasphemy.
What do you think?” They answered, “He deserves death.”
Then they spit in his face and struck him. Others slapped him,
saying, “Prophesy to us, yoʋ Christ! Who is it that struck yoʋ?”
Now Peter was sitting outside in the courtyard, and a servant girl came to him and said, “Yoʋ also were with Jesus the Galilean.”
But he denied it before them all, saying, “I do not know what yoʋ are talking about!”
Then he went out to the gateway, and another servant girl saw him and said to the people there, “This man also was with Jesus of Nazareth.”
But again he denied it with an oath: “I do not know the man.”
After a little while, the people standing there came up and said to Peter, “Truly yoʋ also are one of them, for even yoʋr accent gives yoʋ away.”
Then he began to invoke curses and to swear, saying, “I do not know the man.” And immediately a rooster crowed.
Then Peter remembered what Jesus had said to him: “Before a rooster crows, yoʋ will deny me three times.” And he went out and wept bitterly.
Now when morning came, all the chief priests and the elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death.
They bound him, led him away, and handed him over to Pontius Pilate, the governor.
When Judas, who had betrayed him, saw that Jesus had been condemned, he regretted what he had done and returned the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and the elders,
saying, “I have sinned by betraying innocent blood.” But they said, “What is that to us? See to it yoʋrself.”
So he threw the pieces of silver into the temple and departed. Then he went away and hanged himself.
The chief priests took the pieces of silver and said, “It is not lawful to put them into the temple treasury, since they are a price paid for blood.”
So they took counsel and used the money to buy the potter's field as a burial place for foreigners.
Therefore that field has been called the Field of Blood to this day.
Then what was spoken by the prophet Jeremiah was fulfilled: “They took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him on whom a price had been set, on whom some of the sons of Israel had set a price,
and they gave them for the potter's field, as the Lord directed me.”
Meanwhile, Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor asked him, “Are yoʋ the king of the Jews?” Jesus said to him, “Yoʋ have said it yoʋrself.”
But when he was accused by the chief priests and the elders, he gave no answer.
Then Pilate said to him, “Do yoʋ not hear all the things they are testifying against yoʋ?”
But he gave him no answer, not even to a single charge, so the governor was greatly amazed.
Now at the feast the governor was accustomed to release one prisoner for the crowd, whomever they wanted.
At that time they had a notorious prisoner named Barabbas.
So when the crowds were gathered together, Pilate said to them, “Whom do you want me to release for you? Barabbas, or Jesus, who is called Christ?”
(For he knew they had handed Jesus over out of envy.)
While Pilate was sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent him this message: “Have nothing to do with that righteous man, for I have suffered a great deal today in a dream because of him.”
But the chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowds to ask for Barabbas to be released and for Jesus to be executed.
In response the governor said to them, “Which of the two do you want me to release for you?” They said, “Barabbas.”
So Pilate said to them, “What then shall I do with Jesus, who is called Christ?” They all said to him, “Let him be crucified!”
Then the governor said, “Why? What evil has he done?” But they cried out all the more, “Let him be crucified!”
When Pilate saw that he was achieving nothing and that a riot was breaking out, he took water and washed his hands before the crowd, saying, “I am innocent of the blood of this righteous man. See to it yourselves.”
All the people answered, “His blood be on us and on our children!”
Then he released for them Barabbas, but he scourged Jesus and handed him over to be crucified.
Then the governor's soldiers took Jesus with them into the governor's headquarters and gathered against him the entire cohort of soldiers.
They stripped him and put a scarlet robe on him,
and then twisted together a crown of thorns and put it on his head. They put a reed in his right hand, and kneeling before him, they mocked him, saying, “Hail, King of the Jews!”
Then they spit on him, took the reed, and beat him repeatedly on his head.
When they had finished mocking him, they stripped him of the robe and put his own garments back on him. Then they led him away to crucify him.
As they went out, they found a Cyrenian man named Simon. They pressed him into service, forcing him to carry Jesus' cross.
When they came to a place called Golgotha (which means, “Place of the Skull”),
they gave Jesus sour wine to drink, mixed with gall. But when he tasted it, he refused to drink it.
After crucifying him, they divided his garments among themselves by casting lots.
Then they sat down and kept watch over him there.
Over his head they placed the written charge against him, which read, “This is Jesus, the King of the Jews.”
Then two robbers were crucified with him, one on his right and one on his left.
Those who passed by reviled him, shaking their heads
and saying, “Yoʋ who would destroy the temple and build it in three days, save yoʋrself. If yoʋ are the Son of God, come down from the cross!”
In the same way the chief priests also, along with the scribes, elders, and Pharisees, were mocking him, saying,
“He saved others, but he cannot save himself. If he is the king of Israel, let him come down now from the cross, and we will believe in him.
He has put his trust in God; let God deliver him now if he wants him, for he said, ‘I am the Son of God.’ ”
The robbers who were crucified with him were also reviling him in the same way.
From the sixth hour until the ninth hour, there was darkness over the whole land.
And about the ninth hour Jesus cried out with a loud voice, “Eli, Eli, lima sabachthani?” that is, “My God, my God, why have yoʋ forsaken me?”
When some of those standing there heard this, they said, “This man is calling for Elijah.”
Immediately one of them ran, got a sponge, filled it with sour wine, put it on a reed, and gave it to him to drink.
But the rest said, “Leave him alone. Let us see if Elijah comes to save him.”
Then Jesus cried out again with a loud voice and gave up his spirit.
And behold, the veil of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom. The earth was shaken, and the rocks were split.
The tombs were opened, and the bodies of many saints who had fallen asleep were raised.
(They came out of the tombs, and after his resurrection they went into the holy city and appeared to many.)
Now when the centurion and those who were keeping watch with him over Jesus saw the earthquake and the things that had happened, they became very frightened and said, “Truly this man was the Son of God.”
Many women who had followed Jesus from Galilee and provided for him were there looking on from a distance,
among whom were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.
When it was evening, there came a rich man from Arimathea named Joseph, who was himself also a disciple of Jesus.
He went to Pilate and asked for Jesus' body. So Pilate commanded that the body be given to him.
Joseph took the body, wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,
and laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn in a rock. Then he rolled a large stone against the entrance of the tomb and went away.
Mary Magdalene was there, and so was the other Mary, sitting across from the tomb.
The next day (that is, after the day of Preparation), the chief priests and the Pharisees gathered together before Pilate
and said, “Sir, we remember that while he was still alive that deceiver said, ‘After three days I will rise again.’
Therefore command that the tomb be secured until the third day, lest his disciples come by night, steal him away, and say to the people, ‘He has been raised from the dead.’ This last deception would be worse than the first.”
Pilate said to them, “You have a guard of soldiers. Go and make it as secure as you know how.”
So they went and secured the tomb by sealing the stone and posting the guard of soldiers.
After the Sabbath, at dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene came to see the tomb along with the other Mary.
And behold, there was a great earthquake, for an angel of the Lord descended from heaven and came and rolled away the stone from the entrance and sat on it.
His appearance was like lightning, and his clothing was as white as snow.
The guards were so afraid of him that they trembled and became like dead men.
Then the angel said to the women, “Do not be afraid, for I know that you are looking for Jesus, who has been crucified.
He is not here, for he is risen, just as he said. Come see the place where the Lord lay.
Now go quickly and tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead. And behold, he is going ahead of you to Galilee; there you will see him. Listen to what I have told you.”
So they went out quickly from the tomb with fear and great joy, and ran to tell his disciples.
As they went on their way to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them and said, “Greetings!” So they came to him, took hold of his feet, and worshiped him.
Then Jesus said to them, “Do not be afraid; go tell my brothers to go to Galilee, and there they will see me.”
As they went, behold, some of the guards went into the city and brought word to the chief priests of all that had taken place.
After the chief priests had assembled with the elders and taken counsel, they gave a large sum of money to the soldiers
and said, “Tell people, ‘His disciples came by night and stole him away while we were sleeping.’
If this matter is heard before the governor, we will persuade him and keep you free from concern.”
So they took the money and did as they had been instructed. And this story is still being spread among the Jews today.
Meanwhile, the eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had directed them to go.
When they saw him, they worshiped him, but some doubted.
Then Jesus came and said to them, “All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me.
Go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit,
and teaching them to obey everything I have commanded you. And behold, I am with you always, even to the end of the age.” Amen.
The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.
As it is written in the Prophets, “Behold, I am sending my messenger ahead of yoʋ, who will prepare yoʋr way before yoʋ,
the voice of one crying out in the wilderness, ‘Prepare the way for the Lord; make his paths straight,’ ”
John came baptizing in the wilderness and preaching a baptism of repentance for the remission of sins.
The whole Judean countryside was going out to him, and so were the people of Jerusalem. They were all being baptized by him in the Jordan River, confessing their sins.
Now John was clothed with camel's hair and wore a leather belt around his waist; he ate locusts and wild honey.
He proclaimed, “After me comes one who is mightier than I, the strap of whose sandals I am not worthy to stoop down and untie.
I have baptized you with water, but he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit.”
In those days Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee and was baptized by John in the Jordan.
Immediately as he was coming up from the water, he saw the heavens being split apart and the Spirit descending on him like a dove.
Then a voice came from heaven: “Yoʋ are my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.”
Immediately the Spirit drove him out into the wilderness,
and he was there in the wilderness for forty days, being tempted by Satan. He was with the wild beasts, and the angels ministered to him.
After John was put in prison, Jesus went to Galilee, preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God
and saying, “The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God has drawn near. Repent and believe in the gospel.”
As Jesus was walking by the Sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew his brother (that is, Simon's brother) casting a net in the sea, for they were fishermen.
Jesus said to them, “Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.”
So they immediately left their nets and followed him.
Going on a little farther from there, he saw James the son of Zebedee and John his brother as they were in the boat mending their nets.
Immediately he called them, and they left their father Zebedee in the boat with the hired men and followed him.
They went to Capernaum, and immediately on the Sabbath Jesus went into the synagogue and began teaching.
The people were astonished at his teaching, because he was teaching them as one who had authority, and not as the scribes.
Now in their synagogue there was a man possessed by an unclean spirit. He cried out,
“Leave us alone! What do yoʋ have to do with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Have yoʋ come to destroy us? I know who yoʋ are—the Holy One of God.”
But Jesus rebuked him, saying, “Be silent, and come out of him!”
So the unclean spirit convulsed the man and came out of him, crying out with a loud voice.
All the people were amazed so that they questioned among themselves, saying, “What is this? What new teaching is this that with authority he commands even the unclean spirits, and they obey him?”
And the news about him immediately spread throughout all the surrounding region of Galilee.
After leaving the synagogue, they immediately went to the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John.
Now Simon's mother-in-law lay sick with a fever, and they immediately told Jesus about her.
So he went over to her and raised her up, taking hold of her hand. Immediately the fever left her, and she began to serve them.
When evening came, after the sun had set, they brought to Jesus all who were sick and those who were possessed by demons.
The whole city was gathered together at the door,
and he healed many who were sick with various diseases. He also cast out many demons, but he would not allow the demons to speak, because they knew who he was.
Early the next morning, while it was still very dark, Jesus rose and departed. He went off to a desolate place and prayed there.
Simon and his companions searched diligently for him,
and when they found him, they said to him, “Everyone is looking for yoʋ.”
Jesus said to them, “Let us go into the neighboring towns so that I may preach there also, for that is why I have come.”
So he was preaching in their synagogues in all of Galilee and casting out demons.
Then a leper came up and knelt before him, begging him, “If yoʋ are willing, yoʋ can make me clean.”
Moved with compassion, Jesus stretched out his hand, touched the man, and said to him, “I am willing; be made clean.”
When he said this, the leprosy immediately departed from the man, and he was made clean.
Then Jesus sternly warned him and immediately sent him away,
saying to him, “Be sure not to say anything to anyone, but go show yoʋrself to the priest and offer for yoʋr cleansing what Moses commanded, as a testimony to them.”
But the man went out and began to proclaim it widely and to spread the news, so that Jesus could no longer openly enter a town, but was out in desolate places. Yet people were coming to him from everywhere.
A few days later Jesus went to Capernaum again, and the people heard that he was at home.
Immediately many were gathered together, so that there was no longer any room, not even at the door, and he was speaking the word to them.
Then some people came to him, bringing a paralytic carried by four men.
Since they were not able to come near Jesus because of the crowd, they uncovered the roof where he was. After digging through it, they let down the mat on which the paralytic was lying.
When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic, “Son, yoʋr sins are forgiven yoʋ.”
Now some of the scribes were sitting there and questioning in their hearts:
“Why does this man speak such blasphemies? Who can forgive sins but God alone?”
Immediately Jesus knew in his spirit that they were discussing these questions among themselves, so he said to them, “Why are you questioning these things in your hearts?
Which is easier, to say to the paralytic, ‘Yoʋr sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Rise, take up yoʋr mat, and walk’?
But so that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins”—he said to the paralytic—
“I say to yoʋ, rise, pick up yoʋr mat, and go to yoʋr house.”
So the man immediately rose, picked up his mat, and went out in front of them all, so that they were all amazed and began glorifying God, saying, “We have never seen anything like this!”
Once again Jesus went out by the sea. The entire crowd came to him, and he taught them.
As he was walking along, he saw Levi the son of Alphaeus sitting at the tax booth. Jesus said to him, “Follow me,” so Levi rose and followed him.
Later, as Jesus was reclining at the table in Levi's house, many tax collectors and sinners reclined with him and his disciples, for there were many who followed him.
When the scribes and the Pharisees saw Jesus eating with tax collectors and sinners, they said to his disciples, “Why is he eating and drinking with tax collectors and sinners?”
When Jesus heard this, he said to them, “It is not the healthy who need a physician, but the sick. I did not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.”
Now the disciples of John and the disciples of the Pharisees were fasting. So some people came and said to Jesus, “Why is it that the disciples of John and the disciples of the Pharisees fast, but yoʋr disciples do not fast?”
Jesus said to them, “Can the bridegroom's attendants fast while the bridegroom is with them? As long as they have the bridegroom with them they cannot fast.
But the days are coming when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then they will fast in those days.
“No one sews a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment. For the garment's new patch would pull away from the old cloth, and a worse tear would be made.
And no one puts new wine into old wineskins. For the new wine would burst the wineskins; the wine would be spilled, and the wineskins would be ruined. But new wine must be put into new wineskins.”
On the Sabbath Jesus was going through the grainfields, and his disciples began to make their way, plucking heads of grain.
So the Pharisees said to him, “Behold, why are they doing what is not lawful to do on the Sabbath?”
He said to them, “Have you never read what David did when he had need and was hungry, he and those who were with him,
how he entered the house of God, in the time of Abiathar the high priest, and ate the bread of the Presence, which is not lawful for anyone to eat except for the priests, and how he also gave it to those who were with him?”
Then he said to them, “The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath.
So the Son of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath.”
Once again Jesus went into the synagogue, and a man was there who had a withered hand.
Now the Pharisees were watching Jesus closely to see if he would heal the man on the Sabbath, so that they could accuse him.
And he said to the man with the withered hand, “Rise and come forward.”
Then Jesus said to them, “Is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good or to do evil, to save life or to kill?” But they were silent.
After looking around at them with anger, grieved by the hardness of their hearts, he said to the man, “Stretch out yoʋr hand.” So he stretched it out, and his hand was restored, becoming as sound as the other.
Then the Pharisees went out and immediately took counsel with the Herodians against Jesus as to how they might destroy him.
But Jesus withdrew with his disciples to the sea, and a great multitude from Galilee followed him, and also from Judea,
Jerusalem, Idumea, and beyond the Jordan. A great multitude of people from around Tyre and Sidon also came to him when they heard about everything he was doing.
Then he told his disciples to have a small boat ready for him, so that the crowd would not crush him.
For he had healed many, so that all who had afflictions were pressing toward him to touch him.
Whenever the unclean spirits saw him, they would fall down before him and cry out, “Yoʋ are the Son of God.”
But he would strictly warn them not to make him known.
Afterward Jesus went up on the mountain and called for those whom he wanted, and they came to him.
He appointed twelve so that they might be with him and so that he might send them out to preach
and to have authority to heal diseases and cast out demons.
He appointed Simon (whom he gave the name Peter);
James the son of Zebedee and John the brother of James (whom he gave the name Boanerges, which means, Sons of Thunder);
Andrew, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Thomas, James the son of Alphaeus, Thaddaeus, Simon the Cananite,
and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed him. Then they entered a house,
and a crowd came together again, so that Jesus and his disciples could not even eat bread.
When his family heard about it, they went out to restrain him, for they said, “He is out of his mind.”
But the scribes who had come down from Jerusalem said, “He is possessed by Beelzebul,” and, “By the ruler of demons he casts out demons.”
So Jesus called them over and said to them in parables, “How can Satan cast out Satan?
If a kingdom is divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand.
And if a house is divided against itself, that house cannot stand.
And if Satan has risen up against himself and is divided, he cannot stand, but has come to an end.
No one can enter the house of a strong man and plunder his goods unless he first binds the strong man. Then he can plunder his house.
“Truly I say to you, all sins will be forgiven the sons of men, and whatever blasphemies they utter.
But whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit never has forgiveness, but is subject to eternal judgment.”
He said this because they were saying, “He has an unclean spirit.”
Then Jesus' brothers and mother came, and standing outside, they sent word to him and called for him.
There was a crowd sitting around Jesus, and they said to him, “Behold, yoʋr mother, yoʋr brothers, and yoʋr sisters are outside looking for yoʋ.”
But he answered them, “Who is my mother, or my brothers?”
And looking around in a circle at the people sitting there, he said, “Behold, these are my mother and my brothers!
For whoever does the will of God is my brother and my sister and mother.”
Once again Jesus began to teach by the sea, and a large crowd was gathered around him. So he got into the boat and sat in it on the sea, while the entire crowd was beside the sea on the shore.
Then he taught them many things in parables, and in his teaching he said to them,
“Listen! A sower went out to sow.
As he sowed, some seed fell along the path, and the birds came and devoured it.
Other seed fell on rocky ground, where it did not have much soil, and it sprang up immediately because it had no depth of soil.
But when the sun rose, it was scorched; and because it had no root, it withered away.
Other seed fell among the thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked it, and it produced no fruit.
But other seed fell into good soil and produced fruit that grew and increased; some bore thirty, some sixty, and some a hundred times more than what was sown.”
Then he said, “He who has ears to hear, let him hear.”
When he was alone with the twelve and the others who were around him, they asked him about the parable.
So he said to them, “To you it has been given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God, but to those who are outside everything is spoken in parables,
so that ‘they may see but not perceive, and hear but not understand, lest they should turn back and be forgiven of their sins.’ ”
Then he said to them, “Do you not understand this parable? How then will you understand all the other parables?
The sower sows the word.
Now some people are like the seed along the path, where the word is sown. When they hear, Satan immediately comes and takes away the word that is sown in their hearts.
Likewise, some people are like the seed sown on rocky ground. When they hear the word, they immediately receive it with joy.
Yet they have no root in themselves, but are only temporary. When tribulation or persecution arises on account of the word, they immediately fall away.
Others are like the seed sown among the thorns. They hear the word,
but the cares of this world, the deceitfulness of riches, and the desire for other things enter in and choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.
But others are like the seed sown on the good soil. They hear the word, receive it, and bear fruit—some thirty, some sixty, and some a hundred times more than what was sown.”
He also said to them, “Is a lamp brought in to be put under a basket, or under a bed? Is it not brought in to be set on a lampstand?
For there is nothing hidden that will not be made manifest, nor has anything been made secret except to come to light.
If anyone has ears to hear, let him hear.”
Then he said to them, “Consider what you hear. With the measure you use it will be measured to you, and more will be added to you who hear.
For whoever has will be given more, but whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.”
He also said, “The kingdom of God is like a man who scatters seed on the ground.
He sleeps and rises night and day, and the seed sprouts and grows; he does not know how.
For the earth produces a crop by itself: first the stalk, then the head, then the full grain in the head.
When the crop is ready, the man immediately sends in the sickle, for the harvest has come.”
Then Jesus said, “To what can we compare the kingdom of God? Or what parable can we use to describe it?
It is like a grain of mustard seed, which, when it is sown on the ground, is smaller than all the seeds on earth.
Yet when it is sown, it grows and becomes larger than all the garden plants and produces large branches, so that the birds of the sky can nest in its shade.”
With many similar parables he spoke the word to them, to the extent that they were able to understand it.
He did not speak to them without using a parable, but privately he explained everything to his disciples.
On that day, when evening came, Jesus said to his disciples, “Let us cross over to the other side of the sea.”
So they left the crowd and took him with them in the boat, just as he was. Other little boats were also with him.
Now a great windstorm arose, and the waves were beating against the boat, so that it was nearly swamped.
But Jesus was in the stern, asleep on a cushion. So they woke him up and said to him, “Teacher, do yoʋ not care that we are perishing?”
Then he woke up and rebuked the wind and said to the sea, “Peace! Be still!” So the wind ceased, and there was a great calm.
Then he said to them, “Why are you so afraid? How is it that you have no faith?”
And they were filled with great fear and said to one another, “Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?”
Then they came to the other side of the sea, to the region of the Gadarenes.
As Jesus got out of the boat, he was immediately met by a man from the tombs who had an unclean spirit.
This man lived among the tombs, and no one could bind him, not even with chains.
For he had often been bound with shackles and chains, but he tore the chains apart and broke the shackles in pieces. No one was strong enough to subdue him.
Night and day, on the mountains and among the tombs, he would continually cry out and cut himself with stones.
When he saw Jesus from a distance, he ran and bowed down before him.
Then he cried out with a loud voice and said, “What do yoʋ have to do with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I adjure yoʋ by God, do not torment me.”
For Jesus had said to him, “Come out of the man, yoʋ unclean spirit!”
Then Jesus asked him, “What is yoʋr name?” He answered, “My name is Legion, for we are many.”
And he earnestly begged Jesus not to send them out of that region.
Now there was a large herd of pigs feeding there near the mountain.
All the demons begged Jesus, “Send us into the pigs, so that we may go into them.”
So he immediately gave them permission, and the unclean spirits came out and went into the pigs. Then the herd, about two thousand in number, rushed down the steep bank into the sea, and were drowned in the sea.
Those who had been feeding the pigs then ran off and reported it in the city and in the countryside. So the people went out to see what had happened.
They came to Jesus and saw the man who had been possessed by demons sitting there, clothed and in his right mind—the man who had been possessed by the “Legion”—and they were afraid.
Those who had seen it told them what had happened to the man who had been possessed by demons, and they also told them about the pigs.
Then the people began begging Jesus to depart from their region.
When Jesus got into the boat, the man who had been possessed by demons begged to go with him.
But Jesus did not permit him to do so. Instead, he said to him, “Go to yoʋr house and to yoʋr people, and report to them all that the Lord has done for yoʋ and how he has had mercy on yoʋ.”
So the man went away and began to proclaim in the Decapolis all that Jesus had done for him, and all the people were amazed.
When Jesus had again crossed over in the boat to the other side of the sea, a large crowd was gathered around him, and he was by the sea.
And behold, one of the rulers of the synagogue came, whose name was Jairus. When he saw Jesus, he fell down at his feet
and begged him earnestly, “My little daughter is at the point of death. Please come and lay yoʋr hands on her so that she may be healed. Then she will live.”
So Jesus went with him, and a large crowd followed him and pressed in on him.
Now there was a woman who had suffered from a flow of blood for twelve years.
She had suffered a great deal under many physicians and had spent all she had, yet received no benefit from it, but had only grown worse.
When she heard about Jesus, she came up behind him in the crowd and touched his garment.
For she said, “If I touch even his garments, I will be healed.”
Immediately her flow of blood was dried up, and she knew in her body that she had been healed from her affliction.
Jesus immediately perceived in himself that power had gone out from him, so he turned around in the crowd and said, “Who touched my garments?”
His disciples said to him, “Yoʋ see the crowd pressing in on yoʋ, and yet yoʋ say, ‘Who touched me?’ ”
But he kept looking around to see who had done it.
Now the woman was frightened and trembling, knowing what had happened to her, so she came and fell down before him and told him the whole truth.
Then Jesus said to her, “Daughter, yoʋr faith has healed yoʋ. Go in peace, and be healed of yoʋr affliction.”
While he was still speaking, some people came from the ruler of the synagogue's house and said, “Yoʋr daughter has died; why trouble the teacher any further?”
But when Jesus heard what they said, he immediately said to the ruler of the synagogue, “Do not be afraid; just believe.”
From that point he did not allow anyone to accompany him except Peter, James, and John the brother of James.
When he came to the ruler of the synagogue's house, he saw a commotion, with people weeping and wailing loudly.
Then he went in and said to them, “Why are you making a commotion and weeping? The child is not dead but sleeping.”
And they began laughing at him. But he put them all outside, took the child's father and mother and those who were with him, and went in to where the child was lying down.
Then he took hold of the child's hand and said to her, “Talitha koumi,” which means, “Little girl, I say to yoʋ, arise.”
Immediately the girl got up and began to walk (for she was twelve years old), and they were overcome with great amazement.
Then he gave them strict orders not to let anyone know about it, and he told them to give her something to eat.
Then Jesus left that place and went to his hometown, and his disciples followed him.
When the Sabbath came, he began to teach in the synagogue, and many who heard him were astonished, saying, “Where did this man get these things? And what is this wisdom that has been given to him, that such miracles are done by his hands?
Is this not the carpenter, the son of Mary, and the brother of James, Joses, Judas, and Simon? Are not his sisters here with us?” And they took offense at him.
Then Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor except in his hometown, among his relatives, and in his own household.”
So he could do no miracles there, except that he laid his hands on a few sick people and healed them.
And he was amazed at their unbelief. Then Jesus went around among the villages teaching.
He summoned the twelve and began to send them out two by two, giving them authority over unclean spirits.
He instructed them to take nothing for their journey except a staff—no knapsack, no bread, and no copper money in their belts.
He told them to wear sandals but not an extra tunic.
He also said to them, “Whenever you enter a house, stay there until you leave that place.
If anyone will not receive you or listen to you, shake the dust off your feet as you leave that place, as a testimony against them. Truly I say to you, it will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah on the day of judgment than for that city.”
So they went out and preached that people should repent.
They also cast out many demons and anointed with oil many who were sick and healed them.
Now King Herod heard about this, for Jesus' name had become known, and he said, “John the Baptist has been raised from the dead, and that is why these mighty powers are at work in him.”
Others said, “He is Elijah.” And others said, “He is a prophet, like one of the prophets of old.”
But when Herod heard this, he said, “This is John, whom I beheaded; he has been raised from the dead.”
For Herod himself had sent men to arrest John and chain him in prison on account of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife, whom Herod had married.
For John had been saying to Herod, “It is not lawful for yoʋ to have yoʋr brother's wife.”
So Herodias held a grudge against John and wanted to kill him, but she was not able to do so.
For Herod feared John, knowing that he was a righteous and holy man, and he protected him. When Herod listened to John, he would listen to him gladly and do many things.
But an opportune day came. On his birthday Herod prepared a banquet for his nobles, military commanders, and the prominent men of Galilee.
When the daughter of Herodias came in and danced, she pleased Herod and his guests. So the king said to the girl, “Ask me for whatever yoʋ wish, and I will give it to yoʋ.”
He swore to her, “Whatever yoʋ ask me, I will give to yoʋ, up to half my kingdom.”
So she went out and said to her mother, “What should I ask for?” Her mother said, “The head of John the Baptist.”
Immediately the girl came in with haste to the king and made her request, saying, “I want yoʋ to give me at once the head of John the Baptist on a platter.”
Although the king was very sad, because of his oaths and his guests, he did not want to reject her.
So the king immediately sent an executioner and commanded that John's head be brought back.
The executioner then went and beheaded John in the prison, brought his head on a platter, and gave it to the girl. And the girl gave it to her mother.
When John's disciples heard about it, they came and took his body and laid it in a tomb.
Meanwhile, the apostles gathered around Jesus and told him about all they had done and taught.
Then he said to them, “Come away by yourselves to a desolate place and rest for a little while.” For many people were coming and going, and Jesus and his apostles did not even have an opportunity to eat.
So they went away to a desolate place in the boat by themselves.
Now many saw them going away and recognized Jesus. They ran together on foot from all the towns, got there ahead of them, and then gathered around him.
When Jesus went ashore and saw a large crowd, he was moved with compassion for them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd. So he began to teach them many things.
When the hour was already quite late, his disciples came to him and said, “This place is desolate, and the hour is now late.
Send the people away so that they can go into the surrounding countryside and villages and buy themselves some bread, for they have nothing to eat.”
But Jesus answered them, “You give them something to eat.” They said to him, “Are we to go and buy two hundred denarii worth of bread and give it to them to eat?”
He said to them, “How many loaves do you have? Go and see.” When they found out, they said, “Five, and two fish.”
Then he directed them to have all the people sit down in groups on the green grass.
So they sat down in groups of hundreds and fifties.
Then he took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven, he said the blessing. He broke the loaves and gave them to his disciples to set before the people, and he divided the two fish among them all.
They all ate and were filled,
and the disciples picked up twelve baskets full of the broken pieces and of the fish.
Now those who had eaten the loaves were five thousand men.
Immediately Jesus compelled his disciples to get into the boat and go ahead of him to the other side of the sea, to Bethsaida, while he sent the crowd away.
After taking leave of them, he went to the mountain to pray.
When evening came, the boat was in the middle of the sea, and he was alone on the land.
He saw the disciples straining as they rowed, for the wind was against them. About the fourth watch of the night he came to them, walking on the sea, and intended to pass them by.
But when they saw him walking on the sea, they thought it was a ghost and cried out.
For they all saw him and were terrified. But Jesus immediately said to them, “Take courage! It is I; do not be afraid.”
Then he got into the boat with them, and the wind ceased. And they were utterly and completely amazed and in awe;
for they did not understand the significance of what had happened with the loaves, because their hearts were hardened.
When they had crossed the sea, they came to the land of Gennesaret and moored the boat.
When they got out of the boat, people immediately recognized Jesus.
So the people ran around throughout the entire surrounding region and began to carry the sick on mats to wherever they heard he was.
And wherever he went, to villages, cities, or the countryside, they would lay the sick in the marketplaces and beg him to let the sick touch even the fringe of his garment. And all who touched it were healed.
Now the Pharisees and some of the scribes who had come from Jerusalem were gathered around Jesus.
When they saw some of his disciples eating bread with hands that were defiled (that is, unwashed), they criticized them.
(For none of the Pharisees or Jews eat unless they wash their hands properly, holding to the tradition of the elders.
And when they come from the marketplace, they do not eat unless they have washed. There are also many other traditions they observe, such as the washing of cups, pots, copper vessels, and dining couches.)
Now the Pharisees and the scribes asked Jesus, “Why do yoʋr disciples not walk according to the tradition of the elders, but eat bread with unwashed hands?”
He answered them, “Isaiah prophesied rightly about you hypocrites, as it is written, ‘This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
They worship me in vain, teaching as doctrines the commandments of men.’
For you have neglected the commandment of God and are holding to the tradition of men, such as various washings of pots and cups. And you do many other similar things such as these.”
Then he said to them, “You have a fine way of setting aside the commandment of God so that you may keep your tradition!
For Moses said, ‘Honor yoʋr father and yoʋr mother,’ and, ‘Whoever speaks evil of his father or mother must surely die.’
But you teach that it is acceptable for a man to say to his father or mother, ‘Whatever benefit yoʋ might have received from me is Corban’ ” (that is, a gift devoted to God).
“In this way you no longer permit him to do anything for his father or his mother,
thus nullifying the word of God by your tradition that you have handed down. And you do many similar things such as these.”
Then Jesus called over the entire crowd and said to them, “Listen to me, all of you, and understand:
There is nothing outside of a person that can defile him by going into him, but the things that come out of a person are what defile him.
If anyone has ears to hear, let him hear.”
After Jesus had left the crowd and gone into a house, his disciples asked him about the parable.
He said to them, “So are you also without understanding? Do you not understand that whatever goes into a person from the outside cannot defile him?
For it does not go into his heart but into his stomach; then it goes out into the latrine, thus purifying all foods.”
He also said, “It is what comes out of a person that defiles a person.
For from within, from the hearts of men, come evil thoughts, adultery, fornication, murder,
theft, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, sensuality, envy, slander, pride, and foolishness.
All these evil things come from within and defile a person.”
Then Jesus rose from there and went away to the region of Tyre and Sidon. He went into a house and did not want anyone to know it, yet he could not escape notice.
For a woman whose little daughter had an unclean spirit heard about him and came and fell at his feet.
(This woman was a Greek, a Syrophoenician by birth.) She asked Jesus to cast the demon out of her daughter.
But Jesus said to her, “Let the children first be filled, for it is not good to take the children's bread and throw it to the dogs.”
She answered him, “Yes, Lord, yet even the dogs under the table eat the children's crumbs.”
Then he said to her, “Because of this reply, yoʋ may go; the demon has come out of yoʋr daughter.”
And when she went to her house, she found the demon gone and her daughter lying in bed.
Then Jesus came back from the region of Tyre and Sidon and went to the Sea of Galilee, within the region of the Decapolis.
Some people brought to him a deaf man who had a speech impediment, and they begged him to lay his hand on the man.
So Jesus took him aside privately, away from the crowd. Then he put his fingers into the man's ears, spit, and touched the man's tongue.
And looking up to heaven, he sighed and said to him, “Ephphatha” (that is, “Be opened”).
Immediately the man's ears were opened, the impediment of his tongue was removed, and he began speaking clearly.
Then Jesus ordered them not to tell anyone. But as much as he ordered them not to do so, they proclaimed it all the more.
And they were completely astonished, saying, “He has done all things well. He even makes the deaf hear and the mute speak.”
In those days, when there was a very large crowd that had nothing to eat, Jesus called his disciples over and said to them,
“I have compassion on the crowd because they have stayed with me now for three days and have nothing to eat.
If I send them away to their homes without having eaten, they will faint on the way, for some of them have come from far away.”
His disciples answered him, “How can anyone feed these people with bread here in the wilderness?”
He asked them, “How many loaves do you have?” They said, “Seven.”
So he commanded the crowd to sit down on the ground, and taking the seven loaves, he gave thanks, broke them, and gave them to his disciples to distribute, and they set them before the crowd.
They also had a few small fish. After blessing the fish, Jesus told the disciples to set them before the crowd as well.
The people ate and were filled, and the disciples picked up what was left over of the broken pieces, seven baskets full.
There were about four thousand men who had eaten. After sending them away,
Jesus immediately got into the boat with his disciples and went to the district of Dalmanutha.
Then the Pharisees came and began to argue with Jesus, asking him for a sign from heaven, to test him.
Sighing deeply in his spirit, he said, “Why does this generation ask for a sign? Truly I say to you, no sign will be given to this generation.”
Then he left them, got into the boat again, and went away to the other side of the sea.
Now the disciples had forgotten to bring bread, and they had nothing with them in the boat except for one loaf.
Then Jesus gave them strict orders, saying, “Watch out! Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod.”
So they discussed this with one another, saying, “He must have said this because we have no bread.”
Aware of this, Jesus said to them, “Why are you discussing the fact that you have no bread? Do you not yet perceive or understand? Are your hearts still hardened?
Having eyes do you not see, and having ears do you not hear? Do you not remember?
When I broke the five loaves for the five thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces did you pick up?” They said to him, “Twelve.”
“And when I broke the seven loaves for the four thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces did you pick up?” They said, “Seven.”
Then he said to them, “How is it that you do not understand?”
When Jesus came to Bethsaida, some people brought to him a blind man and begged Jesus to touch him.
So he took the blind man by the hand and led him out of the village. Then he spit on the man's eyes, laid his hands on him, and asked him if he saw anything.
The man looked up and said, “I can see people, but they look like trees walking around.”
So Jesus put his hands on the man's eyes again and had him look up. Then the man's sight was restored, and he saw everyone clearly.
And Jesus sent him away to his house, saying, “Do not go into the village or tell anyone in the village what has happened.”
Then Jesus went on to the villages of Caesarea Philippi along with his disciples. On the way he asked his disciples, “Who do people say that I am?”
They answered, “Some say John the Baptist, others say Elijah, and others say that yoʋ are one of the prophets.”
He said to them, “But who do you say that I am?” Peter answered him, “Yoʋ are the Christ.”
And Jesus warned them not to tell anyone about him.
Then he began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer many things and be rejected by the elders, the chief priests, and the scribes, and that he must be killed and after three days rise again.
He was stating the matter plainly, so Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him.
But turning around and looking at his disciples, he rebuked Peter, saying, “Get behind me, Satan! For yoʋ are not thinking about the things of God, but the things of men.”
Then he called the crowd over, along with his disciples, and said to them, “If anyone wants to be one of my disciples, he must deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me.
For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake and for the sake of the gospel will save it.
For what will it benefit a person if he gains the whole world but forfeits his soul?
Or what can a person give in exchange for his soul?
If anyone is ashamed of me and my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of Man will also be ashamed of him when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.”
And he said to them, “Truly I say to you, there are some standing here who will certainly not taste death until they see the kingdom of God come with power.”
After six days Jesus took Peter, James, and John, and led them up on a high mountain by themselves. There he was transfigured before them.
His garments became radiant and extremely white, like snow, such as no launderer on earth could whiten them.
Then Elijah appeared to them with Moses, and they were talking with Jesus.
So Peter said to Jesus, “Rabbi, it is good for us to be here. Let us make three shelters, one for yoʋ, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.”
(For they were terrified, and he did not know what to say.)
Then a cloud came and overshadowed them, and a voice came from the cloud: “This is my beloved Son; listen to him!”
And suddenly, when they looked around, they no longer saw anyone with them but Jesus.
As they were coming down from the mountain, Jesus ordered them to tell no one what they had seen until the Son of Man had risen from the dead.
So they kept the matter to themselves, discussing what this “rising from the dead” could mean.
Then they asked him, “Why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?”
He answered them, “Elijah does indeed come first to restore all things. How then is it written that the Son of Man must suffer many things and be treated with contempt?
But I tell you that Elijah has indeed come, and they did to him whatever they wanted, just as it is written about him.”
When Jesus came back to the other disciples, he saw a large crowd around them, and some scribes arguing with them.
When the whole crowd saw him, they were greatly amazed and immediately ran up and greeted him.
Then he asked the scribes, “What are you arguing with them about?”
One man from among the crowd answered, “Teacher, I brought yoʋ my son, who has a spirit that makes him mute.
Whenever it seizes him, it throws him down, and he foams at the mouth, grinds his teeth, and becomes rigid. I asked yoʋr disciples to cast it out, but they were not able to do so.”
Jesus answered him, “O faithless generation, how long shall I be with you? How long shall I bear with you? Bring him to me.”
So they brought the boy to him. When the spirit saw Jesus, it immediately threw the boy into convulsions, and he fell on the ground and rolled around, foaming at the mouth.
Then Jesus asked the boy's father, “How long has this been happening to him?” The father said, “From childhood.
It often throws him into the fire and into the water, to destroy him. But if yoʋ are able to do anything, help us and have compassion on us.”
Jesus said to him, “The question is whether yoʋ are able to believe. All things are possible for the one who believes.”
Immediately the child's father cried out and said with tears, “I believe, Lord; help my unbelief!”
When Jesus saw that a crowd came running together, he rebuked the unclean spirit and said to it, “Yoʋ spirit that makes this boy mute and deaf, I command yoʋ, come out of him and never enter him again!”
After crying out, the spirit convulsed the boy greatly and came out, and the boy became as though he were dead, so that many said, “He is dead!”
But Jesus took him by the hand and raised him up, and the boy arose.
Now when Jesus came into the house, his disciples asked him privately, “Why could we not cast it out?”
He said to them, “This kind cannot come out by anything except prayer and fasting.”
Then they went away from there and passed through Galilee, but Jesus did not want anyone to know it.
For he was teaching his disciples and telling them, “The Son of Man is going to be delivered up into the hands of men, and they will kill him. Yet after he has been killed, he will rise on the third day.”
But they did not understand what this meant, and they were afraid to ask him about it.
Then Jesus came to Capernaum, and when he was in the house, he asked the disciples, “What were you discussing among yourselves on the way?”
But they were silent, because on the way they had been arguing with one another about who was greater.
So Jesus sat down, called the twelve over, and said to them, “If anyone wants to be first, he must be last of all and a servant to all.”
Then he took a child and placed him before them. And taking the child in his arms, he said to them,
“Whoever receives one child such as this in my name receives me; and whoever receives me, receives not me, but him who sent me.”
John said to him in response, “Teacher, we saw someone who does not follow us casting out demons in yoʋr name, and we told him to stop because he does not follow us.”
But Jesus said, “Do not stop him, for no one who does a miracle in my name will be able to speak evil of me soon afterward.
For whoever is not against you is for you.
Truly I say to you, whoever gives you a cup of water to drink in my name, because you belong to Christ, will certainly not lose his reward.
“If anyone causes one of these little ones who believe in me to stumble, it would be better for him if a millstone were hung around his neck and he were thrown into the sea.
If yoʋr hand causes yoʋ to stumble, cut it off. It is better for yoʋ to enter life crippled than to have two hands and go into hell, into the unquenchable fire,
‘where their worm does not die and the fire is not quenched.’
And if yoʋr foot causes yoʋ to stumble, cut it off. It is better for yoʋ to enter life lame than to have two feet and be thrown into hell, into the unquenchable fire,
‘where their worm does not die and the fire is not quenched.’
And if yoʋr eye causes yoʋ to stumble, tear it out. It is better for yoʋ to enter the kingdom of God with one eye than to have two eyes and be thrown into the fires of hell,
‘where their worm does not die and the fire is not quenched.’
For everyone will be salted with fire, and every sacrifice will be seasoned with salt.
Salt is good, but if it becomes unsalty, with what shall you season it? Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace with one another.”
Jesus then rose from there and went to the region of Judea, traveling through the region beyond the Jordan, and crowds gathered around him again. And again he taught them, as he was accustomed to do.
Then some Pharisees came up to Jesus and tested him by asking, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife?”
He answered them, “What did Moses command you?”
They said, “Moses allowed a man to write a certificate of divorce and send her away.”
But Jesus answered them, “Because of your hardness of heart he wrote you this commandment.
But from the beginning of creation, God ‘made them male and female.’
‘For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife,
and the two will become one flesh.’ So then, they are no longer two, but one flesh.
Therefore what God has joined together, let no one separate.”
When they were back in the house, Jesus' disciples asked him about the same subject.
So he said to them, “Whoever divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery against her.
And if a woman divorces her husband and gets married to another, she commits adultery.”
Now people were bringing children to Jesus so that he might touch them, but the disciples rebuked those who were bringing them.
When Jesus saw this, he was indignant and said to them, “Let the little children come to me; do not hinder them, for the kingdom of God belongs to such as these.
Truly I say to you, whoever does not receive the kingdom of God like a little child will certainly not enter it.”
And taking the children in his arms, he laid his hands on them and blessed them.
As he was setting out on the road, a man ran up, knelt before him, and asked him, “Good Teacher, what must I do to inherit eternal life?”
Jesus said to him, “Why do yoʋ call me good? No one is good except God alone.
Yoʋ know the commandments: ‘Do not commit adultery, Do not murder, Do not steal, Do not give false testimony, Do not defraud, Honor yoʋr father and mother.’ ”
The man answered him, “Teacher, I have kept all these commandments from the time I was a young boy.”
As Jesus looked at him, he felt love for the man and said to him, “One thing yoʋ lack: Go and sell all that yoʋ have and give to the poor, and yoʋ will have treasure in heaven. Then take up yoʋr cross and come follow me.”
But the man was dejected by what Jesus said and went away sorrowful, for he had many possessions.
Then Jesus looked around and said to his disciples, “How difficult it will be for those who have riches to enter the kingdom of God!”
The disciples were amazed at his words. But Jesus said to them again, “Children, how difficult it is for those who trust in riches to enter the kingdom of God!
It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich person to enter the kingdom of God.”
They were completely astonished at this and said to one another, “Who then can be saved?”
Jesus looked at them and said, “With men it is impossible, but not with God. For all things are possible with God.”
Peter began to say to him, “Behold, we have left everything and followed yoʋ.”
Jesus answered, “Truly I say to you, there is no one who has left house, brothers, sisters, father, mother, wife, children, or fields, for my sake and for the sake of the gospel,
who will not receive now in this age a hundred times as many houses, brothers, sisters, mothers, children, and fields—along with persecutions—and in the age to come, eternal life.
But many who are first will be last, and many who are last will be first.”
Now they were on the road going up to Jerusalem. Jesus was walking ahead of them, and they were amazed. But as they followed they became afraid. Again he took the twelve aside and began to tell them what was going to happen to him:
“Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be delivered up to the chief priests and scribes. They will condemn him to death and hand him over to the Gentiles.
They will mock him, flog him, spit on him, and kill him. But on the third day he will rise again.”
Then James and John, the sons of Zebedee, came to him and said, “Teacher, we want yoʋ to do for us whatever we ask.”
So he said to them, “What do you want me to do for you?”
They said to him, “Grant that one of us may sit on yoʋr right and the other on yoʋr left in yoʋr glory.”
But Jesus said to them, “You do not know what you are asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I drink, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?”
They said to him, “We are able.” Then Jesus said to them, “You will indeed drink the cup that I drink, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with,
but to sit on my right and on my left is not mine to give, but is for those for whom it has been prepared.”
When the ten heard this, they started becoming indignant with James and John.
So Jesus called them over and said to them, “You know that those who are recognized as rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their great men exercise authority over them.
But it shall not be so among you. Instead, whoever wants to be great among you must be your servant,
and whoever wants to be first among you must be a slave to all.
For even the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.”
Then they came to Jericho. Now as Jesus was leaving Jericho, along with his disciples and a large crowd, the blind man Bartimaeus, son of Timaeus, was sitting by the road begging.
When he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out, “Son of David, Jesus, have mercy on me!”
Many people began rebuking him, telling him to be silent, but he cried out all the more, “Son of David, have mercy on me!”
Then Jesus stopped and asked for him to be called over. So they called out to the blind man and said to him, “Take courage and get up; he is calling for yoʋ.”
Throwing off his cloak, he rose and came to Jesus.
Then Jesus said to him, “What do yoʋ want me to do for yoʋ?” The blind man said to him, “Rabboni, I want to receive my sight.”
Jesus said to him, “Go; yoʋr faith has healed yoʋ.” Immediately he received his sight and began following Jesus on the road.
When they drew near to Jerusalem and came to Bethsphage and Bethany, at the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two of his disciples ahead
and said to them, “Go into the village ahead of you, and immediately as you enter it you will find a colt tied there, on which no one has sat. Untie it and bring it here.
If anyone says to you, ‘Why are you doing this?’ say, ‘The Lord has need of it.’ Then he will immediately send it here.”
So they went and found a colt outside in the street, tied at a door, and they untied it.
But some of the people who were standing there said to them, “What are you doing, untying the colt?”
They answered them just as Jesus had instructed, and the people let them go.
Then they brought the colt to Jesus and put their garments on it, and he sat on it.
Many people spread their garments on the road, and others cut down leafy branches from the trees and also spread them on the road.
Those who went ahead of him and those who followed were crying out, “Hosanna! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!
Blessed is the kingdom of our father David that is coming in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!”
Then Jesus entered Jerusalem and went into the temple courts. When he had looked around at everything, he went out to Bethany with the twelve, since the hour was already late.
On the next day, as they went out from Bethany, Jesus was hungry.
Seeing in the distance a fig tree that had leaves, he went to find out if it had any fruit. When he came to it, he found nothing but leaves, because it was not the season for figs.
In response Jesus said to the fig tree, “May no one ever eat fruit from yoʋ again!” And his disciples heard it.
Then they came to Jerusalem, and Jesus entered the temple courts and began driving out those who were selling and buying there. He overturned the tables of the money changers and the seats of those who were selling doves,
and he would not allow anyone to carry anything through the temple courts.
Then he began to teach the people, saying, “Is it not written, ‘My house shall be called a house of prayer for all nations’? But you have made it a den of robbers.”
When the scribes and the chief priests heard this, they began looking for a way to destroy him, for they were afraid of him, because the entire crowd was astonished at his teaching.
And when evening came, he went out of the city.
In the morning, as they went along, they saw that the fig tree had withered from its roots.
Then Peter remembered what had happened and said to Jesus, “Rabbi, behold, the fig tree that yoʋ cursed has withered!”
In response Jesus said to them, “Have faith in God.
For truly I say to you, if anyone says to this mountain, ‘Be taken up and thrown into the sea,’ and does not doubt in his heart, but believes that what he says is going to happen, whatever he says will be granted to him.
Therefore I tell you, whatever you ask for in prayer, believe that you are receiving it, and it will be yours.
And whenever you stand praying, if you have anything against anyone, forgive him, so that your Father in heaven will also forgive you your trespasses.
But if you do not forgive, neither will your Father in heaven forgive your trespasses.”
Again they came to Jerusalem, and as Jesus was walking in the temple courts, the chief priests, the scribes, and the elders came up to him
and said to him, “By what authority are yoʋ doing these things? And who gave yoʋ this authority to do them?”
Jesus answered them, “I will also ask you one question; answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I am doing these things:
Did John's authority to baptize come from heaven or from men? Answer me.”
So they considered it among themselves, saying, “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Why then did you not believe him?’
But shall we say, ‘From men’?”—they were afraid of the people, for everyone thought that John was truly a prophet.
So they answered Jesus, “We do not know.” In response Jesus said to them, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I am doing these things.”
Then Jesus began to speak to them in parables: “A man planted a vineyard, put a fence around it, dug a pit for the winepress, built a tower, leased it to farmers, and left the country.
At harvest time he sent a servant to the farmers to receive from them some of the fruit of the vineyard.
But they seized that servant, beat him, and sent him away empty-handed.
Again he sent to them another servant, and they threw stones at him, struck him on the head, and sent him away after dishonoring him.
Again he sent another, and that one they killed. He also sent many others, some of whom they beat, and some of whom they killed.
Now he still had his one beloved son. He sent him to them as well, last of all, saying, ‘They will have respect for my son.’
But the farmers said to one another, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.’
So they took him, killed him, and threw him out of the vineyard.
What then will the owner of the vineyard do? He will come and destroy those farmers and give the vineyard to others.
Have you not read this Scripture: ‘The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone;
this was the Lord's doing, and it is amazing in our eyes’?”
Then the chief priests, the scribes, and the elders were looking for a way to arrest Jesus because they knew he had spoken the parable against them. But they were afraid of the crowd, so they left him and went away.
Later they sent some of the Pharisees and the Herodians to Jesus to trap him in what he said.
They came and said to him, “Teacher, we know that yoʋ are true and defer to no one, for yoʋ do not show partiality but teach the way of God in truth. Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar, or not?
Should we give, or should we not give?” But knowing their hypocrisy, Jesus said to them, “Why are you testing me? Bring me a denarius and let me look at it.”
So they brought one. Then he said to them, “Whose image and inscription is this?” They said to him, “Caesar's.”
In response Jesus said to them, “Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's.” And they were amazed at him.
Then some Sadducees (who say there is no resurrection) came to Jesus and asked him,
“Teacher, Moses wrote for us: ‘If a man's brother dies, leaving a wife but no children, that man must marry the widow and raise up offspring for his brother.’
Now there were seven brothers. The first married a woman and died, leaving no offspring.
The second married her and died, and he also left no offspring; the third did likewise.
In fact, the seven all married her and left no offspring. Last of all, the woman also died.
In the resurrection, when they rise again, which of them will she be the wife of? For the seven all had her as a wife.”
Jesus answered them, “Is this not why you are in error, because you know neither the Scriptures nor the power of God?
For when people rise from the dead, they neither marry nor are they given in marriage. Instead, they are like the angels in heaven.
But as for the dead being raised, have you not read in the Book of Moses, in the passage about the burning bush, how God said to him, ‘I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’?
He is not the God of the dead, but the God of the living. You have therefore made a serious error.”
Now one of the scribes came up and heard them debating, and when he realized that Jesus had answered them well, he asked him, “Which is the most important commandment of all?”
Jesus answered him, “The most important of all the commandments is this: ‘Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God, the Lord is one.
And yoʋ shall love the Lord yoʋr God with all yoʋr heart, with all yoʋr soul, with all yoʋr mind, and with all yoʋr strength.’ This is the most important commandment.
And a second like it is this: ‘Yoʋ shall love yoʋr neighbor as yoʋrself.’ There is no other commandment greater than these.”
Then the scribe said to him, “Yoʋ are right, Teacher. In truth yoʋ have said that God is one, and that there is no other besides him,
and that to love him with all yoʋr heart, with all yoʋr understanding, with all yoʋr soul, and with all yoʋr strength, and to love yoʋr neighbor as yoʋrself is greater than every whole burnt offering and sacrifice.”
When Jesus saw that the man had answered wisely, he said to him, “Yoʋ are not far from the kingdom of God.” And no one dared to ask him questions anymore.
As Jesus taught in the temple courts, he said, “How can the scribes say that the Christ is the Son of David?
For David himself said in the Holy Spirit, ‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at my right hand until I make yoʋr enemies a footstool for yoʋr feet.” ’
David himself calls him ‘Lord,’ so how is he his son?” And the large crowd was listening to him gladly.
Jesus also said to them in his teaching, “Beware of the scribes, who like to walk around in long robes, and to receive greetings in the marketplaces,
and to have the best seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at banquets,
who devour widows' houses and for a pretense make long prayers. They will receive a more severe judgment.”
Later Jesus sat down across from the treasury and watched how the crowd was putting money into the treasury. Many rich people put in large amounts.
Then a poor widow came and put in two small copper coins, which are worth a penny.
So Jesus called his disciples over and said to them, “Truly I say to you, this poor widow has put more money into the treasury than all the others.
For they have all put in money out of their abundance, but she, out of her poverty, has put in all that she had, her entire livelihood.”
As Jesus was coming out from the temple courts, one of his disciples said to him, “Teacher, look! What wonderful stones and what wonderful buildings!”
Jesus answered him, “Do yoʋ see these great buildings? Not one stone will be left upon another; all of them will be torn down.”
Later, as Jesus was sitting on the Mount of Olives, across from the temple, Peter, James, John, and Andrew asked him privately,
“Tell us, when will these things happen? And what will be the sign that all these things are about to be fulfilled?”
Jesus began to say to them in response, “Make sure no one leads you astray.
For many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am he,’ and will lead many astray.
When you hear of wars and rumors of wars, do not be alarmed, for these things must take place, but the end is not yet.
For nation will rise up against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. There will be earthquakes in various places, along with famines and riots. These are the beginning of the labor pains.
“You must watch out for yourselves, for they will deliver you up to councils, and you will be beaten in synagogues. For my sake you will even be set before governors and kings as witnesses to them.
And the gospel must first be proclaimed to all nations.
When they lead you away and hand you over, do not be anxious beforehand about what you should say. Do not give it much thought, but say whatever is given to you in that hour, for it will not be you speaking, but the Holy Spirit.
Brother will deliver up brother to death, and a father his child, and children will rise up against their parents and have them put to death.
You will be hated by all because of my name, but he who endures to the end will be saved.
“When you see the abomination of desolation, which was spoken of by the prophet Daniel, standing where it should not be” (let the reader understand), “then those who are in Judea must flee to the mountains.
He who is on the housetop must not come down into his house or go inside to get anything out of his house.
And he who is in the field must not turn back to get his cloak.
Woe to those who are with child and to those who are nursing infants in those days!
Pray that your flight will not happen in winter.
For those days will be a time of tribulation unlike any other from the beginning of God's creation until now, and it will never be equaled again.
If the Lord had not cut those days short, no flesh would be saved. But for the sake of the chosen, whom he has selected, he has cut those days short.
If anyone says to you at that time, ‘Behold, here is the Christ!’ or, ‘Behold, there he is!’ do not believe him.
For false christs and false prophets will rise up and perform signs and wonders to lead astray, if possible, even the chosen.
So you must watch out! Behold, I have told you everything in advance.
“But in those days, after that time of tribulation, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light.
The stars of heaven will be falling, and the powers that are in the heavens will be shaken.
Then people will see the Son of Man coming in the clouds with great power and glory.
And he will send his angels and gather together his chosen from the four winds, from the ends of the earth to the ends of heaven.
“Now learn this lesson from the fig tree: As soon as its branches become tender and put out leaves, you know that summer is near.
So also, when you see these things taking place, know that he is near, at the very gates.
Truly I say to you, this generation will certainly not pass away until all these things have taken place.
Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will certainly not pass away.
“No one knows about that day or hour, not even the angels in heaven or the Son, but only the Father.
Be on guard; stay alert and pray! For you do not know when the time is coming.
It is like a man away on a journey: When he leaves his house and gives authority to his servants, assigning to each one his task, he also commands the doorkeeper to keep watch.
Therefore keep watch, for you do not know when the master of the house is coming—in the evening, at midnight, when the rooster crows, or in the morning.
Otherwise, he may come suddenly and find you sleeping.
What I say to you, I say to everyone: Keep watch!”
Now the Passover and the Feast of Unleavened Bread were two days away, and the chief priests and the scribes were looking for a way to arrest Jesus secretly and kill him.
But they said, “Not during the feast, otherwise there will be a riot among the people.”
Meanwhile Jesus was in Bethany, reclining at the table in the house of Simon the leper, and a woman came with an alabaster jar of very expensive ointment made of pure nard. She broke the alabaster jar and poured the ointment on his head.
But some were expressing indignation to one another, saying, “Why has this ointment been wasted?
It could have been sold for more than three hundred denarii, and the money could have been given to the poor.” So they began scolding her.
But Jesus said, “Leave her alone. Why are you causing trouble for her? She has done a good deed to me.
For you always have the poor with you, and you can do good to them whenever you want, but you will not always have me.
She has done what she could; she has anointed my body beforehand to prepare me for burial.
Truly I say to you, wherever this gospel is preached in the whole world, what this woman has done will also be spoken of as a memorial to her.”
Then Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went to the chief priests to deliver Jesus up to them.
When they heard why he had come, they were glad and promised to give him money. So he began looking for a way to betray Jesus at an opportune time.
On the first day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread, when the Passover lamb is sacrificed, Jesus' disciples said to him, “Where do yoʋ want us to go and make preparations for yoʋ to eat the Passover?”
So he sent two of his disciples and said to them, “Go into the city, and a man carrying a jug of water will meet you. Follow him.
Wherever he enters, tell the master of the house, ‘The Teacher asks, “Where is the guest room where I can eat the Passover with my disciples?” ’
He will then show you a large upper room, furnished and prepared; make preparations for us there.”
So his disciples left, went into the city, and found it just as Jesus had told them, and they prepared the Passover.
When it was evening, Jesus came with the twelve.
As they were reclining at the table and eating, Jesus said, “Truly I say to you, one of you who is eating with me will betray me.”
So they began to be sorrowful and to say one after another, “Surely not I?” and, “Surely not I?”
Jesus answered them, “It is one of the twelve, one who is dipping bread with me into the dish.
The Son of Man indeed goes just as it is written of him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed. It would have been better for that man if he had not been born.”
As they were eating, Jesus took bread, and when he had blessed it, he broke it, gave it to them, and said, “Take and eat this bread; this is my body.”
Then he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them, and they all drank of it.
He said to them, “This is my blood of the new covenant, which is poured out for many.
Truly I say to you, I will certainly not drink again from the fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it anew in the kingdom of God.”
And after singing a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
Then Jesus said to them, “All of you will fall away because of me this night. For it is written, ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.’
However, after I have been raised up, I will go ahead of you to Galilee.”
But Peter said to him, “Even if everyone else falls away, I will not.”
Jesus said to him, “Truly I say to yoʋ that today, on this night, before a rooster crows twice, yoʋ will deny me three times.”
But Peter said all the more vehemently, “Even if I must die with yoʋ, I will certainly not deny yoʋ.” And they all said the same thing.
Then they went to a place called Gethsemane, and Jesus said to his disciples, “Sit here while I go and pray.”
He took with him Peter, James, and John, and began to be greatly disturbed and distressed.
He said to them, “My soul is very sorrowful, even to the point of death; stay here and keep watch.”
Going a little farther, he fell on the ground and prayed that, if it were possible, the hour might pass from him.
He said, “Abba, Father, all things are possible for yoʋ. Take this cup away from me; nevertheless, not what I will, but what yoʋ will.”
Then he came and found them sleeping, and said to Peter, “Simon, are yoʋ sleeping? Could yoʋ not keep watch for one hour?
Keep watch and pray, lest you enter into temptation. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.”
Once again he went away and prayed the same prayer.
When he returned, he found them sleeping again, for their eyes were heavy, and they did not know what to say in response.
Then he came a third time and said to them, “Sleep on now and take your rest! That is enough; the hour has come. Behold, the Son of Man is delivered up into the hands of sinners.
Rise, let us go! Behold, my betrayer has drawn near.”
Immediately, as he was still speaking, Judas arrived, who was one of the twelve. With him was a large crowd with swords and clubs, sent by the chief priests, the scribes, and the elders.
Now his betrayer had given them a signal, saying, “Whomever I kiss, he is the one; arrest him and lead him away under guard.”
When Judas came, he immediately went up to Jesus and said to him, “Rabbi! Rabbi!” And he kissed him.
Then they took hold of Jesus and arrested him.
But one of the bystanders drew his sword and struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his ear.
Then Jesus said to them, “Have you come out to arrest me with swords and clubs as you would against a robber?
I was with you daily, teaching in the temple courts, and you did not arrest me. But these things are happening so that the Scriptures may be fulfilled.”
Then they all the disciples left him and fled.
Now a certain young man was following Jesus, wearing nothing but a linen cloth. The young men tried to seize him,
but he left the linen cloth behind and ran away from them naked.
Then they led Jesus away to the high priest, and all the chief priests, the elders, and the scribes were assembled together with him.
Peter had followed Jesus at a distance, right into the courtyard of the high priest. There he sat with the officers, warming himself in the light of the fire.
Now the chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin were seeking testimony against Jesus so that they could put him to death, but they did not find any.
For many were giving false testimony against him, but their testimonies did not agree.
Then some stood up and gave false testimony against him, declaring,
“We heard him say, ‘I will destroy this man-made temple, and in three days I will build another not made by man.’ ”
Yet even then their testimony did not agree.
Then the high priest stood up before them and asked Jesus, “Do yoʋ make no answer? What are these men testifying against yoʋ?”
But he was silent and made no answer. Again the high priest asked him, “Are yoʋ the Christ, the Son of the Blessed One?”
Jesus said, “I am. And you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of Power and coming with the clouds of heaven.”
Then the high priest tore his garments and said, “What further need do we have of witnesses?
You have heard his blasphemy. What seems right to you?” And they all condemned him as deserving death.
Then some began to spit on him, to blindfold him, and to beat him, saying to him, “Prophesy!” And the officers kept striking him with the palms of their hands.
Now as Peter was in the courtyard below, one of the servant girls of the high priest came.
When she saw Peter warming himself, she looked at him and said, “Yoʋ also were with Jesus of Nazareth.”
But he denied it, saying, “I neither know nor understand what yoʋ are talking about!” Then he went outside to the gateway, and a rooster crowed.
When the servant girl saw him again, she began saying to the people standing nearby, “This man is one of them.”
But again he denied it. After a little while, the people standing nearby said to Peter once again, “Truly yoʋ are one of them, for yoʋ also are a Galilean, and yoʋr accent is like theirs.”
But he began to invoke curses and to swear, saying, “I do not know this man of whom you speak.”
Then a rooster crowed a second time, and Peter remembered what Jesus had said to him: “Before a rooster crows twice, yoʋ will deny me three times.” And he broke down and wept.
As soon as it was morning, the chief priests took counsel with the elders, scribes, and the whole Sanhedrin. They bound Jesus, led him away, and handed him over to Pilate.
So Pilate asked him, “Are yoʋ the king of the Jews?” Jesus answered him, “Yoʋ have said it yoʋrself.”
Then the chief priests accused him of many things.
So Pilate asked him again, “Do yoʋ make no answer? See how many things they are testifying against yoʋ!”
But Jesus made no further answer, so Pilate was amazed.
Now at the feast Pilate would release one prisoner for the people, whomever they requested.
And there was a man named Barabbas who was in prison with his fellow insurrectionists who had committed murder in the insurrection.
So the crowd cried out and began to ask Pilate to do what he had always done for them.
Pilate answered them, “Do you want me to release for you the king of the Jews?”
(For he knew that the chief priests had handed Jesus over out of envy.)
But the chief priests stirred up the crowd to have Pilate release for them Barabbas instead.
In response Pilate said to them again, “What then do you want me to do with the man you call King of the Jews?”
They cried out again, “Crucify him!”
Pilate said to them, “Why? What evil has he done?” But they cried out all the more, “Crucify him!”
Then Pilate, wishing to satisfy the crowd, released for them Barabbas. But he scourged Jesus and handed him over to be crucified.
So the soldiers led him away into the palace (that is, the governor's headquarters) and called together the entire cohort of soldiers.
They clothed him with a purple robe, and they twisted together a crown of thorns and put it on him.
Then they began to salute him: “Hail, King of the Jews!”
They kept beating him on the head with a reed, spitting on him, and bending down on their knees to pay homage to him.
When they had finished mocking him, they stripped him of the purple robe and put his own garments back on him. Then they led him out to crucify him.
Now a certain man from Cyrene, Simon, the father of Alexander and Rufus, was passing by on his way in from the countryside. The soldiers pressed him into service, forcing him to carry Jesus' cross,
and they brought Jesus to the place called Golgotha (which means, “Place of the Skull”).
Then they gave him wine to drink, mixed with myrrh, but he did not take it.
And they crucified him. Then they divided his garments, casting lots for them to see who would take what.
It was the third hour when they crucified him.
The inscription of the charge against him was written as follows: “The King of the Jews.”
With him they crucified two robbers, one on his right and one on his left.
So the Scripture was fulfilled that says, “He was numbered with the lawless.”
Those who passed by reviled him, shaking their heads and saying, “Ha! Yoʋ who would destroy the temple and build it in three days,
save yoʋrself and come down from the cross!”
In the same way the chief priests also, along with the scribes, were mocking him among themselves, saying, “He saved others, but he cannot save himself.
Let the Christ, the king of Israel, come down now from the cross, so that we may see it and believe him.” The men who were crucified with him were also insulting him.
From the sixth hour until the ninth hour, there was darkness over the whole land.
And at the ninth hour Jesus cried out with a loud voice, “Eloi, Eloi, lima sabachthani?” which means, “My God, my God, why have yoʋ forsaken me?”
When some of those standing nearby heard this, they said, “Behold, he is calling for Elijah.”
Then a man ran and filled a sponge with sour wine, put it on a reed, and gave it to him to drink, saying, “Leave him alone. Let us see if Elijah comes to take him down.”
But Jesus let out a loud cry and breathed his last breath.
Then the veil of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom.
Now when the centurion who was standing in front of Jesus saw how he cried out and breathed his last breath, he said, “Truly this man was the Son of God.”
There were also some women looking on from a distance, among whom were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James the younger and of Joses, and Salome.
These women had followed Jesus and provided for him when he was in Galilee. There were also many other women who had come up with him to Jerusalem.
When evening had come, since it was the day of Preparation (that is, the day before the Sabbath),
Joseph of Arimathea, a respected council member, who was himself also waiting for the kingdom of God, came and boldly went in before Pilate to ask for Jesus' body.
Pilate was surprised that Jesus was already dead, so he called the centurion over and asked him if Jesus had been dead for some time.
When he found out from the centurion that it was so, he granted the body to Joseph.
After buying a linen cloth and taking him down, Joseph wrapped him in the linen cloth and laid him in a tomb that had been hewn in a rock. Then he rolled a stone against the entrance of the tomb.
And Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses saw where he was laid.
When the Sabbath was over, Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, and Salome bought spices, so that they might go and anoint Jesus' body.
Very early in the morning of the first day of the week, when the sun had risen, they went to the tomb.
On the way, they were saying to one another, “Who will roll the stone away from the entrance of the tomb for us?”
But when they arrived, they looked up and saw that the stone, which was very large, had already been rolled away.
As they went into the tomb, they saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a long white robe, and they were alarmed.
But he said to them, “Do not be alarmed; you seek Jesus of Nazareth, who was crucified. He is risen; he is not here. Behold, this is the place where they laid him.
Now go tell his disciples and Peter that he is going ahead of you to Galilee. There you will see him, just as he told you.”
So they went out and fled from the tomb, and trembling and amazement seized them. But they did not say anything to anyone, for they were afraid.
In the morning on the first day of the week, after Jesus had risen, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, from whom he had cast out seven demons.
She then went and told those who had been with him, while they were mourning and weeping.
But when they heard that he was alive and that she had seen him, they did not believe it.
After this, Jesus appeared in a different form to two of his followers as they were walking along in the countryside.
They went back and told the others, but they did not believe them either.
Later Jesus appeared to the eleven as they were reclining at the table, and he rebuked them for their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they had not believed those who had seen him after he had risen.
He said to them, “Go into all the world and preach the gospel to all creation.
Whoever believes and is baptized will be saved, but whoever does not believe will be condemned.
And these signs will accompany those who believe: They will cast out demons in my name, they will speak in new tongues,
they will pick up serpents, and if they drink any deadly poison, it will certainly not harm them; they will lay hands on the sick, and they will get well.”
After the Lord had spoken to them, he was taken up into heaven, and he sat down at the right hand of God.
Then the disciples went out and preached everywhere, while the Lord worked through them and confirmed the message by the signs that accompanied it. Amen.
Since many have undertaken to compile an account of the events that have been fulfilled among us,
just as those who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and ministers of the word have delivered them to us,
it seemed good to me also, having carefully investigated all things from the beginning, to write an orderly account for yoʋ, most excellent Theophilus,
so that yoʋ may know the certainty of the things about which yoʋ have been instructed.
In the days of Herod, the king of Judea, there was a priest named Zechariah who belonged to the division of Abijah. His wife was of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth.
They were both righteous before God, walking blamelessly in all the commandments and regulations of the Lord.
But they had no children because Elizabeth was barren, and they were both advanced in their days.
While Zechariah was serving as a priest before God when his division was on duty,
he was chosen by lot, according to the custom of the priesthood, to enter the temple of the Lord and burn incense.
At the hour of incense a great crowd was assembled outside, praying.
Then an angel of the Lord appeared to Zechariah, standing at the right side of the altar of incense.
When Zechariah saw him, he was startled, and fear fell upon him.
But the angel said to him, “Do not be afraid, Zechariah, for yoʋr prayer has been heard. Yoʋr wife Elizabeth will bear yoʋ a son, and yoʋ shall name him John.
Yoʋ will have joy and gladness, and many will rejoice at his birth,
for he will be great in the sight of the Lord. He must never drink any wine or strong drink, and he will be filled with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother's womb.
He will turn many of the sons of Israel to the Lord their God.
And he will go before the Lord in the spirit and power of Elijah, to turn the hearts of fathers back to their children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the righteous, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.”
Zechariah said to the angel, “How can I know this for certain? For I am an old man, and my wife is advanced in her days.”
The angel answered him, “I am Gabriel. I stand in the presence of God and was sent to speak to yoʋ and bring yoʋ this good news.
But behold, yoʋ will be silent and unable to speak until the day these things take place, because yoʋ did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled at their appointed time.”
Meanwhile, the people were waiting for Zechariah and wondering about his delay in the temple.
When he came out, he was unable to speak to them, and they perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple, because he kept making signs to them and remained unable to speak.
And when the days of his service had come to an end, he returned to his home.
After those days his wife Elizabeth conceived and kept herself in seclusion for five months, saying,
“The Lord has done this for me. In these days he has looked upon me with favor and taken away my reproach among the people.”
In the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent by God to a town of Galilee called Nazareth,
to a virgin betrothed to a man named Joseph, of the house of David. The virgin's name was Mary.
The angel came to her and said, “Greetings, O favored one, the Lord is with yoʋ! Blessed are yoʋ among women!”
But when Mary saw him, she was greatly perplexed by his statement and began wondering what sort of greeting this could be.
Then the angel said to her, “Do not be afraid, Mary, for yoʋ have found favor with God.
And behold, yoʋ will conceive in yoʋr womb and give birth to a son, and yoʋ shall name him Jesus.
He will be great and will be called the Son of the Most High, and the Lord God will give him the throne of his father David.
He will reign over the house of Jacob forever, and of his kingdom there will be no end.”
Mary said to the angel, “How will this be, since I am a virgin?”
The angel answered her, “The Holy Spirit will come upon yoʋ, and the power of the Most High will overshadow yoʋ; therefore the holy child that is to be born will be called the Son of God.
And behold, yoʋr relative Elizabeth has also conceived a son in her old age, and this is the sixth month for her who was called barren.
For nothing is impossible with God.”
Then Mary said, “Behold, I am the servant of the Lord; may it happen to me according to yoʋr word.” And the angel left her.
In those days Mary arose and went with haste to the hill country, to a town of Judah,
where she entered the house of Zechariah and greeted Elizabeth.
When Elizabeth heard Mary's greeting, the baby leaped in her womb, and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit.
Then she exclaimed with a loud voice, “Blessed are yoʋ among women, and blessed is the fruit of yoʋr womb!
How has this happened to me that the mother of my Lord should come to me?
For behold, when the sound of yoʋr greeting came into my ears, the baby in my womb leaped for joy.
Blessed is she who has believed, for what the Lord has spoken to her will be fulfilled.”
Then Mary said, “My soul magnifies the Lord,
and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior,
because he has looked favorably on the humble state of his servant. For behold, from now on all generations will call me blessed,
because the Mighty One has done great things for me; holy is his name.
From generation to generation his mercy is upon those who fear him.
He has done a mighty deed with his arm; he has scattered the proud in the thoughts of their hearts.
He has brought down rulers from their thrones and exalted the lowly.
He has filled the hungry with good things, but the rich he has sent away empty.
He has helped his servant Israel, remembering his mercy,
just as he spoke to our fathers, to Abraham and to his offspring forever.”
And Mary remained with Elizabeth for about three months and then returned to her house.
Now the time was fulfilled for Elizabeth to give birth, and she bore a son.
Then her neighbors and her relatives heard that the Lord had magnified his mercy with her, and they rejoiced with her.
On the eighth day they came to circumcise the child, and they were going to name him Zechariah, after his father.
But the child's mother responded, “No! He is to be called John.”
But they said to her, “There is no one among yoʋr relatives who has that name.”
Then they began making signs to the child's father to find out what he wanted to name him.
So he asked for a tablet and wrote, “His name is John.” And they were all amazed.
At once Zechariah's mouth was opened and his tongue was released, and he began to speak, blessing God.
Then fear came upon all who dwelt around them, and in the entire hill country of Judea all these things were being discussed.
All who heard about this laid it up in their hearts, saying, “What then will this child become?” And the hand of the Lord was with him.
Then Zechariah, the child's father, was filled with the Holy Spirit and prophesied:
“Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, for he has visited his people and brought them redemption.
He has raised up for us a horn of salvation in the house of his servant David
(just as he spoke through the mouth of his holy prophets long ago),
salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all who hate us—
to deal mercifully with our fathers and to remember his holy covenant,
the oath he swore to Abraham our father, to grant us
that we, having been rescued from the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear,
in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our lives.
And yoʋ, child, will be called a prophet of the Most High, for yoʋ will go before the presence of the Lord to prepare his ways,
to give his people knowledge of salvation through the remission of their sins,
through the tender mercy of our God, by which the sunrise has visited us from on high,
to give light to those who sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace.”
And the child grew and became strong in spirit, and he was in the wilderness until the day of his public appearance to Israel.
In those days a decree went out from Caesar Augustus that all the world should be registered in a census.
This was the first census, and it took place when Quirinius was governor of Syria.
So everyone went to be registered, each to his own town.
Joseph also went up from Galilee, from the town of Nazareth, to Judea, to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and family of David,
to register himself along with Mary, his betrothed wife, who was with child.
While they were there, the days were fulfilled for her to give birth,
and she gave birth to her firstborn son. Then she wrapped him in swaddling cloths and laid him in the manger, because there was no room for them in the inn.
In the same region there were shepherds living out in the fields, keeping watch over their flock by night.
And behold, an angel of the Lord stood before them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were filled with great fear.
But the angel said to them, “Do not be afraid, for behold, I bring you good news of great joy, which will be for all the people.
For to you is born this day in the city of David a Savior, who is Christ the Lord.
This will be the sign for you: You will find a baby wrapped in swaddling cloths and lying in a manger.”
Suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God and saying,
“Glory to God in the highest, and peace on earth, good will among men.”
When the angels had gone away from them into heaven, the shepherds said to one another, “Let us go over to Bethlehem and see this thing that has happened, which the Lord has made known to us.”
So they went with haste and found Mary and Joseph, and the baby lying in the manger.
After seeing him, they made widely known what they had been told about the child,
and all who heard it were amazed at what the shepherds told them.
But Mary treasured up all these things, pondering them in her heart.
Then the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things they had heard and seen, which were just as they had been told.
When the eight days were completed for his circumcision, he was called Jesus, the name given by the angel before he was conceived in the womb.
When the days of their purification were completed according to the law of Moses, Joseph and Mary brought Jesus up to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord
(just as it is written in the law of the Lord, “Every male who opens the womb shall be called holy to the Lord”).
They also went up to offer a sacrifice according to what is said in the law of the Lord: “a pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons.”
And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem named Simeon who was righteous and devout. He was waiting for the consolation of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was upon him.
It had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit that he would not see death before he had seen the Lord's Christ.
So he came in the Spirit into the temple courts, and when the parents brought in the child Jesus to do for him what was customary under the law,
Simeon took him in his arms and blessed God, saying,
“Now, Master, yoʋ are releasing yoʋr servant in peace according to yoʋr word,
for my eyes have seen yoʋr salvation,
which yoʋ have prepared in the presence of all peoples,
a light for revelation to the Gentiles and for the glory of yoʋr people Israel.”
Joseph and the child's mother were amazed at what was being said about him.
Then Simeon blessed them and said to Mary, the child's mother, “Behold, this child is appointed to bring about the falling and rising of many in Israel and to be a sign that will be spoken against,
so that the thoughts of many hearts will be revealed. And a sword will pierce yoʋr own soul as well.”
There was also a prophetess, Anna the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher. She was far advanced in days. Her husband had died seven years after they were married,
and she was a widow of about eighty-four years of age. She did not depart from the temple, but served night and day with fasting and prayer.
She came at that very hour and began giving praise to the Lord and speaking about the child to all who were waiting for redemption in Jerusalem.
When Joseph and Mary had finished everything that was required by the law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee, to their own town of Nazareth.
And the child grew and became strong in spirit; he was filled with wisdom, and the favor of God was upon him.
Now Jesus' parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the Passover.
When he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem according to the custom of the feast.
And when they had completed their days there and started returning home, the boy Jesus stayed behind in Jerusalem. But Joseph did not know it, and neither did Jesus' mother.
They assumed that he was in the company of travelers, so they went a day's journey before they began looking for him among their relatives and acquaintances.
When they did not find him, they returned to Jerusalem, looking for him.
After three days, they found him in the temple courts, sitting among the teachers, listening to them and asking them questions.
And all who heard him were amazed at his understanding and his answers.
When his parents saw him, they were astonished. His mother said to him, “Child, why have yoʋ treated us like this? Behold, yoʋr father and I have been looking for yoʋ in great distress.”
He said to them, “Why were you looking for me? Did you not know that I must be in my Father's house?”
But they did not understand what he said to them.
Then he went down with them and came to Nazareth and was obedient to them. And his mother kept all these things in her heart.
And Jesus advanced in wisdom and in stature, and in favor with God and men.
In the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, when Pontius Pilate was governor of Judea, and Herod was tetrarch of Galilee, and Philip his brother was tetrarch of the region of Ituraea and Trachonitis, and Lysanias was tetrarch of Abilene,
during the high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came to John the son of Zechariah in the wilderness.
He went into all the region around the Jordan, preaching a baptism of repentance for the remission of sins,
as it is written in the book of the words of the prophet Isaiah, “The voice of one crying out in the wilderness, ‘Prepare the way for the Lord; make his paths straight.
Every valley will be filled, and every mountain and hill will be brought low. The crooked roads will be made straight, and the rough ways will be made smooth.
And all flesh will see the salvation of God.’ ”
John said to the crowds that were coming out to be baptized by him, “You brood of vipers, who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
Produce fruit consistent with repentance, and do not begin to say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father,’ for I tell you that God is able from these stones to raise up children for Abraham.
Even now the axe is laid to the root of the trees. Every tree therefore that does not produce good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.”
So the crowds asked him, “What then should we do?”
John answered them, “Whoever has two tunics must share with him who has none, and whoever has food must do likewise.”
Some tax collectors also came to be baptized, and they said to him, “Teacher, what should we do?”
He said to them, “Collect no more than what you have been authorized to collect.”
Then some soldiers asked him, “And what should we do?” He said to them, “Do not extort money from anyone by threats or false accusations, and be content with your wages.”
Now as the people were waiting in expectation and were all questioning in their hearts whether John might be the Christ,
John answered them all, “I baptize you with water, but one is coming who is mightier than I, the strap of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie; he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire.
His winnowing fork is in his hand, and he will thoroughly clean out his threshing floor and gather the wheat into his barn, but the chaff he will burn up with unquenchable fire.”
With these and many other exhortations John preached good news to the people.
But when John rebuked Herod the tetrarch because of his marriage to Herodias, his brother's wife, and because of all the evils he had done,
Herod added this to everything else: He locked John up in prison.
Now when all the people were baptized, and when Jesus had also been baptized and was praying, the heavens were opened,
and the Holy Spirit descended on him in bodily form like a dove. Then a voice came from heaven, saying, “Yoʋ are my beloved Son; in yoʋ I am well pleased.”
Jesus was about thirty years of age when he began his ministry, being the son (so it was thought) of Joseph, the son of Heli,
the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of Janna, the son of Joseph,
the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai,
the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the son of Semei, the son of Joseph, the son of Judah,
the son of Joanan, the son of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, the son of Neri,
the son of Melchi, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmodam, the son of Er,
the son of Jose, the son of Eliezer, the son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi,
the son of Simeon, the son of Judah, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonan, the son of Eliakim,
the son of Melea, the son of Mainan, the son of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David,
the son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of Salmon, the son of Nahshon,
the son of Amminadab, the son of Ram, the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah,
the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor,
the son of Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Eber, the son of Shelah,
the son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech,
the son of Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalaleel, the son of Cainan,
the son of Enosh, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.
Then Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness,
where he was tempted by the devil for forty days. He ate nothing in those days, and afterward, when they had ended, he was hungry.
Then the devil said to him, “If yoʋ are the Son of God, command this stone to become bread.”
But Jesus answered him, “It is written, ‘Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word of God.’ ”
So the devil brought him up to a high mountain and showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.
Then the devil said to him, “To yoʋ I will give all this authority and glory, for it has been delivered to me, and I can give it to anyone I want.
If yoʋ, then, will worship me, it will all be yoʋrs.”
Jesus answered him, “Get behind me, Satan! It is written, ‘Yoʋ shall worship the Lord yoʋr God, and him only shall yoʋ serve.’ ”
Then the devil brought him to Jerusalem, set him on the pinnacle of the temple, and said to him, “If yoʋ are the Son of God, throw yoʋrself down from here,
for it is written, ‘He will command his angels concerning yoʋ, to guard yoʋ,’
and, ‘In their hands they will lift yoʋ up, so that yoʋ do not strike yoʋr foot against a stone.’ ”
Jesus answered him, “It is said, ‘Yoʋ shall not put the Lord yoʋr God to the test.’ ”
And when the devil had finished all these temptations, he left him until an opportune time.
Then Jesus returned to Galilee in the power of the Spirit, and news about him spread throughout the entire surrounding region.
And he was teaching in their synagogues, being praised by all.
When he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, he went into the synagogue on the Sabbath day, as was his custom, and stood up to read.
The scroll of the prophet Isaiah was handed to him, so he unrolled the scroll and found the place where it is written,
“The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach good news to the poor. He has sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to proclaim release to the captives and recovery of sight to the blind, to set free the oppressed,
and to proclaim the year of the Lord's favor.”
Then he rolled up the scroll, gave it back to the attendant, and sat down. The eyes of everyone in the synagogue were fixed upon him,
and he began speaking to them, saying, “Today this Scripture has been fulfilled in your hearing.”
They were all speaking well of him and were amazed at the gracious words coming out of his mouth. They said, “Is this not Joseph's son?”
Then Jesus said to them, “Doubtless you will quote to me this proverb: ‘Physician, heal yoʋrself.’ Do here in yoʋr hometown what we have heard that yoʋ did in Capernaum.”
He also said, “Truly I say to you, no prophet is accepted in his hometown.
But in truth I tell you, there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the sky was shut for three years and six months and a severe famine came over all the land,
yet Elijah was sent to none of them except a widow in Zarephath in the region of Sidon.
There were also many lepers in Israel in the time of the prophet Elisha, yet not one of them was cleansed except Naaman the Syrian.”
When they heard this, all the people in the synagogue were filled with rage.
They rose up, drove him out of town, and brought him to the brow of the hill on which their town was built, to throw him down from the cliff.
But Jesus passed through the crowd and went away.
Then he went down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and on the Sabbath he began teaching the people.
They were astonished at his teaching, because his message was spoken with authority.
Now in the synagogue there was a man who had an unclean demonic spirit, and he cried out with a loud voice,
“Leave us alone! What do yoʋ have to do with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Have yoʋ come to destroy us? I know who yoʋ are—the Holy One of God.”
But Jesus rebuked him, saying, “Be silent and come out of him!” Then the demon threw the man down before them all and came out of him, having done him no harm.
Amazement came over all the people, and they said to one another, “What kind of message is this? For with authority and power he commands the unclean spirits and they come out!”
And news about him went out to every place in the surrounding region.
Then Jesus arose, left the synagogue, and entered Simon's house. Now Simon's mother-in-law was suffering from a high fever, and they asked Jesus to help her.
So he stood over her and rebuked the fever, and it left her. At once she rose and began to serve them.
When the sun was setting, people brought to Jesus those who were sick with various diseases, and he laid his hands on each one of them and healed them.
Demons also came out of many, crying out, “Yoʋ are the Christ, the Son of God.” But he rebuked them and would not allow them to speak, because they knew that he was the Christ.
When daybreak came, Jesus departed and went to a desolate place. The crowds were seeking him, and they came to him and tried to keep him from leaving them.
But Jesus said to them, “I must preach the good news of the kingdom of God to the other towns as well, for that is why I was sent.”
So he continued preaching in the synagogues of Galilee.
On one occasion, Jesus was standing beside the lake of Gennesaret, and the crowd was pressing in on him to listen to the word of God.
He saw two boats moored beside the lake, but the fishermen had gotten out of them and were washing their nets.
He got into one of the boats, the one that was Simon's, and asked him to put out a little way from the shore. Then he sat down and began teaching the crowds from the boat.
When he finished speaking, he said to Simon, “Put out into the deep water and let down your nets for a catch.”
Simon answered him, “Master, we have worked hard throughout the entire night and have caught nothing, but at yoʋr word I will let down the net.”
When he and the men with him did so, they enclosed such a large number of fish that their net began to break.
So they signaled to their partners in the other boat to come and assist them, and they came and filled both the boats, so that they began to sink.
When Simon Peter saw this, he fell down at Jesus' knees and said, “Depart from me, Lord, for I am a sinful man.”
For he and all who were with him were gripped with astonishment at the catch of fish they had taken,
including James and John, the sons of Zebedee, who were Simon's business partners. Then Jesus said to Simon, “Do not be afraid; from now on yoʋ will be catching people.”
So they brought their boats to shore, left everything, and followed Jesus.
While Jesus was in one of the towns, behold, there was a man full of leprosy. When the man saw Jesus, he fell on his face and begged him, “Lord, if yoʋ are willing, yoʋ can make me clean.”
So Jesus stretched out his hand and touched him, saying, “I am willing; be made clean.” Immediately the leprosy left him.
Then Jesus ordered him to tell no one, but said, “Go show yoʋrself to the priest, and make an offering for yoʋr cleansing, just as Moses commanded, as a testimony to them.”
But the news about Jesus spread even more, and large crowds would gather together to hear him and to be healed by him of their infirmities.
But he would often withdraw to desolate places and pray.
On one of those days, as he was teaching, some Pharisees and teachers of the law were sitting there. They had come from every village of Galilee, Judea, and Jerusalem, and the power of the Lord was present to heal the people.
And behold, some men brought on a bed a man who was paralyzed. They were trying to bring him in and place him before Jesus.
But when they could not find a way to bring him in because of the crowd, they went up on the housetop and let him down through the tiles, together with his mat, into the middle of the crowd in front of Jesus.
When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the man, “Man, yoʋr sins are forgiven yoʋ.”
But the scribes and the Pharisees began to question what Jesus said: “Who is this that speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins but God alone?”
Aware of their thoughts, Jesus answered them, “Why are you questioning in your hearts?
Which is easier, to say, ‘Yoʋr sins are forgiven yoʋ,’ or to say, ‘Rise and walk’?
But so that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins”—he said to the paralyzed man—“I say to yoʋ, rise, pick up yoʋr mat, and go to yoʋr house.”
Immediately the man rose up before them, picked up what he had been lying on, and went to his house, glorifying God.
Amazement seized them all, and they too began glorifying God. Filled with awe, they said, “We have seen extraordinary things today.”
After this Jesus went out and saw a tax collector named Levi sitting at the tax booth. Jesus said to him, “Follow me,”
and leaving everything behind, Levi rose and followed him.
Then Levi gave a great banquet for Jesus in his house, and there was a large crowd of tax collectors and others reclining at the table with them.
But the scribes of the people and the Pharisees were grumbling at his disciples, saying, “Why are you eating and drinking with tax collectors and sinners?”
Jesus answered them, “It is not those who are well who need a physician, but those who are sick.
I did not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.”
Then they said to him, “Why is it that the disciples of John often fast and offer prayers, and likewise the disciples of the Pharisees, but yoʋrs eat and drink?”
Jesus said to them, “Can you make the bridegroom's attendants fast while the bridegroom is with them?
But those days are coming, and when the bridegroom is taken away from them, they will fast in those days.”
He also told them a parable: “No one puts a patch from a new garment on an old garment. For not only would he tear the new garment, but the patch from the new garment would not match the old garment.
And no one puts new wine into old wineskins. For the new wine would burst the wineskins and would itself be spilled, and the wineskins would be ruined.
But new wine must be put into new wineskins, and then both are preserved.
And no one after drinking old wine immediately desires new wine, for he says, ‘The old is better.’ ”
On the second major Sabbath, Jesus was going through the grainfields, and his disciples were plucking heads of grain, rubbing off the husks in their hands, and eating them.
But some of the Pharisees said to them, “Why are you doing what is not lawful to do on the Sabbath?”
Jesus answered them, “Have you not read what David did when he was hungry, he and those who were with him,
how he entered the house of God and took and ate the bread of the Presence, which is not lawful for anyone to eat except for the priests, and how he also gave it to those who were with him?”
Then he said to them, “The Son of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath.”
On another Sabbath, Jesus went into the synagogue and was teaching, and a man was there whose right hand was withered.
Now the scribes and the Pharisees were watching Jesus closely to see if he would heal on the Sabbath, so that they could find an accusation against him.
But he knew their thoughts and said to the man with the withered hand, “Rise and stand here.” So he rose and stood there.
Then Jesus said to them, “Let me ask you something: Is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good or to do evil, to save life or to kill?”
And after looking around at them all, he said to the man, “Stretch out yoʋr hand.” The man did so, and his hand was restored, becoming as sound as the other.
But the scribes and Pharisees were filled with mindless rage and discussed with one another what they might do to Jesus.
One day soon afterward Jesus went out to the mountain to pray, and spent the whole night in prayer to God.
When daybreak came, he called his disciples and chose twelve from among them, whom he also named apostles:
Simon (whom he also named Peter) and Andrew his brother, James and John, Philip and Bartholomew,
Matthew and Thomas, James the son of Alphaeus, and Simon (who was called the Zealot),
Judas the son of James, and Judas Iscariot (who became a traitor).
Then Jesus came down with them and stood on a level place. A crowd of his disciples was there along with a great multitude of people from all Judea, Jerusalem, and the coastal region of Tyre and Sidon (who had come to hear him and to be healed of their diseases),
as well as people who were harassed by unclean spirits. And they were healed.
The entire crowd was trying to touch him, because power was coming out from him and healing them all.
Then he looked up at his disciples and said, “Blessed are you who are poor, for yours is the kingdom of God.
Blessed are you who hunger now, for you will be filled. Blessed are you who weep now, for you will laugh.
Blessed are you when others hate you, when they exclude you, reproach you, and spurn your name as evil on account of the Son of Man.
Rejoice in that day and leap for joy, for behold, great is your reward in heaven, for their fathers treated the prophets in the same way.
But woe to you who are rich, for you have received your comfort.
Woe to you who are filled, for you will hunger. Woe to you who laugh now, for you will mourn and weep.
Woe to you when others speak well of you, for their fathers treated the false prophets in the same way.
“But I say to you who are listening, love your enemies, do good to those who hate you,
bless those who curse you, and pray for those who mistreat you.
If anyone strikes yoʋ on one cheek, offer him the other also. If anyone takes away yoʋr cloak, do not withhold yoʋr tunic from him either.
Give to everyone who asks of yoʋ, and if anyone takes away yoʋr belongings, do not demand them back.
As you wish that others would do to you, do the same also to them.
If you love those who love you, what benefit is that to you? For even sinners love those who love them.
And if you do good to those who do good to you, what benefit is that to you? For even sinners do the same.
And if you lend to those from whom you expect to receive something back, what benefit is that to you? For even sinners lend to other sinners in order to receive back the same amount.
But love your enemies, do good to them, and lend to them without expecting anything in return. Then your reward will be great, and you will be sons of the Most High, for he is kind to the ungrateful and the evil.
Therefore be merciful, just as your Father is merciful.
“Do not judge, and you will certainly not be judged. Do not condemn, and you will certainly not be condemned. Forgive, and you will be forgiven.
Give, and it will be given to you. A good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over, will be put into your lap. For with the same measure you use it will be measured to you in return.”
He also told them a parable: “Can one blind person guide another? Will they not both fall into a pit?
A disciple is not above his teacher, but everyone who is fully trained will be like his teacher.
Why do yoʋ see the speck in yoʋr brother's eye, but do not consider the beam in yoʋr own eye?
Or how can yoʋ say to yoʋr brother, ‘Brother, let me take the speck out of yoʋr eye,’ when yoʋ yoʋrself do not see the beam in yoʋr own eye? Hypocrite! First take the beam out of yoʋr own eye, and then yoʋ will see clearly to take the speck out of yoʋr brother's eye.
“No good tree produces bad fruit, nor does a bad tree produce good fruit.
Each tree is known by its own fruit. People do not gather figs from thorns, nor do they pick grapes from a bramble bush.
The good person brings good things out of the good treasure of his heart, and the evil person brings evil things out of the evil treasure of his heart, for out of the abundance of his heart his mouth speaks.
“Why do you call me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ and not do what I say?
I will show you what someone is like who comes to me, hears my words, and acts on them.
He is like a man building a house, who dug deep and laid a foundation on the rock. When a flood came, the river burst against that house but could not shake it, for it was founded on the rock.
But he who hears my words and does not act accordingly is like a man who built a house on the ground without a foundation. As soon as the river burst against that house, it fell and was utterly destroyed.”
When Jesus had finished saying all this in the hearing of the people, he entered Capernaum.
There a centurion's servant, who was highly regarded by his master, was sick and about to die.
The centurion heard about Jesus and sent some Jewish elders to him, asking him to come and heal his servant.
When they came to Jesus, they earnestly pleaded with him, saying, “This man is worthy to have yoʋ do this for him,
for he loves our nation and built our synagogue for us.”
So Jesus went with them. When he was not far from the house, the centurion sent friends to say to him, “Lord, do not trouble yoʋrself, for I am not worthy to have yoʋ enter under my roof;
therefore I did not even consider myself worthy to come to yoʋ. But just say the word, and my servant will be healed.
For I too am a man set under authority, with soldiers under me. I say to this one, ‘Go,’ and he goes; and to another, ‘Come,’ and he comes; and to my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.”
When Jesus heard this, he was amazed at the centurion. And turning to the crowd that was following him, he said, “I tell you, not even in Israel have I found such great faith.”
Then the men the centurion had sent returned to the house and found that the servant who had been sick was well.
Soon afterward Jesus went to a town called Nain, and many of his disciples went with him, along with a large crowd.
As he drew near to the gate of the town, behold, a man who had died was being carried out, the one and only son of his mother (who was a widow). And a large crowd from the town was with her.
When the Lord saw her, he was moved with compassion for her and said to her, “Do not weep.”
Then he came up and touched the bier, and those who were carrying it stood still. He said, “Young man, I say to yoʋ, arise!”
So the dead man sat up and began to speak, and Jesus gave him back to his mother.
Then all the people were filled with awe and began glorifying God, saying, “A great prophet has arisen among us,” and, “God has visited his people.”
This news about Jesus then spread throughout Judea and all the surrounding region.
John's disciples told him about all these things.
So John called two of his disciples and sent them to ask Jesus, “Are yoʋ the one who is to come, or should we wait for another?”
When the men came to him, they said, “John the Baptist has sent us to yoʋ to ask, ‘Are yoʋ the one who is to come, or should we wait for another?’ ”
Now in that very hour Jesus had healed many people of diseases, afflictions, and evil spirits, and had given sight to many who were blind.
So Jesus replied to John's disciples, “Go tell John what you have seen and heard: The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, lepers are made clean, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the poor have good news preached to them.
And blessed is anyone who does not take offense at me.”
When John's messengers had gone away, Jesus began to speak to the crowds about John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind?
What then did you go out to see? A man clothed in soft garments? Behold, those who are dressed in splendid clothing and who live in luxury are in royal palaces.
But what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet.
This is the one of whom it is written, ‘Behold, I am sending my messenger ahead of yoʋ, who will prepare yoʋr way before yoʋ.’
For I tell you, among those born of women there is no prophet greater than John the Baptist, but whoever is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.”
(When all the people heard this, including the tax collectors, they affirmed that God's way was right, because they had been baptized with the baptism of John.
But the Pharisees and the lawyers rejected the will of God for themselves, because they had not been baptized by John.)
Jesus went on to say, “To what then should I compare the people of this generation, and what are they like?
They are like children who sit in the marketplace and call out to one another, ‘We played the flute for you, but you did not dance; we sang a lament for you, but you did not weep.’
For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say, ‘He has a demon.’
The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and you say, ‘Behold, a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’
Yet wisdom is vindicated by all her children.”
One of the Pharisees asked Jesus to eat with him, so he went into the Pharisee's house and reclined at the table.
And behold, when a woman in that city who was a sinner found out that Jesus was reclining at the table in the Pharisee's house, she brought an alabaster jar of ointment.
As she stood behind him at his feet, weeping, she began to wet his feet with her tears. Then she wiped them with the hair of her head, kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment.
When the Pharisee who had invited him saw it, he said to himself, “If this man were a prophet, he would know who is touching him and what kind of woman she is—that she is a sinner.”
Jesus said to him in response, “Simon, I have something to say to yoʋ.” So he said, “Say it, Teacher.”
“A certain moneylender had two debtors. The one owed him five hundred denarii, and the other owed him fifty.
When they did not have the means to repay, he forgave the debts of them both. So tell me, which of them will love him more?”
Simon answered, “I suppose that it would be the one for whom he forgave the larger debt.” Jesus said to him, “Yoʋ have judged correctly.”
Then he turned toward the woman and said to Simon, “Do yoʋ see this woman? When I came into yoʋr house, yoʋ did not give me water for my feet, but this woman has wet my feet with her tears and wiped them with the hair of her head.
Yoʋ did not give me a kiss, but from the time I came in, this woman has not stopped kissing my feet.
Yoʋ did not anoint my head with oil, but this woman has anointed my feet with ointment.
Therefore I tell yoʋ, her many sins are forgiven; that is why she has shown great love. But he to whom little is forgiven shows little love.”
Then Jesus said to her, “Yoʋr sins are forgiven.”
Those who were reclining at the table with him began to say among themselves, “Who is this man that even forgives sins?”
And Jesus said to the woman, “Yoʋr faith has saved yoʋ; go in peace.”
Soon afterward Jesus was going through every city and village, preaching and proclaiming the good news of the kingdom of God. The twelve were with him,
as well as some women who had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities: Mary (called Magdalene) from whom seven demons had gone out,
Joanna the wife of Chuza (Herod's steward), Susanna, and many others. These women provided for Jesus and his disciples out of their own resources.
As a large crowd was gathering and people were coming to Jesus from town after town, he said in a parable:
“A sower went out to sow his seed. As he sowed, some seed fell along the path and was trampled underfoot, and the birds of the sky devoured it.
Other seed fell on rock, and as it grew up, it withered away because it had no moisture.
Other seed fell among the thorns, and the thorns grew up with it and choked it.
But other seed fell into good soil, and when it grew, it produced a hundred times more than what was sown.” As he said this, he called out, “He who has ears to hear, let him hear.”
Then his disciples asked him, “What does this parable mean?”
He said, “To you it has been given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God, but to the rest I speak in parables, so that ‘they may see but not perceive, and hear but not understand.’
“Now this is the meaning of the parable: The seed is the word of God.
The ones along the path are those who hear; then the devil comes and takes away the word from their heart, so that they may not believe and be saved.
The ones on the rock are those who, when they hear the word, receive it with joy. Yet they have no root; they believe for a while, but in a time of testing they fall away.
The seed that fell among the thorns are those who have heard, but as they go on their way they are choked by the cares, riches, and pleasures of this life, and their fruit does not mature.
But the seed in the good soil are those who hear the word, hold fast to it with an honest and good heart, and bear fruit with patient endurance.
“No one lights a lamp and covers it with a container or puts it under a bed. Instead, it is put on a lampstand, so that those who come in can see its light.
For nothing is hidden that will not be made manifest, nor is anything hidden away that will not be made known and come to light.
Therefore consider how you hear, for whoever has will be given more, but whoever does not have, even what he thinks he has will be taken away from him.”
Then Jesus' mother and brothers came to him, but they were not able to reach him because of the crowd.
So some people told him, “Yoʋr mother and yoʋr brothers are standing outside, wanting to see yoʋ.”
But he answered them, “My mother and my brothers are those who hear the word of God and obey it.”
One day Jesus got into a boat with his disciples and said to them, “Let us cross over to the other side of the lake.” So they set out,
and as they were sailing along, he fell asleep. Then a windstorm came down on the lake, and they were in danger as the boat was being swamped by the waves.
So they came to Jesus and woke him up, saying, “Master, Master, we are perishing!” Then he rose and rebuked the wind and the raging water. They ceased, and all was calm.
Then he said to his disciples, “Where is your faith?” But they were afraid and amazed, saying to one another, “Who then is this, that he commands even the winds and the water, and they obey him?”
Then they sailed to the region of the Gadarenes, which is across the lake from Galilee.
When Jesus stepped ashore, he was met by a man from the city who had been possessed by demons for a long time. This man did not wear clothes or live in a house but among the tombs.
When he saw Jesus, he cried out, fell down before him, and said with a loud voice, “What do yoʋ have to do with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I beg yoʋ, do not torment me.”
For Jesus had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man. Many times it had seized him, and he would be bound with chains and shackles and kept under guard, but he would break the chains and be driven by the demon into desolate places.
Jesus then asked him, “What is yoʋr name?” He said, “Legion,” for many demons had entered him.
And he begged Jesus not to command them to go away into the abyss.
Now there was a herd of many pigs feeding there on the mountain. The demons begged Jesus to permit them to enter the pigs. So he gave them permission.
Then the demons came out of the man and went into the pigs, and the herd rushed down the steep bank into the lake and were drowned.
When those who had been feeding the pigs saw what happened, they ran off and reported it in the city and in the countryside.
So the people came out to see what had happened. When they came to Jesus, they found the man from whom the demons had gone out sitting at Jesus' feet, clothed and in his right mind, and they were afraid.
Those who had seen it told them how the demon-possessed man had been delivered.
Then the entire multitude from the surrounding region of the Gadarenes asked Jesus to depart from them, for they were seized with great fear. So he got into the boat and left.
Now the man from whom the demons had gone out begged to go with him. But Jesus sent him away, saying,
“Return to yoʋr house, and declare all that God has done for yoʋ.” So the man went away, proclaiming throughout the entire city all that Jesus had done for him.
Now when Jesus returned, the crowd welcomed him, for they had all been waiting for him.
And behold, there came a man named Jairus, who was a ruler of the synagogue. He fell down at Jesus' feet and begged him to come to his house,
because he had an only daughter, about twelve years old, and she was dying. As Jesus went on his way, the crowds were pressing in on him.
Now there was a woman who had suffered from a flow of blood for twelve years, and even though she had spent her entire livelihood on physicians, she could not be healed by anyone.
She came up behind Jesus and touched the fringe of his garment, and the flow of her blood stopped at once.
Then Jesus said, “Who touched me?” When everyone denied it, Peter and those who were with him said, “Master, the crowds are surrounding yoʋ and pressing against yoʋ, and yet yoʋ say, ‘Who touched me?’ ”
But Jesus said, “Someone touched me, for I know that power has gone out from me.”
When the woman saw that she could not escape notice, she came trembling and fell down before him, and in the presence of all the people she told him the reason why she had touched him, and how she had been healed at once.
Then Jesus said to her, “Take courage, daughter; yoʋr faith has healed yoʋ. Go in peace.”
While he was still speaking, someone came from the ruler of the synagogue's house and said to him, “Yoʋr daughter has died; do not trouble the teacher.”
But when Jesus heard this, he said to him in response, “Do not be afraid; just believe, and she will be healed.”
When he came to the house, Jesus allowed no one to go in, except Peter, John, James, and the child's father and mother.
Meanwhile, all the people were weeping and mourning for her, but Jesus said, “Do not weep; she is not dead but sleeping.”
And they began laughing at him, knowing that she was dead.
But Jesus put them all outside, took hold of the girl's hand, and called out, “Child, arise!”
Her spirit returned, and she got up at once. Then he told them to give her something to eat.
Her parents were amazed, but he ordered them not to tell anyone what had happened.
Then Jesus called the twelve together and gave them power and authority over all demons and to heal diseases,
and he sent them to proclaim the kingdom of God and to heal the sick.
He said to them, “Take nothing for your journey—no staffs, no knapsack, no bread, no money—and bring only one tunic each.
Whatever house you enter, stay there until you leave that place.
If any will not receive you, shake off the very dust from your feet as you leave that town, as a testimony against them.”
So they set out and went throughout the villages, preaching the gospel and healing people everywhere.
Now Herod the tetrarch heard about everything that Jesus was doing, and he was greatly perplexed, because some were saying that John had been raised from the dead,
others were saying that Elijah had appeared, and others were saying that one of the ancient prophets had risen.
But Herod said, “John I beheaded; who then is this man about whom I hear such things?” So he was looking for an opportunity to see him.
When the apostles returned, they told Jesus about all they had done. Then he took them and withdrew privately to a desolate place belonging to a town called Bethsaida.
But when the crowds found out about it, they followed him. So he welcomed them and spoke to them about the kingdom of God, and cured those who had need of healing.
As the day began to draw to a close, the twelve came up and said to Jesus, “Send the crowd away so that they can go into the surrounding villages and countryside and find lodging and provisions, for we are in a desolate place here.”
But he said to them, “You give them something to eat.” They said, “We have only five loaves and two fish—unless we are to go and buy food for this entire group of people.”
(For there were about five thousand men.) Then he said to his disciples, “Have them sit down in groups of fifty each.”
The disciples did so, and had everyone sit down.
Then Jesus took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven, he said a blessing over them. Then he broke the loaves and fish into pieces and gave them to the disciples to set before the crowd.
They all ate and were filled, and what was left over was picked up, twelve baskets of broken pieces.
Once when Jesus was praying in private and the disciples were with him, he asked them, “Who do the crowds say that I am?”
They answered, “Some say John the Baptist, others say Elijah, and others say that one of the ancient prophets has risen.”
Then he said to them, “But who do you say that I am?” Peter answered, “The Christ of God.”
Jesus then warned them and instructed them to tell this to no one,
saying, “The Son of Man must suffer many things and be rejected by the elders, chief priests, and scribes, and he must be killed and on the third day rise again.”
Then he said to them all, “If anyone wants to be one of my disciples, he must deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me.
For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake will save it.
For what does it benefit a person if he gains the whole world but loses or forfeits himself?
If anyone is ashamed of me and my words, the Son of Man will be ashamed of him when he comes in his glory and the glory of the Father and the holy angels.
But truly I say to you, there are some standing here who will certainly not taste death until they see the kingdom of God.”
About eight days after he had spoken these words, he took Peter, John, and James, and went up on a mountain to pray.
As he was praying, the appearance of his face was altered, and his clothing became dazzling white.
And behold, two men were talking with him; they were Moses and Elijah,
who appeared in glory and were speaking about his departure, which he was about to bring to fulfillment in Jerusalem.
Now Peter and those who were with him were heavy with sleep, but when they became fully awake, they saw his glory and the two men standing with him.
As the men were parting from Jesus, Peter said to him, “Master, it is good for us to be here. Let us make three shelters, one for yoʋ, one for Moses, and one for Elijah,” not knowing what he was saying.
But as he was saying this, a cloud came and overshadowed them, and they were afraid as they entered the cloud.
Then a voice came from the cloud, saying, “This is my beloved Son; listen to him!”
When the voice finished speaking, they found that Jesus was alone. And the disciples kept silent, not telling anyone in those days about any of the things they had seen.
On the next day, when they came down from the mountain, Jesus was met by a large crowd.
And behold, a man from among the crowd cried out, “Teacher, I beg yoʋ to look at my son, for he is my one and only child.
A spirit seizes him, and he suddenly cries out; it convulses him so that he foams at the mouth. It hardly ever leaves him alone, bruising him severely.
I begged yoʋr disciples to cast it out, but they could not.”
Jesus answered, “O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you and bear with you? Bring yoʋr son here.”
Now as the boy was approaching, the demon threw him down and shook him with convulsions. But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, healed the boy, and gave him back to his father.
And they were all astonished at the majesty of God. But while everyone was marveling at all that Jesus had done, he said to his disciples,
“Let these words sink into your ears: The Son of Man is about to be delivered up into the hands of men.”
But they did not understand what this meant. It was concealed from them, so that they could not grasp it, and they were afraid to ask him about it.
Now an argument arose among the disciples as to which of them was greater.
But Jesus, perceiving the thoughts of their hearts, took a child and placed him by his side.
Then he said to them, “Whoever receives this child in my name receives me, and whoever receives me receives him who sent me. For he who is least among you all is the one who will be great.”
John responded, “Master, we saw someone casting out demons in yoʋr name, and we told him to stop because he does not follow us.”
But Jesus said to him, “Do not stop him, for whoever is not against us is for us.”
Now when the days were approaching for Jesus' ascension, he set his face to go to Jerusalem.
He sent messengers on ahead, who went and entered a village of the Samaritans to make preparations for him.
But the people there refused to welcome him, because his face was set to go to Jerusalem.
When his disciples James and John saw this, they said, “Lord, do yoʋ want us to command fire to come down from heaven and consume them, just like Elijah did?”
But he turned and rebuked them, saying, “You do not know what kind of spirit you belong to.
For the Son of Man did not come to destroy people's lives but to save them.” And they went on to another village.
As they were going along the road, someone said to him, “I will follow yoʋ wherever yoʋ go, Lord.”
Jesus said to him, “Foxes have holes, and the birds of the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head.”
Then Jesus said to another man, “Follow me.” But the man said, “Lord, let me first go and bury my father.”
Jesus said to him, “Let the dead bury their own dead. But yoʋ go and proclaim the kingdom of God.”
Still another said, “I will follow yoʋ, Lord, but first let me say goodbye to my family.”
But Jesus said to him, “No one who puts his hand to the plow and looks back is fit for the kingdom of God.”
After this, the Lord appointed seventy others and sent them on ahead, two by two, to every town and place where he himself was about to go.
He said to them, “The harvest is plentiful, but the workers are few. Therefore ask the Lord of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.
Now go on your way. Behold, I am sending you out like lambs in the midst of wolves.
Carry no moneybag, no knapsack, and no sandals; and do not greet anyone on the road.
Whenever you enter a house, first say, ‘May peace be upon this house!’
If there is a man of peace there, your peace will rest upon him. But if not, it will return to you.
Remain in the same house, eating and drinking whatever they provide, for the worker is worthy of his wages. Do not go from house to house.
Whenever you enter a town and they receive you, eat what is set before you.
Heal the sick in that city and say to them, ‘The kingdom of God has drawn near to you.’
But whenever you enter a town and they do not receive you, go out into its streets and say,
‘Even the dust that clings to us from your town we wipe off against you. Yet know this: The kingdom of God has drawn near to you.’
I tell you, on that day it will be more tolerable for Sodom than for that town.
“Woe to yoʋ, Chorazin! Woe to yoʋ, Bethsaida! For if the miracles that were done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
But it will be more tolerable at the judgment for Tyre and Sidon than for you.
And yoʋ, Capernaum, who have been exalted to heaven, will be brought down to Hades.
“He who listens to you listens to me; he who rejects you rejects me, and he who rejects me rejects him who sent me.”
When the seventy returned, they were joyful and said, “Lord, even the demons submit to us in yoʋr name.”
He said to them, “I watched Satan fall from heaven like lightning.
Behold, I am giving you authority to tread on serpents and scorpions, and to overcome all the power of the enemy, and nothing at all will harm you.
Nevertheless, do not rejoice that the spirits submit to you, but rejoice that your names are written in heaven.”
At that same hour Jesus rejoiced in the Spirit and said, “I praise yoʋ, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because yoʋ have hidden these things from the wise and intelligent, and revealed them to infants. Yes, Father, for so it was well-pleasing in yoʋr sight.”
Then he turned to the disciples and said, “All things have been delivered to me by my Father. No one knows who the Son is except the Father, and no one knows who the Father is except the Son, and anyone to whom the Son chooses to reveal him.”
Then he turned to the disciples and said privately, “Blessed are the eyes that see what you see!
For I tell you that many prophets and kings wished to see the things you see but did not see them, and to hear the things you hear but did not hear them.”
And behold, a lawyer stood up to test Jesus, saying, “Teacher, what must I do to inherit eternal life?”
Jesus said to him, “What is written in the law? How do yoʋ read it?”
He answered, “Yoʋ shall love the Lord yoʋr God with all yoʋr heart, with all yoʋr soul, with all yoʋr strength, and with all yoʋr mind; and yoʋ shall love yoʋr neighbor as yoʋrself.”
Jesus said to him, “Yoʋ have answered correctly; do this and yoʋ will live.”
But wishing to justify himself, he said to Jesus, “And who is my neighbor?”
Jesus replied, “A man was going down to Jericho from Jerusalem and fell into the hands of robbers. They stripped him, beat him, and went away, leaving him as he was, half dead.
Now a priest happened to be going down that road, but when he saw the man, he passed by on the other side.
In the same way, a Levite, when he came to that place and saw him, passed by on the other side.
But a Samaritan, who was on a journey, came to where the man was, and when he saw him, he was moved with compassion.
He went over to him and bandaged his wounds, pouring oil and wine on them. Then he put him on his own animal, brought him to an inn, and took care of him.
On the next day, when he was departing, he took out two denarii, gave them to the innkeeper, and said to him, ‘Take care of him, and whatever more yoʋ spend I will repay to yoʋ when I return.’
Now which of these three do yoʋ think was a neighbor to the man who fell into the hands of robbers?”
The lawyer said, “The one who showed him mercy.” Jesus said to him, “Go and do likewise.”
As Jesus and his disciples went along, he entered a village, and a woman named Martha welcomed him into her home.
She had a sister named Mary, who sat at Jesus' feet and listened to what he was saying.
But Martha was distracted by the many preparations that had to be made. So she came up to Jesus and said, “Lord, do yoʋ not care that my sister has left me to make all the preparations by myself? Tell her then to assist me.”
But Jesus answered her, “Martha, Martha, yoʋ are anxious and troubled about many things,
but only one thing is necessary. Mary has chosen the good portion, and it will not be taken away from her.”
One day Jesus was praying in a certain place, and when he finished, one of his disciples said to him, “Lord, teach us to pray, just as John taught his disciples.”
So he said to them, “When you pray, say, ‘Our Father in heaven, hallowed be yoʋr name. Yoʋr kingdom come. Yoʋr will be done, on earth as it is in heaven.
Give us each day our daily bread.
And forgive us our sins, for we also forgive everyone who is indebted to us. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.’ ”
Then he said to them, “Suppose one of you has a friend, and yoʋ go to him at midnight and say to him, ‘Friend, lend me three loaves,
for a friend on a journey has come to me, and I have nothing to set before him,’
and he answers from inside and says, ‘Do not bother me! The door is already shut, and my children are with me in bed. I cannot get up to give yoʋ anything.’
I tell you, even if he will not get up and give yoʋ anything because yoʋ are his friend, yet because of yoʋr shameless persistence, he will get up and give yoʋ as much as yoʋ need.
So I tell you: Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and the door will be opened for you.
For everyone who asks receives; and he who seeks finds; and for him who knocks, the door will be opened.
Now what father among you, when his son asks for bread, will give him a stone; or again, when he asks for a fish, will give him a serpent instead of a fish;
or again, if he asks for an egg, will give him a scorpion?
If you then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him!”
Now Jesus was casting out a demon that made a certain man mute. When the demon came out, the mute man began to speak, and the crowds were amazed.
But some of them said, “By Beelzebul, the ruler of demons, he casts out demons.”
Others were asking him for a sign from heaven, to test him.
Knowing their thoughts, Jesus said to them, “Every kingdom divided against itself is laid waste, and a house divided against itself falls.
So if Satan is also divided against himself, how will his kingdom stand? For you say that I cast out demons by Beelzebul.
Now if I cast out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your followers cast them out? Therefore they will be your judges.
But if I cast out demons by the finger of God, then the kingdom of God has come upon you.
When a strong man, fully armed, guards his own palace, his possessions are secure.
But when a stronger man attacks and overpowers him, he takes away all the armor in which the man trusted and then distributes the plunder.
Whoever is not with me is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters.
“When an unclean spirit has gone out of a person, it goes through waterless places seeking rest. But when it does not find any, it says, ‘I will return to the house I left.’
When it arrives, it finds the house swept and put in order.
Then it goes and takes along seven other spirits more evil than itself, and they go and dwell there, and the last state of that person becomes worse than the first.”
As Jesus was saying these things, a woman from among the crowd lifted up her voice and said to him, “Blessed is the womb that bore yoʋ, and the breasts at which yoʋ nursed.”
But he said, “Blessed rather are those who hear the word of God and obey it.”
Now as the crowds were increasing, Jesus began to say, “This generation is evil. It asks for a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of the prophet Jonah.
For just as Jonah became a sign to the people of Nineveh, so also will the Son of Man be to this generation.
The queen of the South will rise up at the judgment with the men of this generation and condemn them, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, something greater than Solomon is here.
The men of Nineveh will rise up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, for they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold, something greater than Jonah is here.
“No one lights a lamp and puts it in a hidden place or under a basket. Instead, it is put on a lampstand, so that those who come in can see its light.
The lamp of the body is the eye. So when yoʋr eye is clear, yoʋr whole body is full of light. But when yoʋr eye is bad, yoʋr body is full of darkness.
Therefore make sure that the light within yoʋ is not darkness.
If then yoʋr whole body is full of light, having no part dark, it will be entirely light, like when a lamp gives yoʋ light with its rays.”
As Jesus was speaking, a Pharisee invited him to have a meal with him, so Jesus went in and reclined at the table.
The Pharisee was amazed when he saw that Jesus did not first perform the ritual washing before the meal.
So the Lord said to him, “You Pharisees clean the outside of the cup and the platter, but inside you are filled with thoughts of robbery and wickedness.
You fools! Did not he who made the outside also make the inside?
But give as alms the things that are on the inside, and behold, everything will be clean for you.
“But woe to you, Pharisees! For you tithe mint, rue, and every herb, yet you ignore justice and the love of God. These you ought to have practiced without neglecting the other things.
Woe to you, Pharisees! For you love the best seats in the synagogues and greetings in the marketplaces.
Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you are like unmarked graves, which people walk over without realizing it.”
In response one of the lawyers said to him, “Teacher, by saying these things, yoʋ insult us as well.”
But Jesus said, “Woe also to you lawyers! For you burden people with burdens that are hard to bear, but you yourselves do not touch the burdens with even one of your fingers.
Woe to you! For you build the tombs of the prophets, but it was your fathers who killed them.
So you bear witness to and approve of the works of your fathers; for they killed the prophets, and you build their tombs.
That is why the wisdom of God said, ‘I will send them prophets and apostles, some of whom they will kill and some of whom they will persecute.’
As a result, this generation will be held accountable for the blood of all the prophets that has been shed from the foundation of the world,
from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zechariah, who perished between the altar and the house of God. Yes, I tell you, this generation will be held accountable.
Woe to you lawyers! For you have taken away the key of knowledge. You yourselves have not entered, and you have hindered those who were trying to enter.”
As he was saying these things to them, the scribes and the Pharisees began to oppose him fiercely and to question him closely about many things,
lying in wait for him and seeking to catch him in some word coming out of his mouth, so that they might accuse him.
Meanwhile, when the crowd had gathered together by the thousands, so that they were trampling on one another, Jesus began to speak first to his disciples: “Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
There is nothing covered up that will not be revealed, and nothing hidden that will not be made known.
Therefore whatever you have said in the darkness will be heard in the light, and what you have whispered in anyone's ear in private rooms will be proclaimed on the housetops.
“I tell you, my friends, do not be afraid of those who kill the body, and after that have nothing more they can do.
But I will tell you whom you should fear: Fear him who has authority to throw you into hell after your body has been killed. Yes, I tell you, fear him!
Are not five sparrows sold for two pennies? Yet not one of them is forgotten in the sight of God.
Indeed, even the hairs of your head are all numbered. So do not be afraid; you are of more value than many sparrows.
“I tell you, everyone who acknowledges me before men, the Son of Man will also acknowledge before the angels of God,
but whoever denies me before men will be denied before the angels of God.
And everyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven.
When you are brought before synagogues, rulers, and authorities, do not be anxious about how or what you should speak in your own defense, or what you should say,
for the Holy Spirit will teach you in that very hour what you should say.”
Then someone from among the crowd said to him, “Teacher, tell my brother to divide the family inheritance with me.”
But Jesus said to him, “Man, who appointed me as a judge or arbitrator over you?”
Then he said to them, “Watch out and be on your guard against covetousness, for one's life does not consist in the abundance of his possessions.”
And he told them a parable: “The land of a certain rich man produced abundantly.
So he thought to himself, ‘What should I do, for I do not have anywhere to store my crops?’
Then he said, ‘This is what I will do: I will tear down my barns and build larger ones, and there I will store all my produce and my goods.
And I will say to my soul, “Soul, yoʋ have many goods laid up for many years; relax, eat, drink, and be merry.” ’
But God said to him, ‘Yoʋ fool! This very night yoʋr life will be demanded back from yoʋ, and the things yoʋ have prepared, whose will they be?’
This is how it will be with anyone who lays up treasure for himself and is not rich toward God.”
Then Jesus said to his disciples, “Therefore I tell you, do not be anxious about your life, what you will eat, or about your body, what you will wear.
Life is more than food, and the body is more than clothing.
Consider the ravens: They do not sow or reap; they have no storehouse or barn, yet God feeds them. Of how much more value are you than birds?
Which of you by being anxious can add a single moment to yoʋr span of life?
If then you cannot even do a very little thing like that, why are you anxious about the rest?
Consider the lilies, how they grow: They do not toil or spin, yet I tell you, not even Solomon in all his glory was clothed like one of these.
Now if God so clothes the grass in the field, which is alive today and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, how much more will he clothe you, O you of little faith?
And do not be concerned about what you will eat or what you will drink; do not be anxious about such things.
For the nations of the world seek after all these things, and your Father knows that you need them.
Rather, seek the kingdom of God, and all these things will be added to you.
Do not be afraid, little flock, for your Father is pleased to give you the kingdom.
Sell your possessions and give to the needy. Make yourselves moneybags that do not wear out, an inexhaustible treasure in heaven, where no thief comes near and no moth destroys.
For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
“Be dressed for service and keep your lamps burning,
like men who are waiting for their master to return from a wedding feast, so that they can immediately open the door for him when he comes and knocks.
Blessed are those servants whom their master finds keeping watch when he comes. Truly I say to you, he will dress himself for service and have them recline at the table, and he will come and serve them.
If he comes in the second watch or the third watch and finds them doing so, blessed are those servants.
But know this: If the master of the house had known at what hour the thief was coming, he would have kept watch and would not have let his house be broken into.
Therefore you also must be ready, for the Son of Man is coming at an hour when you do not expect him.”
Then Peter said to him, “Lord, are yoʋ telling this parable only for us, or for everyone else as well?”
The Lord said, “Who then is the faithful and wise steward, whom his master will set over his household, to give them their portion of food at the proper time?
Blessed is that servant whom his master finds doing so when he comes.
Truly I say to you, he will set him over all his possessions.
But if that servant says in his heart, ‘My master is delayed in coming,’ and he begins to beat the male and female servants, and to eat and drink and get drunk,
the master of that servant will come on a day when he does not expect him and at an hour he does not foresee, and will cut him in two and assign his portion to be with the unfaithful.
That servant who knew his master's will, but did not prepare himself or act according to his will, will be beaten with many lashes.
But the one who did not know his master's will, yet did what deserved a beating, will be beaten with few lashes. From everyone to whom much has been given, much will be required; and from him to whom much has been entrusted, even more will be demanded.
“I have come to bring fire to the earth, and how I wish it were already kindled!
But I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how consumed I am with it until it is completed!
Do you think I have come to grant peace on earth? No, I tell you, but division.
For from now on five in one household will be divided, three against two and two against three.
Father will be divided against son and son against father, mother against daughter and daughter against mother, mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law and daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.”
Jesus also said to the crowds, “When you see a cloud rising from the west, you immediately say, ‘A rainstorm is coming,’ and that is what happens.
And when you see the south wind blowing, you say, ‘There will be scorching heat,’ and it happens.
Hypocrites! You know how to interpret the appearance of the earth and the sky, so why can you not interpret this present time?
“Why do you not judge for yourselves what is right?
As yoʋ are going with yoʋr adversary before the magistrate, make an effort to settle with him on the way, lest he drag yoʋ to the judge, and the judge hand yoʋ over to the officer, and the officer throw yoʋ into prison.
I tell yoʋ, yoʋ will certainly not come out of there until yoʋ have paid the very last cent.”
Now there were some present at that very time who told Jesus about the Galileans whose blood Pilate had mixed with their sacrifices.
Jesus responded to them, “Do you think that those Galileans were worse sinners than all the other Galileans because they suffered such things?
No, I tell you, but if you do not repent, you will all likewise perish.
Or those eighteen who were killed when the tower in Siloam fell on them, do you think they were worse offenders than all the other people who dwell in Jerusalem?
No, I tell you, but if you do not repent, you will all likewise perish.”
Then he told this parable: “A man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard, and he came looking for fruit on it but did not find any.
So he said to the vinedresser, ‘Behold, for three years I have come looking for fruit on this fig tree and have not found any. Cut it down! Why should it use up the soil?’
But the vinedresser said to him in response, ‘Sir, allow it to remain for this year also, and I will dig around it and put manure on it.
If it bears fruit, fine; but if not, yoʋ can cut it down in the coming year.’ ”
One Sabbath Jesus was teaching in one of the synagogues.
And behold, there was a woman who had suffered from a spirit of disability for eighteen years. She was bent over and could not stand up completely straight.
When Jesus saw her, he called her over and said to her, “Woman, yoʋ are set free from yoʋr disability.”
Then he laid his hands on her, and at once her back was made straight, and she began glorifying God.
But the ruler of the synagogue, indignant because Jesus had healed on the Sabbath, said to the crowd in response, “There are six days in which work should be done; so come and be healed on those days and not on the Sabbath day.”
Then the Lord said to him in response, “Hypocrites! Do not each of you on the Sabbath untie yoʋr ox or donkey from the manger, lead it away, and give it water?
Then should not this woman, a daughter of Abraham whom Satan has bound for eighteen long years, be released from this bondage on the Sabbath day?”
When he said this, all his adversaries were put to shame, and the entire crowd was rejoicing over all the glorious things he was doing.
Then Jesus said, “What is the kingdom of God like? To what should I compare it?
It is like a grain of mustard seed that a man took and sowed in his garden. It grew and became a large tree, and the birds of the sky nested in its branches.”
Again he said, “To what should I compare the kingdom of God?
It is like leaven that a woman took and mixed into three measures of flour until it had all been leavened.”
Then Jesus traveled through towns and villages, teaching and making his way to Jerusalem.
Someone said to him, “Lord, will only a few be saved?” Jesus said to them,
“Strive to enter through the narrow gate. For many, I tell you, will seek to enter and will not be able to.
Once the master of the house gets up and shuts the door, you will begin to stand outside and knock at the door, saying, ‘Lord, Lord, open the door for us.’ But he will answer you, ‘I do not know you or where you are from.’
Then you will begin to say, ‘We ate and drank in yoʋr presence, and yoʋ taught in our streets.’
But he will say, ‘I tell you, I do not know you or where you are from. Depart from me, all you workers of unrighteousness.’
In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when you see Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, but you yourselves cast out.
People will come from east and west, and from north and south, and recline at the banquet table in the kingdom of God.
And behold, some are last who will be first, and some are first who will be last.”
On that same day some Pharisees came up and said to Jesus, “Leave this place and go somewhere else, for Herod wants to kill yoʋ.”
But he said to them, “Go tell that fox, ‘Behold, I will continue casting out demons and performing healings today and tomorrow, and on the third day I will finish my work.’
Nevertheless, I must go on my way today, tomorrow, and the following day; for it is unthinkable that a prophet should perish outside of Jerusalem.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the city that kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to yoʋ! How often I have wanted to gather yoʋr children together as a hen gathers her brood under her wings, but you were not willing!
Behold, your house is left to you desolate. I tell you, you will certainly not see me again until the time comes when you say, ‘Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!’ ”
One Sabbath, when Jesus went to eat at the house of one of the rulers of the Pharisees, the people there were watching him closely.
And behold, there in front of him was a man suffering from dropsy.
In response Jesus said to the lawyers and Pharisees, “Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath?”
But they remained silent. So Jesus took hold of the man, healed him, and sent him away.
Then he said to them, “Which of you whose son or ox falls into a pit on the Sabbath will not immediately pull him out?”
But they could give him no answer about these things.
When Jesus noticed how the guests were choosing the places of honor for themselves, he told them a parable:
“When yoʋ are invited by someone to a wedding feast, do not recline in the place of honor, in case someone more honorable than yoʋ has been invited by yoʋr host.
Then the host, who invited you both, will come and say to yoʋ, ‘Give yoʋr place to this person.’ And with shame yoʋ will begin moving to the least important place.
But when yoʋ are invited, go recline in the least important place, so that, when yoʋr host comes, he will say to yoʋ, ‘Friend, move up to a better place.’ Then yoʋ will be honored in the presence of those who are reclining at the table with yoʋ.
For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and he who humbles himself will be exalted.”
Jesus also said to the man who had invited him, “When yoʋ prepare a luncheon or a dinner, do not invite yoʋr friends, yoʋr brothers, yoʋr relatives, or yoʋr rich neighbors. If yoʋ do, they may invite yoʋ in return, and yoʋ will be repaid.
But when yoʋ prepare a banquet, invite the poor, the maimed, the lame, and the blind.
Then yoʋ will be blessed. Since they do not have the means to repay yoʋ, yoʋ will be repaid at the resurrection of the righteous.”
When one of the men reclining at the table with Jesus heard these things, he said to him, “Blessed is he who will eat at the feast in the kingdom of God.”
Jesus said to him, “A man prepared a great banquet and invited many guests.
At the time for the banquet he sent his servant to tell those who had been invited, ‘Come, for everything is now ready.’
But they all alike began to make excuses. The first one said to him, ‘I have bought a field, and I need to go out and see it. I ask yoʋ to have me excused.’
Another said, ‘I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I am on my way to try them out. I ask yoʋ to have me excused.’
Still another said, ‘I have married a woman, and for that reason I cannot come.’
So the servant came back and told these things to his master. Then the master of the house became angry and said to his servant, ‘Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in the poor, the maimed, the lame, and the blind.’
After the servant had done so, he said, ‘Master, it has been done as yoʋ commanded, and there is still room.’
So the master said to the servant, ‘Go out to the highways and hedges and compel people to come in, so that my house may be filled.
For I tell you that none of those men who were invited will get a taste of my banquet.’ For many are called, but few are chosen.”
Now large crowds were traveling with Jesus, and he turned and said to them,
“If anyone comes to me and does not hate his father and mother, wife and children, brothers and sisters, and even his own life, he cannot be my disciple.
And whoever does not bear his own cross and follow me cannot be my disciple.
For which of you who wants to build a tower does not first sit down and estimate the cost, to see if he has what he needs to complete it?
For if he lays the foundation and is not able to finish it, all who are looking on will begin to mock him,
saying, ‘This man began to build and was not able to finish.’
Or what king, when he is going out to confront another king in battle, does not first sit down and consider whether he is able with ten thousand men to face the king who is coming against him with twenty thousand men?
If he is not able to do so, he sends a delegation while the other is still far away and asks for terms of peace.
So then, any one of you who does not give up all his possessions cannot be my disciple.
“Salt is good, but if salt loses its flavor, with what shall it be seasoned?
It is fit neither for the soil nor for the manure pile, so it is thrown out. He who has ears to hear, let him hear.”
Now all the tax collectors and sinners were drawing near to Jesus to listen to him.
But the Pharisees and the scribes grumbled, saying, “This man receives sinners and eats with them.”
So Jesus told them this parable:
“What man among you, who has a hundred sheep and loses one of them, does not leave the other ninety-nine in the wilderness and go after the one that is lost until he finds it?
And when he does find it, he rejoices as he lays it on his shoulders.
Then he returns home and calls together his friends and neighbors, saying to them, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found my lost sheep.’
I tell you, in the same way there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents, than over ninety-nine righteous people who have no need of repentance.
“Or suppose a woman has ten silver coins and loses one of them. Does she not light a lamp, sweep the house, and search carefully until she finds it?
And when she does find it, she calls together her friends and neighbors, saying, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found my lost coin.’
In the same way, I tell you, there is joy in the presence of God's angels over one sinner who repents.”
Then he said, “There was a man who had two sons.
The younger of the two said to his father, ‘Father, give me the share of property that will belong to me.’ So the father divided his assets between his two sons.
A few days later, the younger son gathered together all that he had and went on a journey to a distant country, and there he squandered his property by living recklessly.
When he had spent all that he had, a severe famine arose throughout that country, and he began to be in need.
So he went and hired himself out to one of the citizens of that country, who sent him to his fields to feed pigs.
The young man longed to fill his belly with the carob pods the pigs were eating, but no one gave him anything.
When he came to his senses, he said, ‘How many of my father's hired workers have an abundance of bread, while I perish with hunger!
I will arise, go to my father, and say to him, “Father, I have sinned against heaven and before yoʋ.
I am no longer worthy to be called yoʋr son; make me like one of yoʋr hired workers.” ’
So he arose and went to his father. But while he was still far away, his father saw him and was moved with compassion. So he ran to his son, threw his arms around his neck, and kissed him.
Then the son said to him, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and before yoʋ. I am no longer worthy to be called yoʋr son.’
But the father said to his servants, ‘Bring out the best robe and put it on him. Put a ring on his finger and sandals on his feet.
Bring the fattened calf and kill it. Let us eat and celebrate.
For this son of mine was dead but is now alive again; he was lost but has now been found.’ And they began to celebrate.
“Now his older son was in the field, and as he came and drew near to the house, he heard music and dancing.
So he called one of the servants over and asked him what was happening.
The servant said to him, ‘Yoʋr brother has come, and yoʋr father has killed the fattened calf, because he has received yoʋr brother back safe and sound.’
But the older son was angry and would not go in. So his father came out and began pleading with him.
But he said to his father in response, ‘Behold, all these years I have served yoʋ and have never disobeyed yoʋr command, yet yoʋ have never given me even a young goat so that I could celebrate with my friends.
But when this son of yoʋrs came, who has devoured yoʋr assets with prostitutes, yoʋ killed the fattened calf for him.’
The father said to him, ‘Son, yoʋ are always with me, and everything I have is yoʋrs.
But it was proper to celebrate and rejoice, for yoʋr brother was dead but is now alive again; he was lost but has now been found.’ ”
Then Jesus said to his disciples, “There was a rich man whose steward was accused of squandering his possessions.
So he called the steward in and said to him, ‘What is this I hear about yoʋ? Give an account of yoʋr stewardship, for yoʋ can no longer be steward.’
The steward said to himself, ‘What should I do, now that my master is taking my stewardship away from me? I am not strong enough to dig, and I am ashamed to beg.
I know what I will do so that, when I am removed from my stewardship, people will receive me into their homes.’
So he summoned each one of his master's debtors. He said to the first, ‘How much do yoʋ owe my master?’
The man said, ‘A hundred measures of oil.’ The steward said to him, ‘Take yoʋr bill, sit down quickly, and write fifty.’
Then he said to another, ‘And how much do yoʋ owe?’ The man said, ‘A hundred measures of wheat.’ The steward said to him, ‘Take yoʋr bill and write eighty.’
So the master commended the unrighteous steward because he had acted shrewdly. For the people of this world are more shrewd in dealing with their own generation than are the people of the light.
And I tell you, make friends for yourselves by means of unrighteous wealth so that when you die, those friends will receive you into eternal dwellings.
“He who is faithful with very little is also faithful with much, and he who is dishonest with very little is also dishonest with much.
If then you have not been faithful with unrighteous wealth, who will entrust you with true riches?
And if you have not been faithful with the property of another, who will give you property of your own?
No servant can serve two masters, for either he will hate one and love the other, or he will be devoted to one and despise the other. You cannot serve God and money.”
Now the Pharisees, who were lovers of money, heard all these things and began ridiculing Jesus.
So he said to them, “You present yourselves as righteous in the sight of men, but God knows your hearts. For what is highly esteemed among men is an abomination in the sight of God.
“The Law and the Prophets were proclaimed until John; since then the good news of the kingdom of God has been preached, and everyone tries to force their way into it.
But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away than for one stroke of a letter to be dropped from the law.
“For example, any man who divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery, and any man who marries a woman divorced from her husband commits adultery.
“Now there was a certain rich man who would dress in purple and fine linen, enjoying himself each day as he lived lavishly.
There was also a poor man named Lazarus, who was laid at the rich man's gate, covered with sores.
He longed to be filled with the crumbs that fell from the rich man's table, but instead the dogs would come and lick his sores.
Now the poor man died and was carried away by the angels to Abraham's side, and the rich man also died and was buried.
As he was in torment in Hades, he lifted up his eyes and saw Abraham far off, and Lazarus at his side.
So he called out and said, ‘Father Abraham, have mercy on me and send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue, for I am in agony in these flames.’
But Abraham said, ‘Son, remember that in yoʋr lifetime yoʋ received yoʋr good things, and in the same way Lazarus received bad things, but now he is here being comforted, while yoʋ are in agony.
And besides all this, a great chasm has been set in place between you and us, so that those who want to cross over to you from here cannot do so, nor can anyone cross over to us from there.’
The rich man said, ‘Then I beg yoʋ, father, to send Lazarus to my father's house,
for I have five brothers. Let him warn them, so that they will not also come to this place of torment.’
Abraham said to him, ‘They have Moses and the Prophets; they can listen to them.’
He said, ‘No, father Abraham, but if someone goes to them from the dead, they will repent.’
But Abraham said to him, ‘If they do not listen to Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded even if someone rises from the dead.’ ”
Then Jesus said to the disciples, “It is inevitable that stumbling blocks come, but woe to the one through whom they come!
It would be better for him if a heavy millstone were hung around his neck and he were cast into the sea than for him to cause one of these little ones to stumble.
Watch yourselves. If yoʋr brother sins against yoʋ, rebuke him. If he repents, forgive him.
Even if he sins against yoʋ seven times in a day, and seven times in that day he comes back and says, ‘I repent,’ yoʋ must forgive him.”
The apostles said to the Lord, “Increase our faith.”
The Lord said, “If you had faith like a grain of mustard seed, you could say to this mulberry tree, ‘Be uprooted and planted in the sea,’ and it would obey you.
“Suppose one of you has a servant plowing the field or tending the sheep. As soon as he comes in from the field would you say, ‘Come and recline at the table’?
Instead, would yoʋ not say to him, ‘Prepare my supper. Put on yoʋr apron and serve me while I eat and drink; after that yoʋ may eat and drink’?
Do yoʋ thank that servant because he did what he was commanded? I think not.
So you also, when you have done everything you were commanded to do, should say, ‘We are unworthy servants; we have only done what we were obligated to do.’ ”
Now on his way to Jerusalem, Jesus traveled along the border of Samaria and Galilee.
As he entered a village, he was met by ten lepers who stood at a distance.
They lifted up their voices, saying, “Jesus, Master, have mercy on us!”
When he saw them, he said to them, “Go show yourselves to the priests.” As they went along, they were cleansed.
When one of them saw that he had been healed, he came back, glorifying God with a loud voice.
He then fell on his face at Jesus' feet, giving him thanks. (Now he was a Samaritan.)
In response Jesus said, “Were not ten cleansed? Where then are the other nine?
Were there none found who came back to give glory to God except this foreigner?”
Then he said to the man, “Rise and go on yoʋr way; yoʋr faith has healed yoʋ.”
At one point Jesus was asked by the Pharisees when the kingdom of God was coming, so he answered them, “The kingdom of God does not come with observable signs,
nor will people say, ‘Behold, here it is!’ or, ‘Behold, there it is!’ For behold, the kingdom of God is within you.”
Then he said to the disciples, “The days will come when you will long to see one of the days of the Son of Man, but you will not see it.
People will say to you, ‘Behold, here he is!’ or, ‘Behold, there he is!’ Do not go off with them or run after them,
for just as lightning flashes from one part of the sky and shines to the other, so will the Son of Man be in his day.
But first he must suffer many things and be rejected by this generation.
Just as it was in the days of Noah, so will it be in the days of the Son of Man.
People were eating and drinking, marrying and being given in marriage, until the day when Noah went into the ark, and the flood came and destroyed them all.
It will be the same as it was in the days of Lot. People were eating and drinking, buying and selling, planting and building.
But on the day when Lot went out from Sodom, fire and sulfur rained down from heaven and destroyed them all.
So will it be on the day when the Son of Man is revealed.
On that day, he who is on the housetop and whose goods are in the house must not come down to get them. Likewise, he who is in the field must not turn back.
Remember Lot's wife.
Whoever seeks to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life will preserve it.
I tell you, on that night two people will be in one bed; one will be taken and the other will be left.
Two women will be grinding grain together; one will be taken and the other will be left.”

Then the disciples said to him in response, “Where, Lord?” He said to them, “Where the body is, there the vultures will be gathered together.”
Then Jesus told them a parable about the need to pray at all times and not lose heart.
He said, “In a certain city there was a judge who neither feared God nor respected man.
There was also a widow in that city who kept coming to him and saying, ‘Give me justice against my adversary.’
For a while he would not do so, but afterward he said to himself, ‘Though I neither fear God nor respect man,
yet because this widow keeps bothering me, I will give her justice, so that she will not wear me out by continually coming to me.’ ”
Then the Lord said, “Consider what this unrighteous judge said.
If even he ultimately rendered a just decision, will not God patiently listen to his chosen ones, who cry out to him day and night, and give them justice?
I tell you that he will bring about justice for them quickly. Nevertheless, when the Son of Man comes, will he find faith on the earth?”
He also told this parable to some who were confident in their own righteous and regarded others with contempt:
“Two men went up to the temple to pray. One was a Pharisee and the other was a tax collector.
The Pharisee stood by himself and prayed like this: ‘God, I thank yoʋ that I am not like other people: swindlers, unrighteous, adulterers, or even like this tax collector.
I fast twice a week, and I give tithes of all that I get.’
But the tax collector stood at a distance and would not even lift up his eyes to heaven, but beat his breast, saying, ‘God, be merciful to me, a sinner!’
I tell you, this man went down to his home justified rather than the other one. For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, but he who humbles himself will be exalted.”
Now people were even bringing their babies to Jesus so that he might touch them. When the disciples saw this, they rebuked those who were bringing them,
but Jesus called for them and said, “Let the little children come to me and do not hinder them, for the kingdom of God belongs to such as these.
Truly I say to you, whoever does not receive the kingdom of God like a little child will certainly not enter it.”
Then a certain ruler asked him, “Good Teacher, what must I do to inherit eternal life?”
Jesus said to him, “Why do yoʋ call me good? No one is good except God alone.
Yoʋ know the commandments: ‘Do not commit adultery, Do not murder, Do not steal, Do not give false testimony, Honor yoʋr father and yoʋr mother.’ ”
The man said, “I have kept all these commandments from the time I was a young boy.”
When Jesus heard this, he said to him, “One thing yoʋ still lack: Sell everything yoʋ have and distribute the money to the poor, and yoʋ will have treasure in heaven; then come follow me.”
But when the man heard this, he became very sorrowful, for he was extremely rich.
When Jesus saw that the man had become very sorrowful, he said, “How difficult it will be for those who have riches to enter the kingdom of God!
For it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich person to enter the kingdom of God.”
Those who heard this said, “Who then can be saved?”
Jesus said, “What is impossible with men is possible with God.”
Then Peter said, “Behold, we have left everything and followed yoʋ.”
Jesus said to them, “Truly I say to you, there is no one who has left house, parents, brothers, wife, or children, for the sake of the kingdom of God,
who will not surely receive many times more in this present age—and in the age to come, eternal life.”
Then Jesus took the twelve aside and said to them, “Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and everything written by the prophets about the Son of Man will be fulfilled.
For he will be delivered up to the Gentiles, and he will be mocked, insulted, and spit upon.
After flogging him, they will kill him, and on the third day he will rise again.”
But the disciples did not understand any of these things; this statement was hidden from them, and they did not comprehend what was being said.
As Jesus drew near to Jericho, a blind man was sitting by the road begging.
When he heard a crowd going by, he asked what was happening.
They told him that Jesus of Nazareth was passing by.
So he cried out, “Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!”
Then those who were out in front rebuked him, telling him to be silent. But he cried out all the more, “Son of David, have mercy on me!”
So Jesus stopped and ordered the man to be brought to him. When the man drew near, Jesus asked him,
“What do yoʋ want me to do for yoʋ?” He said, “Lord, I want to receive my sight.”
So Jesus said to him, “Receive yoʋr sight; yoʋr faith has healed yoʋ.”
Immediately he received his sight and began following Jesus, glorifying God. And when all the people saw it, they gave praise to God.
Then Jesus entered Jericho and was passing through.
And behold, there was a man named Zacchaeus. He was a chief tax collector and was rich.
He was trying to see who Jesus was, but he could not do so because of the crowd, for he was a short man.
So he ran on ahead and climbed a sycamore tree so that he could see him, because Jesus was about to pass by that way.
When Jesus came to that place, he looked up and saw him. Then he said to him, “Zacchaeus, hurry and come down, for I must stay at yoʋr house today.”
So he hurried down and received Jesus with joy.
When all the people saw it, they grumbled, saying, “He has gone to be the guest of a sinful man.”
But Zacchaeus stood there and said to the Lord, “Behold, half of my goods, Lord, I give to the poor, and if I have extorted anything from anyone, I will pay back four times the amount.”
Jesus said to him, “Today salvation has come to this house, because this man has shown that he too is a son of Abraham.
For the Son of Man came to seek and save the lost.”
Now as the people were listening to this, Jesus went on to tell a parable, because he was near Jerusalem, and because they thought that the kingdom of God was going to appear at once.
So he said, “A man of noble birth went to a distant country to receive a kingdom for himself and then return.
Calling ten of his servants, he gave them ten minas and said to them, ‘Engage in business until I return.’
But his subjects hated him and sent a delegation after him, saying, ‘We do not want this man to reign over us.’
When he returned after receiving the kingdom, he summoned the servants to whom he had given the money, to find out who had gained what by engaging in business.
The first came before him and said, ‘Master, yoʋr mina has made ten minas more.’
The king said to him, ‘Well done, good servant! Because yoʋ have been faithful in a very small matter, take authority over ten cities.’
The second came and said, ‘Master, yoʋr mina has made five minas.’
The king said to him, ‘Yoʋ are to be over five cities.’
Another came and said, ‘Master, behold, here is yoʋr mina, which I kept put away in a piece of cloth.
For I was afraid of yoʋ, because yoʋ are a stern man. Yoʋ take out what yoʋ did not put in, and yoʋ reap what yoʋ did not sow.’
The king said to him, ‘I will condemn yoʋ by the words coming out of yoʋr own mouth, yoʋ evil servant. Yoʋ knew, did yoʋ, that I was a stern man, taking out what I did not put in, and reaping what I did not sow?
Why then did yoʋ not deposit my money in the bank, and when I came I would have collected it with interest?’
Then he said to those standing nearby, ‘Take the mina from him and give it to the one who has ten minas.’
But they said to him, ‘Master, he has ten minas!’
The king said, ‘I tell you that everyone who has will be given more, but the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.
But as for those enemies of mine who did not want me to reign over them, bring them here and slay them in front of me.’ ”
After saying these things, Jesus continued on his way up to Jerusalem, walking ahead of his disciples.
As he drew near to Bethsphage and Bethany, at the mount called Olivet, he sent two of his disciples ahead,
saying, “Go into the village ahead of you. As you enter it, you will find a colt tied, on which no one has ever sat. Untie it and bring it here.
If anyone asks you, ‘Why are you untying it?’ tell him this: ‘The Lord has need of it.’ ”
So those who were sent went off and found it just as he had told them.
As they were untying the colt, its owners said to them, “Why are you untying the colt?”
They said, “The Lord has need of it.”
Then they brought the colt to Jesus, threw their garments over it, and set Jesus on it.
As he went along, people were spreading their garments on the road.
And as he drew near to the descent of the Mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began to praise God joyfully with a loud voice for all the miracles they had seen,
saying, “Blessed is the king who comes in the name of the Lord! Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest!”
But some of the Pharisees from among the crowd said to Jesus, “Teacher, rebuke yoʋr disciples.”
In response he said to them, “I tell you, if they keep silent, the stones will cry out.”
As he drew near to Jerusalem and saw the city, he wept over it,
saying, “If only yoʋ had known, especially on this day of yoʋrs what would bring yoʋ peace! But now it is hidden from yoʋr eyes.
For the days will come upon yoʋ when yoʋr enemies build a barricade around yoʋ and encircle yoʋ, hemming yoʋ in on every side.
They will raze yoʋ to the ground, and yoʋr children within yoʋ. They will not leave in yoʋ one stone upon another, because yoʋ did not recognize the time of yoʋr visitation.”
Then Jesus entered the temple courts and began driving out those who were selling and buying there.
He said to them, “It is written, ‘My house is a house of prayer,’ but you have made it a den of robbers.”
Every day Jesus was teaching in the temple courts, but the chief priests and the scribes were seeking to destroy him, and so were the prominent leaders among the people.
But they could not figure out what to do, for all the people were hanging on his every word as they listened to him.
One day, as Jesus was teaching the people in the temple courts and preaching the gospel, the priests and the scribes came with the elders
and said to him, “Tell us, by what authority are yoʋ doing these things, or who is it that gave yoʋ this authority?”
He answered them, “I will also ask you one question. Tell me:
Did John's authority to baptize come from heaven or from men?”
So they discussed it among themselves, saying, “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Why did you not believe him?’
But if we say, ‘From men,’ all the people will stone us, for they are persuaded that John was a prophet.”
So they answered that they did not know where it came from.
Then Jesus said to them, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I am doing these things.”
Then he began to tell the people this parable: “A man planted a vineyard, leased it to farmers, and left the country for a long time.
At harvest time he sent a servant to the farmers so that they would give him some of the fruit of the vineyard. But the farmers beat that servant and sent him away empty-handed.
So he proceeded to send another servant, but they beat him also, treated him shamefully, and sent him away empty-handed.
Then he proceeded to send a third, but they wounded him as well and threw him out.
So the owner of the vineyard said, ‘What should I do? I will send my beloved son; perhaps when they see him they will have respect for him.’
But when they saw him, the farmers discussed it among themselves, saying, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him so that the inheritance will be ours.’
So they threw him out of the vineyard and killed him. What then will the owner of the vineyard do to them?
He will come and destroy those farmers and give the vineyard to others.” When the people heard this, they said, “Certainly not!”
But Jesus looked at them and said, “What then is the meaning of this Scripture: ‘The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone’?
Everyone who falls on that stone will be broken to pieces, but anyone on whom it falls will be crushed.”
Then the chief priests and the scribes wanted to arrest him at that very hour, for they knew he had spoken this parable against them, but they were afraid.
So they watched him and sent spies who pretended to be sincere in order to catch him in something he said, so that they could deliver him up to the jurisdiction and authority of the governor.
The spies asked him, “Teacher, we know that yoʋ speak and teach correctly, and that yoʋ do not show partiality but teach the way of God in truth.
Is it lawful for us to pay taxes to Caesar, or not?”
But perceiving their craftiness, Jesus said to them, “Why are you testing me?
Show me a denarius. Whose image and inscription does it have?” They answered, “Caesar's.”
He said to them, “Then render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's.”
So they were not able to catch him in what he said in the presence of the people. And being amazed at his answer, they fell silent.
Now some of the Sadducees, who deny that there is a resurrection, came up and asked Jesus,
“Teacher, Moses wrote for us: ‘If a man's brother dies, leaving a wife but no children, that man must marry the widow and raise up offspring for his brother.’
Now there were seven brothers. The first married a woman and died childless.
The second married the widow, and he also died childless.
Likewise, the third also married her. In the same way all seven died, leaving no children.
Last of all, the woman also died.
In the resurrection, therefore, which of them will she be the wife of? For the seven all had her as a wife.”
Jesus answered them, “The people of this age marry and are given in marriage,
but those who are considered worthy to attain to that age and the resurrection from the dead neither marry nor are they given in marriage.
Indeed they can no longer die, for they are like angels. They are sons of God, since they are sons of the resurrection.
But even Moses indicated that the dead are raised, when he said in the passage about the burning bush, ‘The Lord, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.’
He is not the God of the dead, but of the living, for to him all are alive.”
Then some of the scribes responded, “Teacher, yoʋ have spoken well.”
And they no longer dared to ask him anything.
Then Jesus said to them, “How can it be said that the Christ is the Son of David?
Even David himself says in the Book of Psalms, ‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at my right hand
until I make yoʋr enemies a footstool for yoʋr feet.” ’
David calls him ‘Lord,’ so how is he his son?”
As all the people were listening, Jesus said to his disciples,
“Beware of the scribes. They like to walk around in long robes, and they love to be greeted in the marketplaces and to have the best seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at banquets.
They devour widows' houses and for a pretense make long prayers. They will receive a more severe judgment.”
Then Jesus looked up and saw the rich putting their gifts into the treasury.
He also saw a poor widow there putting in two small copper coins.
So he said, “Truly I say to you, this poor widow has put in more than all the others.
For they have all put in gifts for God out of their abundance, but she, out of her poverty, has put in all that she had to live on.”
Then, as some were talking about how the temple was adorned with beautiful stones and gifts consecrated to God, Jesus said,
“As for these things that you see, the days will come when not one stone will be left upon another; all of them will be torn down.”
So they asked him, “Teacher, when will these things happen? And what will be the sign that these things are about to take place?”
He said, “Make sure you are not led astray. For many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am he,’ and, ‘The time has drawn near.’ Do not go after them.
When you hear of wars and uprisings, do not be terrified, for these things must first take place, but the end will not immediately follow.”
Then he said to them, “Nation will rise up against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.
There will be great earthquakes in various places, along with famines and plagues. There will also be terrifying sights and great signs from heaven.
But before all these things take place, they will arrest you and persecute you. They will deliver you up to synagogues and prisons, and you will be brought before kings and governors for my name's sake.
This will lead to opportunities for you to bear witness.
Therefore settle it in your hearts not to prepare your defense in advance.
For I will give you a mouth to speak and wisdom that none of your adversaries will be able to refute or resist.
You will even be betrayed by parents, relatives, friends, and brothers, and they will have some of you put to death.
You will be hated by all because of my name.
Yet not a hair of your head will by any means perish.
You must gain your lives by your patient endurance.
“When you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, know that its desolation is near.
Then those who are in Judea must flee to the mountains, those who are in the city must get out, and those who are in the countryside must not enter the city.
For those will be days of vengeance, to fulfill all that is written.
Woe to those who are with child and to those who are nursing infants in those days! For there will be great distress in the land and wrath against this people.
They will fall by the edge of the sword and be led captive into all the nations, and Jerusalem will be trampled by the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled.
“There will be signs in the sun, moon, and stars, and on the earth there will be distress among the nations as they are perplexed by the roaring sea and the surging waves.
People will faint from fear and foreboding of what is coming upon the world, for the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
Then they will see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.
So when these things begin to take place, stand tall and lift up your heads, for your redemption is near.”
Then he told them a parable: “Consider the fig tree and all the other trees.
As soon as they sprout leaves, you can see for yourselves and know that summer is near.
So also, when you see these things taking place, know that the kingdom of God is near.
Truly I say to you, this generation will certainly not pass away until all things have taken place.
Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will certainly not pass away.
“Watch yourselves, lest your hearts be weighed down with carousing, drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and that day come upon you suddenly.
For it will come like a trap upon all who dwell on the face of the whole earth.
Therefore stay alert at all times, praying that you may be considered worthy to escape everything that will take place, and to stand before the Son of Man.”
Each day Jesus taught in the temple courts, but at night he would go out and stay at the mount called Olivet.
And all the people would come to him early in the morning to listen to him in the temple courts.
Now the Feast of Unleavened Bread was drawing near, which is called the Passover,
and the chief priests and the scribes were looking for a way to get rid of Jesus quietly, for they were afraid of the people.
Then Satan entered into Judas, the one called Iscariot, who was numbered among the twelve.
He went away and discussed with the chief priests and officers how he might deliver Jesus up to them.
They were glad and agreed to give him money.
So he accepted the offer and began looking for an opportunity to deliver Jesus up to them in the absence of a crowd.
Then came the day for the Feast of Unleavened Bread, when the Passover lamb had to be sacrificed.
Jesus sent Peter and John, saying, “Go make preparations for us to eat the Passover.”
They said to him, “Where do yoʋ want us to prepare it?”
He said to them, “Behold, when you enter the city, a man carrying a jug of water will meet you. Follow him into the house he enters
and say to the master of the house, ‘The Teacher asks yoʋ, “Where is the guest room where I can eat the Passover with my disciples?” ’
He will then show you a large upper room that is furnished; prepare it there.”
So they went and found it just as Jesus had told them, and they prepared the Passover.
When the hour came, Jesus reclined at the table, and the twelve apostles were with him.
He said to them, “I have earnestly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer.
For I tell you that I will certainly not eat it again until it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God.”
Then he took a cup, and after giving thanks he said, “Take this and divide it among yourselves.
For I tell you, I will certainly not drink again from the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of God comes.”
Then he took bread, and when he had given thanks, he broke it and gave it to them, saying, “This is my body, which is given for you. Do this in remembrance of me.”
In the same way, he also took the cup after they had eaten supper, saying, “This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you.
But behold, the hand of the one who is going to betray me is with mine on the table.
The Son of Man indeed goes as it has been determined, but woe to that man by whom he is betrayed.”
Then they began to discuss with one another which one of them could ever do such a thing.
A dispute also arose among them as to which of them was considered to be greater.
So Jesus said to them, “The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them, and those who have authority over them are called benefactors.
But it must not be so with you; rather the greatest among you must become like the youngest, and the leader must become like one who serves.
For who is greater? The one who reclines at the table or the one who serves? Is it not the one who reclines at the table? But I am among you as one who serves.
“You have stayed with me in my trials.
And I bestow on you a kingdom, just as my Father bestowed one on me,
so that you may eat and drink at my table. And you will sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.”
Then the Lord said, “Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has demanded to have you, so that he might sift you like wheat.
But I have prayed for yoʋ that yoʋr faith may not fail. Once yoʋ have turned back, strengthen yoʋr brothers.”
Peter said to him, “Lord, I am ready to go with yoʋ both to prison and to death.”
Jesus said, “I tell yoʋ, Peter, a rooster will certainly not crow today before yoʋ have denied three times that yoʋ know me.”
Then Jesus said to them, “When I sent you without a moneybag, knapsack, or sandals, did you lack anything?” They said, “Nothing.”
Then he said to them, “But now he who has a moneybag must take it, and likewise a knapsack. And he who does not have a sword must sell his garment and buy one.
For I tell you that this Scripture must still be fulfilled in me: ‘He was numbered with the lawless.’ For what is written about me is reaching its fulfillment.”
So they said, “Lord, behold, here are two swords.” He said to them, “That is enough!”
Then Jesus went out and made his way to the Mount of Olives, as was his custom, and his disciples followed him.
When he came to the place, he said to them, “Pray that you will not enter into temptation.”
Then he withdrew from them about a stone's throw away and knelt down and prayed,
“Father, if yoʋ are willing to take this cup away from me, do so; nevertheless, not my will, but yoʋrs be done.”
Then an angel from heaven appeared to him and strengthened him.
Being in agony, he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat became like drops of blood falling to the ground.
When he rose from prayer and came to the disciples, he found them sleeping because of their sorrow.
So he said to them, “Why are you sleeping? Rise and pray, lest you enter into temptation.”
While he was still speaking, behold, a crowd approached, and the man called Judas, one of the twelve, was leading them. He drew near to Jesus to kiss him,
and Jesus said to him, “Judas, are you betraying the Son of Man with a kiss?”
When those who were around him saw what was about to happen, they said to him, “Lord, shall we strike with the sword?”
Then one of them struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his right ear.
But Jesus responded, “No more of this!” And he touched the man's ear and healed him.
Then Jesus said to the chief priests, the officers of the temple, and the elders who had come out against him, “Have you come out with swords and clubs as you would against a robber?
I was with you daily in the temple courts, and you did not lay a hand on me. But this is your hour, when the power of darkness reigns.”
Then they arrested him, led him away, and brought him to the house of the high priest, and Peter was following at a distance.
Some had kindled a fire there in the middle of the courtyard and sat down together, and Peter sat down among them.
When a servant girl saw him sitting in the light of the fire, she looked at him intently and said, “This man also was with him.”
But Peter denied him, saying, “Woman, I do not know him.”
After a little while, someone else saw him and said, “Yoʋ also are one of them.” But Peter said, “Man, I am not.”
After about an hour had gone by, another man kept insisting, “Truly this man also was with him, for he too is a Galilean.”
But Peter said, “Man, I do not know what yoʋ are talking about!” And immediately, while he was still speaking, a rooster crowed.
Then the Lord turned and looked at Peter, and Peter remembered what the Lord had said to him, “Before a rooster crows, yoʋ will deny me three times.”
And Peter went out and wept bitterly.
Now the men who were holding Jesus in custody began mocking him and beating him.
They also blindfolded him and kept striking his face, saying to him, “Prophesy! Who is it that struck yoʋ?”
And they said many other things against him, reviling him.
When daybreak came, the elders of the people gathered together, both chief priests and scribes, and they led Jesus up to their Sanhedrin and said,
“If yoʋ are the Christ, tell us.” But he said to them, “If I tell you, you will surely not believe.
And if I ask you a question, you will surely not answer me or release me.
But from now on the Son of Man will be seated at the right hand of the power of God.”
So they all said, “Are yoʋ then the Son of God?” He said to them, “You yourselves say that I am.”
Then they said, “What further testimony do we need? For we ourselves have heard it from his own mouth.”
Then the whole assembly arose and led Jesus to Pilate.
They began to accuse him, saying, “We found this man perverting the nation and forbidding us to pay taxes to Caesar, declaring himself to be Christ, a king.”
So Pilate asked Jesus, “Are yoʋ the king of the Jews?” Jesus answered him, “Yoʋ have said it yoʋrself.”
Then Pilate said to the chief priests and the crowd, “I find no fault in this man.”
But they kept insisting, “He stirs up the people, teaching throughout all Judea. He started in Galilee and has come all the way here.”
When Pilate heard mention of Galilee, he asked whether the man was a Galilean.
And when he found out that Jesus was under Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him over to Herod, who was also in Jerusalem in those days.
When Herod saw Jesus he was very glad, for he had long desired to see him, because he had heard many things about him and was hoping to see him perform some sign.
So he questioned him at great length, but Jesus gave him no answer.
Meanwhile, the chief priests and the scribes stood there, vehemently accusing him.
Herod also treated him with contempt and mocked him, as did his soldiers. Then, after dressing Jesus in fine clothing, Herod sent him back to Pilate.
That very day Pilate and Herod became friends with one another; previously they had been enemies.
Then Pilate called together the chief priests, the rulers, and the people,
and said to them, “You brought me this man as one who was misleading the people. And behold, after examining him before you, I have found no fault in this man with respect to the accusations you are making against him,
and neither has Herod, for I sent you to him. Clearly he has done nothing that deserves death.
Therefore I will have him flogged and then release him.”
Now each year at the feast Pilate was obligated to release one prisoner for the people.
So they all cried out together, “Away with this man, and release for us Barabbas!”
(This was a man who had been thrown into prison for an insurrection that had taken place in the city, and for murder.)
Wishing to release Jesus, Pilate addressed them again,
but they kept on shouting, “Crucify, crucify him!”
A third time he said to them, “Why? What evil has he done? I have found in him no grounds for death. So I will have him flogged and then release him.”
But they continued insistently with loud voices, demanding that he be crucified, and their voices prevailed, along with those of the chief priests.
So Pilate rendered his decision that their demand be granted.
He released the man they had been asking for, who had been thrown into prison for insurrection and murder, but he handed Jesus over to their will.
As the soldiers led him away, they took hold of Simon, a Cyrenian man who was coming in from the countryside, and they laid on him the cross, forcing him to carry it behind Jesus.
A great multitude of people followed along behind, including women who were mourning and lamenting for Jesus.
But Jesus turned to them and said, “Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for me, but weep for yourselves and for your children.
For behold, the days are coming when people will say, ‘Blessed are the barren, the wombs that have not given birth, and the breasts that have not nursed!’
Then they will begin to say to the mountains, ‘Fall on us!’ and to the hills, ‘Cover us!’
For if they do these things when the wood is green, what will happen when it is dry?”
Now two others, who were criminals, were also being led away to be put to death with Jesus.
When they came to the place called the Skull, the soldiers crucified him there along with the criminals, one on his right and one on his left.
But Jesus said, “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing.” Then they cast lots to divide his garments.
The people stood there looking on, and the rulers who were with them ridiculed him, saying, “He saved others; let him save himself if he is the Christ, the Chosen One of God.”
The soldiers also mocked him, coming up to him and offering him sour wine,
saying, “If yoʋ are the king of the Jews, save yoʋrself!”
There was also an inscription over him written in Greek, Latin, and Hebrew, which read: “This is the King of the Jews.”
One of the criminals who was hanging there reviled him, saying, “If yoʋ are the Christ, save yoʋrself and us!”
But the other rebuked him, saying, “Do yoʋ not even fear God, seeing that yoʋ are under the same condemnation?
The two of us are justly condemned, for we are receiving the appropriate punishment for the things we have done, but this man has done nothing wrong.”
Then he said to Jesus, “Remember me, Lord, when yoʋ come in yoʋr kingdom.”
Jesus said to him, “Truly I say to yoʋ, today yoʋ will be with me in Paradise.”
Now it was about the sixth hour, and there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour.
The sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was torn down the middle.
Then Jesus cried out with a loud voice, “Father, into yoʋr hands I commit my spirit.” After saying this, he breathed his last breath.
Now when the centurion saw what had happened, he glorified God and said, “Surely this man was righteous.”
And when all the crowds who had gathered together for this spectacle saw what had happened, they returned home beating their breasts.
But all those who knew Jesus stood at a distance watching these things, including the women who had followed him from Galilee.
Now there was a good and righteous man named Joseph, who was a member of the council
but had not consented to their decision and action. He was from Arimathea, a town of the Jews, and was himself also waiting for the kingdom of God.
He went to Pilate and asked for Jesus' body.
Then he took it down, wrapped it in a linen cloth, and laid it in a tomb hewn in a rock, where no one had ever been laid.
It was the day of Preparation, and the Sabbath was approaching.
The women who had come with Jesus from Galilee followed along behind and saw the tomb and how his body was laid in it.
Then they returned and prepared spices and ointments. But they rested on the Sabbath according to the commandment.
On the first day of the week, at early dawn, the women came to the tomb, bringing the spices they had prepared, and some other women were with them.
They found the stone rolled away from the tomb,
but when they went in, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus.
While they were greatly perplexed about this, behold, two men stood by them in dazzling clothes.
The women were terrified and bowed their faces to the ground, but the men said to them, “Why do you seek the living among the dead?
He is not here, but is risen. Remember how he told you, while he was still in Galilee,
that the Son of Man must be delivered up into the hands of sinful men, be crucified, and on the third day rise again.”
Then they remembered his words.
When they returned from the tomb, they told all these things to the eleven and to all the others.
It was Mary Magdalene, Joanna, Mary the mother of James, and the other women with them, who told these things to the apostles.
But their words came across to the apostles as nonsense, and they did not believe them.
Peter, however, got up and ran to the tomb. When he stooped down to look in, he saw the linen cloths lying there by themselves. So he went away, wondering to himself what had happened.
That same day two of Jesus' disciples were going to a village called Emmaus, which was about seven miles from Jerusalem.
They were talking with each other about everything that had happened.
As they were talking and discussing these things, Jesus himself drew near and went along with them,
but their eyes were kept from recognizing him.
He said to them, “What are you discussing with each other as you walk along, looking downcast?”
Then the one whose name was Cleopas answered him, “Are yoʋ the only visitor in Jerusalem who does not know the things that have happened there in these last few days?”
He said to them, “What things?” So they said to him, “The things concerning Jesus of Nazareth, who was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people,
and how the chief priests and our rulers handed him over to a sentence of death and crucified him.
But we had hoped that he was the one who would redeem Israel. And besides all this, today is now the third day since these things happened.
Moreover, some women from our group amazed us. They were at the tomb early this morning,
and when they did not find his body, they came back saying that they had seen a vision of angels, who said that he was alive.
Then some of our companions went to the tomb and found it to be so, just as the women had said, but they did not see him.”
Then Jesus said to them, “O foolish men, how slow of heart you are to believe all that the prophets have spoken!
Was it not necessary for the Christ to suffer these things and enter into his glory?”
And beginning from Moses and all the Prophets, he explained to them the things written about himself in all the Scriptures.
As they drew near to the village where they were headed, Jesus acted as if he were going farther.
But they urged him not to do so, saying, “Stay with us, for it is nearly evening, and the day is drawing to a close.” So he went in to stay with them.
As he was reclining at the table with them, he took the bread, blessed and broke it, and gave it to them.
Then their eyes were opened, and they recognized him, but he disappeared from their sight.
They said to each other, “Were not our hearts burning within us as he spoke to us on the road and explained the Scriptures to us?”
So they rose that very hour and returned to Jerusalem, where they found the eleven gathered together with their companions,
saying, “The Lord is risen indeed and has appeared to Simon!”
Then they began describing what had happened on the road, and how Jesus had been made known to them when he broke the bread.
As they were saying these things, Jesus himself stood among them and said to them, “Peace be with you.”
But they were startled and terrified, thinking they had seen a spirit.
Then he said to them, “Why are you troubled, and why are doubts arising in your hearts?
Look at my hands and my feet and see that it is I myself. Touch me and look at me, for a spirit does not have flesh and bones as you see that I have.”
After saying this, he showed them his hands and his feet.
And while they were still amazed and in disbelief because of their joy, he said to them, “Do you have anything here to eat?”
So they gave him a piece of broiled fish and some honeycomb.
And he took them and ate in their presence.
Then he said to them, “These are the words I spoke to you while I was still with you, that everything written about me in the Law of Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms must be fulfilled.”
Then he opened their minds to understand the Scriptures
and said to them, “Thus it is written, and thus it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead on the third day,
and for repentance and remission of sins to be preached in his name to all nations, beginning from Jerusalem.
You are witnesses of these things.
And behold, I am sending the promise of my Father upon you, but stay in the city of Jerusalem until you are clothed with power from on high.”
Then he led them out as far as Bethany, and lifting up his hands he blessed them.
While he was blessing them, he parted from them and was carried up into heaven.
So they worshiped him and returned to Jerusalem with great joy.
And they were continually in the temple courts, praising and blessing God. Amen.
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
He was in the beginning with God.
All things were made through him, and nothing that was made was made without him.
In him was life, and the life was the light of men.
The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness has not overcome it.
There came a man sent from God, whose name was John.
He came as a witness to testify about the light, so that all might believe through him.
He himself was not the light, but he came to testify about the light.
The true light, which gives light to everyone, was coming into the world.
He was in the world, and the world was made through him, but the world did not know him.
He came to his own, but his own people did not receive him.
But to all who did receive him, who believed in his name, he gave the right to become children of God,
who were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
The Word became flesh and dwelt among us, and we have seen his glory, the glory of the one and only Son, who came from the Father, full of grace and truth.
John testified about him and cried out, “This is he of whom I said, ‘He who comes after me ranks ahead of me, because he existed before me.’ ”
Of his fullness we have all received, even grace upon grace.
For the law was given through Moses, but grace and truth came through Jesus Christ.
No one has ever seen God, but the one and only Son, who is at the Father's side, has made him known.
This was the testimony of John when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, “Who are yoʋ?”
He did not refuse to answer, but openly declared, “I am not the Christ.”
So they asked him, “What then? Are yoʋ Elijah?” He said, “I am not.” “Are yoʋ the Prophet?” He answered, “No.”
So they said to him, “Who are yoʋ? Tell us so that we may give an answer to those who sent us. What do yoʋ say about yoʋrself?”
He said, “I am the voice of one crying out in the wilderness, ‘Make straight the way for the Lord,’ as the prophet Isaiah said.”
(Now those who had been sent were from the Pharisees.)
Then they asked him, “Why then do yoʋ baptize if yoʋ are not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the Prophet?”
John answered them, “I baptize with water, but among you stands someone you do not know.
He is the one who comes after me, who ranks ahead of me, the strap of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie.”
These things took place in Bethany beyond the Jordan, where John was baptizing.
On the next day John saw Jesus coming to him and said, “Behold, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!
This is he of whom I said, ‘After me comes a man who ranks ahead of me, because he existed before me.’
I myself did not know him, but I came baptizing with water so that he might be revealed to Israel.”
Then John testified, “I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it remained upon him.
I myself did not recognize him, but he who sent me to baptize with water said to me, ‘He upon whom yoʋ see the Spirit descend and remain is the one who baptizes with the Holy Spirit.’
And I have seen it and can testify that this is the Son of God.”
On the next day John was again standing with two of his disciples.
As Jesus walked by, John looked at him and said, “Behold, the Lamb of God.”
When the two disciples heard him say this, they followed Jesus.
Turning around, Jesus saw them following him and said to them, “What are you seeking?” They said to him, “Rabbi” (which means “Teacher”), “where are yoʋ staying?”
He said to them, “Come and see.” So they went and saw where he was staying, and stayed with him that day; it was about the tenth hour.
Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, was one of the two who heard this from John and followed Jesus.
Andrew first found his own brother Simon and said to him, “We have found the Messiah” (which means “Christ”),
and he brought Simon to Jesus. Jesus looked at him and said, “Yoʋ are Simon the son of Jonah; yoʋ shall be called Cephas” (which means “Peter”).
On the next day Jesus decided to go to Galilee. Finding Philip, he said to him, “Follow me.”
(Now Philip was from Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter.)
Philip then found Nathanael and said to him, “We have found him of whom Moses wrote in the law, and of whom the prophets also wrote—Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.”
Nathanael said to him, “Can anything good come from Nazareth?” Philip said to him, “Come and see.”
When Jesus saw Nathanael coming toward him, he said of him, “Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no deceit.”
Nathanael said to him, “How do yoʋ know me?” Jesus answered him, “Before Philip called yoʋ, when yoʋ were under the fig tree, I saw yoʋ.”
Nathanael answered him, “Rabbi, yoʋ are the Son of God! Yoʋ are the king of Israel!”
Jesus answered him, “Do yoʋ believe because I said to yoʋ, ‘I saw yoʋ under the fig tree’? Yoʋ will see greater things than these.”
Then he said to him, “Truly, truly, I say to you, before long you will see heaven opened and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man.”
On the third day there was a wedding in Cana of Galilee, and Jesus' mother was there.
Jesus was also invited to the wedding, and so were his disciples.
When the wine ran out, Jesus' mother said to him, “They have no wine.”
Jesus said to her, “Woman, what concern is that to yoʋ or to me? My hour has not yet come.”
But his mother said to the servants, “Do whatever he tells you.”
Now six stone water jars had been set there for the Jewish rites of purification, each holding twenty to thirty gallons.
Jesus said to the servants, “Fill the jars with water.” So they filled them up to the brim.
Then he said to them, “Now draw some out and take it to the master of the feast.” So they took it,
and the master of the feast tasted the water, which had been turned into wine. He did not know where it had come from, but the servants who had drawn the water knew. Then the master of the feast called the bridegroom aside
and said to him, “Everyone else serves the good wine first, and then the inferior wine after the guests have drunk freely; but yoʋ have kept the good wine until now.”
Jesus did this in Cana of Galilee as the first of his signs. He revealed his glory, and his disciples believed in him.
After this he went down to Capernaum with his mother, his brothers, and his disciples, and they stayed there for a few days.
Now the Passover of the Jews was near, so Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
In the temple courts he found those who were selling oxen, sheep, and doves, and he also found the money changers sitting at their tables.
So he made a whip of cords and drove them all out of the temple courts, along with their sheep and oxen. He also poured out the coins of the money changers and overturned their tables.
Then he said to those who were selling doves, “Take these things away from here; stop making my Father's house a marketplace.”
And his disciples remembered that it is written, “Zeal for yoʋr house will consume me.”
In response the Jews said to him, “What sign can yoʋ show us to prove yoʋr authority to do these things?”
Jesus answered them, “Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.”
The Jews said, “It has taken forty-six years to build this temple, and will yoʋ raise it up in three days?”
But he was speaking about the temple of his body.
So when he was raised from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this, and they believed the Scripture and the word that Jesus had spoken.
While Jesus was in Jerusalem during the feast of the Passover, many believed in his name because they saw the signs he was doing.
But Jesus did not entrust himself to them, for he knew all men.
He did not need anyone to testify about man, for he himself knew what was in man.
Now there was a Pharisee named Nicodemus, who was a ruler of the Jews.
He came to Jesus by night and said to him, “Rabbi, we know that yoʋ are a teacher who has come from God, for no one can do these signs yoʋ are doing unless God is with him.”
Jesus answered him, “Truly, truly, I say to yoʋ, unless someone is born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.”
Nicodemus said to him, “How can a person be born when he is old? Can he enter the womb of his mother a second time and be born?”
Jesus answered, “Truly, truly, I say to yoʋ, unless one is born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God.
That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit.
Do not be amazed that I said to yoʋ, ‘You must be born again.’
The wind blows where it wishes. Yoʋ hear the sound of it, but yoʋ do not know where it is coming from or where it is going; so it is with everyone born of the Spirit.”
In response Nicodemus said to him, “How can these things be?”
Jesus answered him, “Yoʋ are the teacher of Israel, and yoʋ do not understand these things?
Truly, truly, I say to yoʋ, we speak of what we know, and we testify about what we have seen, but you do not receive our testimony.
If I have spoken to you about earthly things and you do not believe, how will you believe if I speak to you about heavenly things?
No one has ascended into heaven, except he who descended from heaven, the Son of Man, who is in heaven.
Just as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up,
so that everyone who believes in him should not perish but have eternal life.
“For God loved the world in this way: He gave his one and only Son, so that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life.
For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but so that the world might be saved through him.
Whoever believes in him is not condemned, but whoever does not believe has been condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the one and only Son of God.
This is the judgment: The light has come into the world, but people loved the darkness rather than the light because their works were evil.
For whoever does evil hates the light and does not come to the light, so that his works may not be exposed.
But whoever lives by the truth comes to the light, so that it may be evident that his works have been done in obedience to God.”
After this Jesus went into the Judean countryside along with his disciples, and he spent some time there with them, baptizing people.
Now John was also baptizing people in Aenon near Salem, because there was plenty of water there, and people were coming to him and being baptized.
(For John had not yet been thrown into prison.)
Now a discussion arose between the disciples of John and a Jew about purification.
So John's disciples came and said to him, “Rabbi, he who was with yoʋ beyond the Jordan, about whom yoʋ have testified, behold, he is baptizing people, and everyone is going to him.”
John replied, “A person cannot receive anything unless it is given to him from heaven.
You yourselves can testify that I said, ‘I am not the Christ,’ but rather, ‘I have been sent ahead of him.’
He who has the bride is the bridegroom. But the friend of the bridegroom, who stands and listens for him, rejoices greatly at the bridegroom's voice. So this joy of mine has been made full.
He must increase, but I must decrease.”
He who comes from above is above all. He who is from the earth belongs to the earth and speaks about earthly things. But he who comes from heaven is above all.
He testifies to what he has seen and heard, yet no one receives his testimony.
Whoever does receive his testimony has certified that God is true.
For he whom God sent speaks the words of God, for God gives the Spirit without measure.
The Father loves the Son and has put all things in his hand.
Whoever believes in the Son has eternal life, but whoever disobeys the Son will not see life; rather, the wrath of God remains upon him.
Now when the Lord learned that the Pharisees heard he was making and baptizing more disciples than John
(although it was not Jesus himself who baptized them, but his disciples),
he left Judea and went away to Galilee.
But he had to pass through Samaria.
So he came to a town of Samaria called Sychar, near the plot of land that Jacob had given to his son Joseph.
Jacob's well was there, so Jesus, wearied as he was from the journey, sat by the well. It was about the sixth hour.
When a woman from Samaria came to draw water, Jesus said to her, “Give me some water to drink.”
(For his disciples had gone into the city to buy food.)
So the Samaritan woman said to him, “How is it that yoʋ, a Jew, ask for water to drink from me, a Samaritan woman?” (For Jews have no dealings with Samaritans.)
Jesus answered her, “If yoʋ knew the gift of God and who it is that is saying to yoʋ, ‘Give me some water to drink,’ yoʋ would have asked him, and he would have given yoʋ living water.”
The woman said to him, “Sir, yoʋ do not even have a bucket to draw with, and the well is deep. Where then can yoʋ get this living water?
Are yoʋ greater than our father Jacob, who gave us this well and drank from it himself, as did his sons and livestock?”
Jesus answered her, “Everyone who drinks this water will thirst again,
but whoever drinks the water I give him will certainly never thirst again. On the contrary, the water I give him will become in him a spring of water welling up to eternal life.”
The woman said to him, “Sir, give me this water so that I will not get thirsty again and have to come here to draw water.”
Jesus said to her, “Go call yoʋr husband and come back here.”
The woman said in response, “I have no husband.” Jesus said to her, “Yoʋ have rightly said, ‘I have no husband,’
for yoʋ have had five husbands, and the man yoʋ now have is not yoʋr husband; what yoʋ have said is true.”
The woman said to him, “Sir, I see that yoʋ are a prophet.
Our fathers worshiped on this mountain, but you say that the place where people must worship is in Jerusalem.”
Jesus said to her, “Woman, believe me, an hour is coming when neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem will you worship the Father.
You worship what you do not know; we worship what we know, because salvation is from the Jews.
But an hour is coming, and is now here, when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and truth, for the Father seeks such people to worship him.
God is spirit, and those who worship him must worship in spirit and truth.”
The woman said to him, “I know that Messiah is coming” (who is called Christ). “When he comes, he will explain everything to us.”
Jesus said to her, “I who speak to yoʋ am he.”
Just then his disciples came back, and they were amazed that he was speaking with a woman. However, no one said, “What do yoʋ want?” or, “Why are yoʋ speaking with her?”
Then the woman left her water jar, went into the town, and said to the people,
“Come see a man who told me everything I have ever done. Could this be the Christ?”
So they left the town and began coming to him.
In the meantime the disciples were urging him, “Rabbi, eat.”
But he said to them, “I have food to eat that you do not know about.”
So the disciples said to one another, “Could someone have brought him something to eat?”
Jesus said to them, “My food is to do the will of him who sent me and to complete his work.
Do you not say, ‘There are still four months and then comes the harvest’? I tell you, lift up your eyes and see that the fields are already ripe for harvest.
He who reaps receives wages and gathers fruit for eternal life, so that both he who sows and he who reaps may rejoice together.
For in this the true saying is verified: ‘One sows and another reaps.’
I sent you to reap what you have not labored for; others have labored, and you have entered into their labor.”
Many of the Samaritans from that town believed in Jesus because of the woman's testimony: “He told me everything I have ever done.”
So when the Samaritans came to him, they asked him to stay with them, and he stayed there for two days.
And many more believed because of his word.
So they said to the woman, “It is no longer because of yoʋr report that we believe, for we ourselves have heard, and we know that this is truly the Christ, the Savior of the world.”
After two days, he departed from there and went to Galilee.
(For Jesus himself had testified that a prophet has no honor in his own hometown.)
When he came to Galilee, the Galileans received him because they had seen all that he had done in Jerusalem at the feast, for they also had gone to the feast.
Once more Jesus went to Cana of Galilee, where he had turned the water into wine. Now there was a certain royal official whose son was sick in Capernaum.
When he heard that Jesus had come from Judea to Galilee, he went to him and asked him to come down and heal his son, for his son was about to die.
Then Jesus said to him, “Unless you see signs and wonders, you will certainly not believe.”
The royal official said to him, “Sir, come down before my boy dies.”
Jesus said to him, “Go; yoʋr son will live.” And the man believed what Jesus said to him and went on his way.
As he was going back down to his house, his servants met him and told him, “Yoʋr son is alive.”
So he asked them the hour when he began to get better. They said to him, “Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him.”
Then the father realized that this was the hour when Jesus had said to him, “Yoʋr son will live.” So he believed, along with his entire household.
This was the second sign that Jesus did after coming from Judea to Galilee.
After this came the feast of the Jews, so Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
Now in Jerusalem by the Sheep Gate there is a pool, called Bethesda in Hebrew, which has five porticoes.
In the porticoes were lying a great multitude of disabled people, including the blind, the lame, and the paralyzed, who were waiting for the moving of the water.
For at times an angel would go down into the pool and stir up the water. The first person who stepped in after the water was stirred up was healed of whatever disease he had.
One man was there who had been suffering in his disability for thirty-eight years.
When Jesus saw him lying there, knowing that he had been in that condition for a long time already, he said to him, “Do yoʋ want to be made well?”
The disabled man answered him, “Sir, I have no one to put me into the pool when the water is stirred up, but while I am going, another goes down before me.”
Jesus said to him, “Rise, pick up yoʋr mat, and walk.”
Immediately the man was made well, so he picked up his mat and began to walk. Now that day was a Sabbath.
So the Jews said to the man who had been healed, “It is the Sabbath; it is not lawful for yoʋ to pick up yoʋr mat.”
He answered them, “The man who made me well said to me, ‘Pick up yoʋr mat and walk.’ ”
So they asked him, “Who is the man who said to yoʋ, ‘Pick up yoʋr mat and walk’?”
But the man who had been healed did not know who it was, for Jesus had slipped away, since there was a crowd in that place.
After this Jesus found the man in the temple courts and said to him, “Behold, yoʋ have been made well; do not sin anymore, lest something worse happen to yoʋ.”
Then the man went and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well.
So the Jews began persecuting Jesus and seeking to kill him, because he was doing these things on the Sabbath.
But Jesus responded to them, “My Father is still working even now, and I too am working.”
So the Jews were seeking all the more to kill him, because not only was he breaking the Sabbath, but he was even calling God his own Father, making himself equal with God.
So Jesus responded to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, the Son can do nothing on his own, but only what he sees the Father doing. For whatever the Father does, the Son also does in the same way.
For the Father loves the Son and shows him all that he himself does. And he will show him greater works than these, so that you will be amazed.
For just as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, so also the Son gives life to whomever he wishes.
The Father judges no one, but has given all judgment to the Son,
so that all may honor the Son just as they honor the Father. Anyone who does not honor the Son does not honor the Father who sent him.
Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever hears my word and believes him who sent me has eternal life. He does not come into judgment, but has passed from death to life.
“Truly, truly, I say to you, an hour is coming, and is now here, when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who hear it will live.
For as the Father has life in himself, so he has granted the Son to have life in himself.
And he has given the Son authority to execute judgment, because he is the Son of Man.
Do not be amazed at this, because an hour is coming in which all who are in the tombs will hear his voice
and come out, those who have done good to a resurrection of life, and those who have done evil to a resurrection of judgment.
“I can do nothing on my own. As I hear, I judge, and my judgment is just, because I seek not my own will, but the will of the Father who sent me.
“If I testify about myself, my testimony is not valid.
There is another who testifies about me, and I know that the testimony he gives about me is true.
You have sent to John, and he has testified to the truth.
Now I do not receive testimony from man, but I say these things so that you may be saved.
John was a burning and shining lamp, and you were willing to rejoice for an hour in his light.
But I have testimony greater than John's. For the works that the Father has given me to accomplish, the very works that I am doing, testify that the Father has sent me.
And the Father who sent me has himself testified about me. You have neither heard his voice at any time nor seen his form.
And you do not have his word abiding in you, for you do not believe him whom he sent.
You search the Scriptures because you think that in them you have eternal life, and it is these that testify about me,
yet you are not willing to come to me so that you may have life.
I do not receive glory from men.
But I know that you do not have the love of God within you.
I have come in the name of my Father, and yet you do not receive me. If another comes in his own name, you will receive him.
How can you believe when you receive glory from one another but do not seek the glory that comes from the one and only God?
Do not think that I will accuse you before the Father. The one who accuses you is Moses, in whom you have set your hope.
If you had believed Moses, you would believe me, for he wrote about me.
But if you do not believe his writings, how will you believe my words?”
After this Jesus went away to the other side of the Sea of Galilee (that is, the Sea of Tiberias).
A large crowd was following him because they saw the miraculous signs he was performing on the sick.
So Jesus went up on the mountain and sat there with his disciples.
(Now the Jewish feast of the Passover was near.)
When Jesus lifted up his eyes and saw that a large crowd was coming to him, he said to Philip, “Where shall we buy bread so that these people may eat?”
(He said this to test him, for he himself knew what he was about to do.)
Philip answered him, “Two hundred denarii worth of bread would not be sufficient for each of them to receive a little portion.”
Then one of his disciples, Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, said to him,
“There is a little boy here who has five barley loaves and two fish, but what good are they for so many people?”
Jesus said, “Have the people sit down.” (Now there was a lot of grass in that place.) So the men sat down, about five thousand in number.
Then Jesus took the loaves, and after giving thanks, he distributed them to the disciples, and the disciples distributed them to those who were seated. He did the same with the fish, and the people ate as much as they wanted.
When they were full, Jesus said to his disciples, “Gather together the pieces that are left over so that nothing is wasted.”
So they gathered them together and filled twelve baskets with the broken pieces from the five barley loaves that were left over by those who had eaten.
When the people saw the sign that Jesus had done, they said, “This is truly the Prophet who is to come into the world.”
So Jesus, knowing that they were about to come and take him by force to make him king, withdrew to the mountain by himself.
When evening came, his disciples went down to the sea,
and after getting into the boat, they started going across the sea to Capernaum. Darkness had already set in, but Jesus had not come to them.
Then the sea became rough because a strong wind was blowing.
When they had rowed about three or four miles, they saw Jesus approaching the boat, walking on the sea, and they were afraid.
But he said to them, “It is I; do not be afraid.”
Then they were willing to receive him into the boat, and immediately the boat reached the land where they were heading.
On the next day the crowd that had stayed on the other side of the sea realized that there had been no other boat there except the one Jesus' disciples had gotten into, and that Jesus himself had not gotten into the boat with his disciples, but that his disciples had gone away alone.
Then other boats from Tiberias came near the place where they had eaten the bread after the Lord had given thanks.
So when the crowd saw that neither Jesus nor his disciples were there, they themselves got into the boats and went to Capernaum, seeking Jesus.
When they found him on the other side of the sea, they said to him, “Rabbi, when did yoʋ get here?”
Jesus answered them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, you are seeking me not because you saw signs, but because you ate the loaves and were filled.
Do not work for food that perishes, but for food that endures to eternal life, which the Son of Man will give you. For on him God the Father has set his seal.”
Then they said to him, “What must we do to do the works of God?”
Jesus answered them, “This is the work of God, that you believe in the one he has sent.”
So they said to him, “What sign then are yoʋ going to perform so that we may see it and believe yoʋ? What will yoʋ do?
Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, just as it is written, ‘He gave them bread from heaven to eat.’ ”
Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, it was not Moses who gave you the bread from heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread from heaven.
For the bread of God is that which comes down from heaven and gives life to the world.”
So they said to him, “Sir, give us this bread always.”
Jesus said to them, “I am the bread of life; he who comes to me will never hunger, and he who believes in me will never thirst.
But as I told you, you have seen me and still you do not believe.
Everyone the Father gives me will come to me, and I will never cast out anyone who comes to me.
For I have come down from heaven not to do my own will, but the will of him who sent me.
And this is the will of the Father who sent me, that I should lose none of those he has given me, but should raise them up on the last day.
And this is the will of him who sent me, that anyone who looks to the Son and believes in him should have eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day.”
Then the Jews began to grumble about him because he said, “I am the bread that came down from heaven.”
They said, “Is this not Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How then can he say, ‘I have come down from heaven’?”
Jesus answered them, “Do not grumble among yourselves.
No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him, and I will raise him up on the last day.
It is written in the Prophets, ‘They will all be taught by God.’ Everyone therefore who has heard and learned from the Father comes to me—
not that anyone has seen the Father, except he who is from God; he has seen the Father.
Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever believes in me has eternal life.
I am the bread of life.
Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, and died.
This is the bread that comes down from heaven, so that anyone may eat of it and not die.
I am the living bread that has come down from heaven. If anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever. And the bread that I will give for the life of the world is my flesh.”
Then the Jews began to quarrel with one another, saying, “How can this man give us his flesh to eat?”
So Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, if you do not eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you have no life in yourselves.
Anyone who eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day.
For my flesh is true food, and my blood is true drink.
Whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood abides in me, and I in him.
Just as the living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father, so whoever feeds on me will also live because of me.
This is the bread that came down from heaven, not as your fathers ate the manna, and died. Whoever eats this bread will live forever.”
He said these things in a synagogue while teaching in Capernaum.
After hearing this, many of his disciples said, “This teaching is difficult; who can accept it?”
But Jesus, aware that his disciples were grumbling about this, said to them, “Does this offend you?
Then what if you see the Son of Man ascending to where he was before?
It is the Spirit who gives life; the flesh is of no benefit. The words I speak to you are spirit and life.
But there are some among you who do not believe.” (For Jesus knew from the beginning which of them did not believe and who it was that would betray him.)
Then he said, “That is why I told you that no one can come to me unless it has been granted to him by my Father.”
At that point many of his disciples went back and no longer walked with him.
So Jesus said to the twelve, “Do you also want to go away?”
Simon Peter answered him, “Lord, to whom shall we go? Yoʋ have the words of eternal life.
And we have come to believe and to know that yoʋ are the Christ, the Son of the living God.”
Jesus answered them, “Did I not choose you, the twelve? And yet one of you is a devil.”
(Now he was speaking about Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon, who was one of the twelve and would later betray him.)
After this Jesus went from place to place in Galilee, for he did not want to travel around in Judea because the Jews were seeking to kill him.
Now the Jewish Feast of Tabernacles was near.
So Jesus' brothers said to him, “Leave here and go to Judea so that yoʋr disciples may see the works yoʋ are doing.
For no one does anything in secret while seeking to be known publicly. If yoʋ are going to do these things, show yoʋrself to the world.”
(For not even his brothers believed in him.)
So Jesus said to them, “My time has not yet come, but your time is always at hand.
The world cannot hate you, but it does hate me because I testify that its works are evil.
You go up to this feast; I am not yet going up to this feast, for my time has not yet been fulfilled.”
After saying this to them, he remained in Galilee.
However, after his brothers had gone up to the feast, Jesus also went up, not openly but in secret.
Now the Jews were looking for him at the feast, saying, “Where is that man?”
And there was much murmuring about him among the crowds. Some were saying, “He is a good man.” Others were saying, “No, he is deceiving the people.”
No one, however, was speaking openly about him for fear of the Jews.
Midway through the feast, Jesus went up to the temple courts and began to teach.
The Jews were amazed, saying, “How does this man know so much, when he has never had any formal instruction?”
Jesus answered them, “My teaching is not my own; it comes from him who sent me.
If anyone wants to do God's will, he will know whether my teaching comes from God or whether I am speaking on my own authority.
He who speaks on his own authority seeks his own glory, but he who seeks the glory of the one who sent him is true, and there is no unrighteousness in him.
Did not Moses give you the law? Yet none of you keeps the law. Why are you seeking to kill me?”
The crowd answered, “Yoʋ have a demon! Who is seeking to kill yoʋ?”
Jesus answered them, “I performed one miracle, and you are all amazed.
Moses gave you circumcision (not that it came from Moses, but from the fathers), and that is why you circumcise a boy even on the Sabbath.
If a boy can receive circumcision on the Sabbath so that the law of Moses will not be broken, why are you angry with me because I made a man entirely well on the Sabbath?
Do not judge according to appearance, but judge with right judgment.”
Now some of the people of Jerusalem were saying, “Is this not the man whom they are seeking to kill?
And behold, he is speaking openly, and they are saying nothing to him. Could it be that the rulers indeed know that he is truly the Christ?
Yet we know where this man is from, but when the Christ comes, no one will know where he is from.”
Then Jesus cried out as he taught in the temple courts, “You know me and you know where I am from. Yet I have not come on my own authority, but he who sent me is true. You do not know him,
but I know him, because I have come from him, and he is the one who sent me.”
So they were trying to arrest him, but no one laid a hand on him, because his hour had not yet come.
Still, many from among the crowd believed in him and said, “When the Christ comes, will he do more signs than this man has done?”
The Pharisees heard the crowd murmuring these things about Jesus, so the Pharisees and the chief priests sent officers to arrest him.
Then Jesus said, “I will be with you for only a little while longer, and then I am going to him who sent me.
You will seek me, but you will not find me; and where I am going, you cannot come.”
Then the Jews said to one another, “Where is this man about to go that we will not find him? Is he about to go to the Jews who are scattered among the Greeks and teach the Greeks?
What does he mean by saying, ‘You will seek me, but you will not find me; and where I am going, you cannot come’?”
On the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus stood up and cried out, “If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink.
Whoever believes in me, just as the Scripture has said, ‘From his innermost being will flow rivers of living water.’ ”
(He said this about the Spirit, whom those who believed in him were going to receive, for the Holy Spirit had not yet been given, because Jesus had not yet been glorified.)
When they heard this, many from among the crowd were saying, “Surely this man is the Prophet.”
Others were saying, “He is the Christ.” But others were saying, “No, for the Christ does not come from Galilee, does he?
Does not the Scripture say that the Christ will come from David's descendants and from Bethlehem, the town where David lived?”
So a division arose among the crowd because of Jesus.
Some of them wanted to arrest him, but no one laid a hand on him.
Then the officers came to the chief priests and Pharisees, who said to them, “Why did you not bring him in?”
The officers answered, “Never has anyone spoken like this man.”
The Pharisees answered them, “Have you also been deceived?
Have any of the rulers or the Pharisees believed in him?
No! But this crowd that is following him does not know the law; they are accursed.”
Then Nicodemus, who had gone to Jesus by night and who was one of the rulers, said,
“Does our law condemn a man without first giving him a hearing and finding out what he is doing?”
They answered him, “Are yoʋ also from Galilee? Search and see that no prophet has ever arisen from Galilee.”
And each went to his own house.
But Jesus went to the Mount of Olives.
Early in the morning he again went to the temple courts. All the people came, and he sat down and taught them.
Then the scribes and the Pharisees brought him a woman who had been caught in adultery. Making her stand before them all,
they said to Jesus, testing him, “Teacher, this woman was caught in the very act of committing adultery.
In the law, Moses commanded us that such women should be stoned; what then do yoʋ say?”
(They said this to test him, so that they might have something to accuse him of.) But Jesus stooped down and wrote with his finger on the ground, taking no notice.
When they continued asking him, he stood up and said to them, “Let him among you who is without sin throw the first stone at her.”
And again he stooped down and wrote on the ground.
When they heard this, they were convicted by their own consciences and began to go away one by one, starting with the older men. So Jesus was left alone, with the woman there before him.
Then Jesus stood up and saw no one but the woman. So he said to her, “Where are yoʋr accusers? Has no one condemned yoʋ?”
She said, “No one, Lord.” Jesus said, “Neither do I pass judgment on yoʋ; go and sin no more.”
Then Jesus spoke to them again, saying, “I am the light of the world. Whoever follows me will certainly not walk in darkness, but will have the light of life.”
So the Pharisees said to him, “Yoʋ are testifying about yoʋrself, so yoʋr testimony is not valid.”
Jesus answered them, “Even if I testify about myself, my testimony is valid, for I know where I came from and where I am going, but you do not know where I come from or where I am going.
You judge according to the flesh, but I judge no one.
Yet even if I do judge, my judgment is valid; for I am not alone, but I stand with the Father who sent me.
In your own law it is written that the testimony of two men is valid.
I testify about myself, and the Father who sent me also testifies about me.”
Then they said to him, “Where is yoʋr father?” Jesus answered, “You neither know me nor my Father. If you knew me, you would know my Father as well.”
(Jesus spoke these words in the treasury as he taught in the temple courts. But no one arrested him, because his hour had not yet come.)
Then Jesus said to them again, “I am going away, and you will seek me, but you will die in your sin. Where I am going, you cannot come.”
So the Jews said, “Is he going to kill himself? Is that what he means by saying, ‘Where I am going, you cannot come’?”
He said to them, “You are from below; I am from above. You are of this world; I am not of this world.
Therefore I said to you that you will die in your sins, for if you do not believe that I am he, you will die in your sins.”
They said to him, “Who are yoʋ?” Jesus said to them, “Exactly what I have been saying to you from the beginning.
I have many things to say about you and to judge, but he who sent me is true, and I tell the world what I have heard from him.”
(They did not know that he was speaking to them about the Father.)
So Jesus said to them, “When you lift up the Son of Man, then you will know that I am he and that I do nothing on my own authority, but I speak these things just as my Father taught me.
He who sent me is with me. The Father has not left me alone, for I always do what pleases him.”
As he was saying these things, many believed in him.
Then Jesus said to the Jews who had believed in him, “If you abide in my word, you are truly my disciples.
Then you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.”
They answered him, “We are descendants of Abraham, and we have never been enslaved to anyone. How then can yoʋ say, ‘You will be set free’?”
Jesus answered them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, everyone who commits sin is a slave of sin.
The slave does not abide in the house forever; the son abides forever.
So if the son sets you free, you will be free indeed.
I know that you are Abraham's descendants, but you are seeking to kill me because your hearts have no room for my word.
I speak of what I have seen with my Father; so you also are doing what you have seen with your father.”
They answered him, “Our father is Abraham.” Jesus said to them, “If you were children of Abraham, you would be doing the works of Abraham.
But now you are seeking to kill me, a man who has spoken to you the truth I heard from God. Abraham did not do such a thing.
You are doing the works of your father.” They said to him, “We were not born of fornication. We have one Father—God.”
Jesus said to them, “If God were your Father, you would love me, for I have come here from God. I have not come of my own accord, but he sent me.
Why do you not understand what I am saying? It is because you cannot bear to accept my word.
You belong to your father the devil, and you want to carry out your father's desires. He was a murderer from the beginning and does not stand in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks lies, he speaks from his own character, because he is a liar and the father of lies.
But because I speak the truth, you do not believe me.
Which one of you can convict me of sin? If I am telling the truth, why do you not believe me?
Whoever belongs to God hears the words of God. The reason you do not hear them is because you do not belong to God.”
The Jews answered him, “Do we not rightly say that yoʋ are a Samaritan and have a demon?”
Jesus answered, “I do not have a demon, but I honor my Father, and you dishonor me.
I do not seek my own glory; there is one who seeks it, and he is the judge.
Truly, truly, I say to you, if anyone keeps my word, he will certainly never see death.”
The Jews said to him, “Now we know that yoʋ have a demon. Abraham died, and so did the prophets, yet yoʋ say, ‘If anyone keeps my word, he will certainly never taste death.’
Are yoʋ greater than our father Abraham, who died? The prophets also died. Who do yoʋ make yoʋrself out to be?”
Jesus answered, “If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing. It is my Father who glorifies me, of whom you say, ‘He is our God.’
You do not know him, but I know him. If I were to say that I do not know him, I would be a liar like you. But I do know him, and I keep his word.
Your father Abraham was glad that he would see my day. He saw it and rejoiced.”
Then the Jews said to him, “Yoʋ are not yet fifty years old, and yoʋ have seen Abraham?”
Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, before Abraham was, I am.”
So they picked up stones to throw at him, but Jesus hid himself and went out from the temple grounds. And passing through the crowd, he walked away.
As Jesus walked along, he saw a man who had been blind from birth.
His disciples asked him, “Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he should be born blind?”
Jesus answered, “Neither did this man sin nor his parents, but it happened so that the works of God might be revealed in him.
I must do the works of him who sent me while it is day; night is coming, when no one can work.
As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.”
After saying this, he spit on the ground and made mud with the saliva. Then he rubbed the mud on the blind man's eyes
and said to him, “Go wash in the pool of Siloam” (which means “Sent”). So he went and washed, and came away seeing.
Then his neighbors and those who had previously seen that he was blind were saying, “Is this not the man who used to sit and beg?”
Others were saying, “It is he.” Still others were saying, “He is like him.” But he kept saying, “I am he.”
So they said to him, “How were yoʋr eyes opened?”
He answered, “A man named Jesus made mud, rubbed it on my eyes, and said to me, ‘Go to the pool of Siloam and wash.’ So I went and washed, and received my sight.”
They said to him, “Where is this man?” He said, “I do not know.”
So they brought the man who was once blind to the Pharisees.
(Now it was a Sabbath when Jesus made the mud and opened the man's eyes.)
The Pharisees again asked him how he had received his sight, and he said to them, “He put mud on my eyes, and I washed, and now I see.”
Then some of the Pharisees were saying, “This man is not from God, for he does not keep the Sabbath.” But others were saying, “How can a sinful man do such signs?” And a division arose among them.
So they said to the blind man again, “What do yoʋ say about him, since he opened yoʋr eyes?” The man said, “He is a prophet.”
Now the Jews did not believe that the man had been blind and had received his sight until they called in his parents.
They asked them, “Is this your son, who you say was born blind? How then does he now see?”
His parents answered them, “We know that this is our son and that he was born blind.
But how he can now see or who opened his eyes, we do not know. He is of age; ask him. He will speak for himself.”
(His parents said this because they were afraid of the Jews, for the Jews had already agreed that if anyone should confess that Jesus was the Christ, he would be put out of the synagogue.
That is why his parents said, “He is of age; ask him.”)
So for a second time they called in the man who had been blind and said to him, “Give glory to God! We know that this man is a sinner.”
He answered, “Whether he is a sinner or not, I do not know; one thing I know, that though I was blind, now I see.”
Again they said to him, “What did he do to yoʋ? How did he open yoʋr eyes?”
He answered them, “I told you already, and you did not listen. Why do you want to hear it again? Do you also want to become his disciples?”
Then they reviled him and said, “Yoʋ are a disciple of that man, but we are disciples of Moses.
We know that God has spoken to Moses, but as for this man, we do not know where he is from.”
The man answered them, “Why, this is an amazing thing, that you do not know where he is from, and yet he opened my eyes!
We know that God does not listen to sinners, but he does listen to anyone who is devout and does his will.
Never before has anyone heard of someone opening the eyes of a man born blind.
If this man were not from God, he could do nothing.”
They answered him, “Yoʋ were born entirely in sin, and yet yoʋ are trying to teach us?” And they threw him out.
Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, so he found the man and said to him, “Do yoʋ believe in the Son of God?”
He answered, “Who is he, Lord, that I may believe in him?”
Jesus said to him, “Yoʋ have seen him, and the one speaking with yoʋ is he.”
The man said, “I believe, Lord.” And he worshiped him.
Then Jesus said, “For judgment I have come into this world, so that those who do not see may see, and those who see may become blind.”
Some of the Pharisees who were with him heard this and said to him, “We are not also blind, are we?”
Jesus said to them, “If you were blind, you would have no sin, but now you say, ‘We see.’ Therefore your sin remains.
“Truly, truly, I say to you, he who does not enter the sheepfold by the gate but climbs in by another way is a thief and a robber.
But he who enters by the gate is the shepherd of the sheep.
The gatekeeper opens the gate for him, and the sheep hear his voice. He calls his own sheep by name and leads them out.
When he has brought out his own sheep, he goes ahead of them, and the sheep follow him because they recognize his voice.
They will certainly not follow a stranger, but will flee from him because they do not recognize the voice of strangers.”
Jesus spoke to them with this figure of speech, but they did not understand what he was saying to them.
So Jesus said to them again, “Truly, truly, I say to you, I am the gate for the sheep.
All who came previously are thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not listen to them.
I am the gate; if anyone enters through me, he will be saved and will come in and go out and find pasture.
The thief comes only to steal, kill, and destroy. I have come that they may have life, and have it abundantly.
I am the good shepherd; the good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep.
But the hired hand is not the shepherd and does not own the sheep. So when he sees the wolf coming, he leaves the sheep and flees, and the wolf snatches the sheep and scatters them.
The hired hand flees, for he is a hired hand and does not care about the sheep.
I am the good shepherd. I know my sheep and my sheep know me,
even as the Father knows me and I know the Father. I lay down my life for the sheep.
I have other sheep that are not of this fold. I must bring them in as well, and they will hear my voice. And there will be one flock with one shepherd.
This is why the Father loves me, because I lay down my life so that I may take it up again.
No one takes it from me, but I lay it down of my own accord. I have authority to lay it down, and I have authority to take it up again. I received this commandment from my Father.”
At these words there was again a division among the Jews.
Many of them were saying, “He has a demon and is out of his mind; why do you listen to him?”
Others were saying, “These are not the words of a man possessed by a demon. Can a demon open the eyes of the blind?”
Now it was the Feast of the Dedication in Jerusalem. It was winter,
and Jesus was walking in the temple courts, in Solomon's Portico.
So the Jews gathered around him and said to him, “How long are yoʋ going to keep us in suspense? If yoʋ are the Christ, tell us plainly.”
Jesus answered them, “I did tell you, but you do not believe. The works that I do in my Father's name testify about me,
but you do not believe because you are not among my sheep, just as I told you.
My sheep hear my voice; I know them, and they follow me.
I give them eternal life, and they will certainly never perish, and no one will snatch them out of my hand.
My Father, who has given them to me, is greater than all, and no one is able to snatch them out of my Father's hand.
The Father and I are one.”
Then the Jews picked up stones again to stone him.
In response Jesus said to them, “I have shown you many good works from my Father; for which of these works are you going to stone me?”
The Jews answered him, “We are not going to stone yoʋ for any good work, but for blasphemy, because yoʋ, who are just a man, make yoʋrself out to be God.”
Jesus answered them, “Is it not written in your law, ‘I said, you are gods’?
If he called them ‘gods,’ to whom the word of God came (and the Scripture cannot be broken),
do you say of him whom the Father consecrated and sent into the world, ‘Yoʋ are blaspheming,’ because I said, ‘I am the Son of God’?
If I do not do the works of my Father, do not believe me.
But if I do them, even if you do not believe me, believe the works, so that you may know and believe that the Father is in me and I in him.”
Once again they tried to arrest him, but he eluded their grasp.
Then Jesus went away again to the other side of the Jordan, to the place where John had been baptizing at first, and he stayed there.
Many came to him and were saying, “John did no sign, but everything that John said about this man was true.”
And many of the people there believed in Jesus.
Now a man named Lazarus was sick. He was from Bethany, the village of Mary and her sister Martha.
(Mary was the one who anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped his feet with her hair; it was her brother Lazarus who was sick.)
So the sisters sent word to Jesus, “Lord, behold, the one yoʋ love is sick.”
But when Jesus heard this, he said, “This sickness will not end in death but is for the glory of God, so that the Son of God may be glorified through it.”
Now Jesus loved Martha, her sister Mary, and Lazarus.
But when he heard that Lazarus was sick, he stayed where he was for two more days.
After that he said to the disciples, “Let us go to Judea again.”
The disciples said to him, “Rabbi, the Jews were just recently seeking to stone yoʋ, and yet you are going there again?”
Jesus answered, “Are there not twelve hours in the day? If anyone walks in the day, he does not stumble, because he sees the light of this world.
But if anyone walks in the night, he stumbles, because the light is not in him.”
After saying this, he said to them, “Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep, but I am going there to wake him up.”
His disciples said, “Lord, if he has fallen asleep, he will recover.”
(They thought Jesus was speaking about natural sleep, but he was actually speaking about Lazarus' death.)
Then Jesus told them plainly, “Lazarus has died,
and I rejoice for your sake that I was not there, so that you may believe. But let us go to him.”
Then Thomas (called Didymus) said to his fellow disciples, “Let us go too, so that we may die with him.”
When Jesus arrived, he found that Lazarus had been in the tomb for four days already.
Now Bethany was less than two miles from Jerusalem,
and many of the Jews had joined the women who were with Martha and Mary, to console them about their brother.
When Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went to meet him, but Mary remained seated in the house.
Then Martha said to Jesus, “Lord, if yoʋ had been here, my brother would not have died.
But even now I know that God will give yoʋ whatever yoʋ ask of him.”
Jesus said to her, “Yoʋr brother will rise again.”
Martha said to him, “I know that he will rise again in the resurrection on the last day.”
Jesus said to her, “I am the resurrection and the life. He who believes in me, though he may die, yet shall he live.
No one who lives and believes in me will ever die. Do yoʋ believe this?”
She said to him, “Yes, Lord, I have come to believe that yoʋ are the Christ, the Son of God, who is to come into the world.”
After saying this, she went and called her sister Mary, saying in private, “The Teacher is here and is calling for yoʋ.”
When Mary heard this, she rose quickly and went to him.
(Now Jesus had not yet come into the village, but was in the place where Martha had met him.)
When the Jews who were in the house with Mary, consoling her, saw her rise quickly and go out, they followed her, saying, “She is going to the tomb to weep there.”
When Mary came to where Jesus was and saw him, she fell at his feet and said to him, “Lord, if yoʋ had been here, my brother would not have died.”
When Jesus saw her weeping, and the Jews who had come with her also weeping, he was deeply moved in his spirit and troubled.
He said, “Where have you laid him?” They said to him, “Lord, come and see.”
Jesus wept.
So the Jews said, “See how he loved him!”
But some of them said, “Could not he who opened the eyes of the blind man have also kept this man from dying?”
Deeply moved once more, Jesus came to the tomb. (It was a cave, and a stone was lying against it.)
Jesus said, “Take away the stone.” Martha, the sister of the man who had died, said to him, “Lord, there is already a stench, for it is the fourth day.”
Jesus said to her, “Did I not tell yoʋ that if yoʋ believed yoʋ would see the glory of God?”
So they took away the stone from where the dead man was lying. Then Jesus lifted up his eyes and said, “Father, I thank yoʋ that yoʋ have heard me.
I know that yoʋ always hear me, but I say this for the benefit of the crowd that is standing here, so that they may believe that yoʋ sent me.”
After saying this, he cried out with a loud voice, “Lazarus, come out!”
Then the man who had died came out, his feet and his hands bound with strips of cloth, and his face wrapped in a cloth. Jesus said to them, “Unbind him, and let him go.”
Therefore many of the Jews who had come to Mary, and had seen what Jesus did, believed in him.
But some of them went to the Pharisees and told them what Jesus had done.
So the chief priests and the Pharisees convened a meeting of the Sanhedrin and said, “What are we going to do? For this man is doing many signs.
If we allow him to continue like this, everyone will believe in him, and the Romans will come and take away our holy place and our nation.”
But one of them, Caiaphas, who was high priest that year, said to them, “You do not know anything,
nor do you consider that it is better for us to have one man die for the people than to have the whole nation perish.”
(He said this not of his own accord, but as high priest that year he prophesied that Jesus was going to die for the nation,
and not only for the nation, but also to gather together and unite the children of God scattered abroad.)
So from that day they plotted together to kill him.
Therefore Jesus no longer went around openly among the Jews. Instead, he departed from there to the region near the wilderness, to a town called Ephraim, where he spent time with his disciples.
Now the Passover of the Jews was near, and many people went up to Jerusalem from the countryside to purify themselves before the Passover.
They were looking for Jesus and saying to one another as they stood in the temple courts, “What do you think? That he will not come to the feast at all?”
(Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had given an order that if anyone knew where Jesus was, he should report it, so that they could arrest him.)
Six days before the Passover, Jesus came to Bethany, where Lazarus was, the man who had died and whom Jesus had raised from the dead.
They prepared a supper for Jesus there. Martha was serving, and Lazarus was one of the people reclining at the table with him.
Then Mary took a pound of expensive ointment made of pure nard, anointed Jesus' feet, and wiped his feet with her hair. The house was filled with the fragrance of the ointment.
Then one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, who was about to betray him, said,
“Why was this ointment not sold for three hundred denarii and the money given to the poor?”
(He said this not because he cared about the poor, but because he was a thief; he was the keeper of the moneybag and would pilfer what was put into it.)
So Jesus said, “Leave her alone; she has kept this ointment for the day of my burial.
For you always have the poor with you, but you will not always have me.”
Meanwhile a large crowd of the Jews found out that Jesus was there, so they came not only because of Jesus but also to see Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead.
So the chief priests plotted to kill Lazarus also,
because on account of him many of the Jews were going over to Jesus and believing in him.
On the next day, when a large crowd that had come to the feast heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,
they took palm branches and went out to meet him. They were crying out, “Hosanna! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, the King of Israel!”
Finding a young donkey, Jesus sat on it, just as it is written,
“Do not be afraid, daughter of Zion. Behold, yoʋr king is coming, sitting on a donkey's colt.”
(His disciples did not understand these things at first, but when Jesus was glorified, they remembered that these things were written about him, and that these things had been done to him.)
Now the crowd that had been with him when he called Lazarus out of the tomb and raised him from the dead was testifying about it.
That is why a crowd went out to meet him, because they heard he had done this sign.
So the Pharisees said to one another, “You see that you are achieving nothing. Behold, the world has gone after him.”
Now there were some Greeks among those who went up to worship at the feast.
They came to Philip, who was from Bethsaida of Galilee, and requested of him, “Sir, we would like to see Jesus.”
Philip went and told Andrew, and in turn Andrew and Philip told Jesus.
Jesus replied to them, “The hour has come for the Son of Man to be glorified.
Truly, truly, I say to you, unless a grain of wheat falls to the ground and dies, it remains alone; but if it dies, it bears much fruit.
Whoever loves his life will lose it, but whoever hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life.
If anyone wants to serve me, he must follow me; and where I am, there will my servant be also. If anyone serves me, the Father will honor him.”
“My soul is now troubled. And what shall I say? ‘Father, save me from this hour’? No, it is for this reason that I have come to this hour.
Father, glorify yoʋr name.” Then a voice came from heaven: “I have glorified it, and will glorify it again.”
When the crowd standing there heard the voice, they said it was thunder. Others said, “An angel has spoken to him.”
Jesus responded, “This voice has come not for my sake, but for your sake.
Now is the judgment of this world. Now the ruler of this world will be cast out.
And when I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw all people to myself.”
(He said this to indicate the kind of death he was going to die.)
The crowd responded to him, “We have heard from the law that the Christ remains forever, so how can yoʋ say, ‘The Son of Man must be lifted up’? Who is this ‘Son of Man’?”
Jesus said to them, “The light is with you for a little while longer. Walk while you have the light, so that the darkness will not overtake you. He who walks in the darkness does not know where he is going.
While you have the light, believe in the light, so that you will become sons of light.” After saying these things, Jesus went away and was hidden from them.
Although he had done so many signs in their presence, they did not believe in him.
This was to fulfill what had been spoken by the prophet Isaiah: “Lord, who has believed our report? And to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?”
For this reason they could not believe, for again Isaiah said,
“He has blinded their eyes and hardened their hearts, lest they should see with their eyes and understand with their hearts and turn back, and I would heal them.”
Isaiah said these things when he saw the Lord's glory and spoke about him.
Nevertheless, many even among the rulers believed in him, but because of the Pharisees they would not declare it openly, so that they would not be put out of the synagogue.
For they loved the glory that comes from men more than the glory that comes from God.
Then Jesus cried out, “Whoever believes in me, believes not in me but in him who sent me.
And whoever sees me sees him who sent me.
I have come into the world as light, so that no one who believes in me will remain in darkness.
If anyone hears my words and does not believe, I do not judge him; for I did not come to judge the world, but to save the world.
He who rejects me and does not receive my words has a judge; the word I have spoken will judge him on the last day.
For I have not spoken on my own authority, but the Father who sent me gave me a commandment as to what I should say and what I should speak.
And I know that his commandment leads to eternal life. What I speak, therefore, I speak just as the Father has told me.”
Now before the feast of the Passover, Jesus knew that his hour had come to depart from this world and go to the Father. Having loved his own who were in the world, he loved them to the end.
By the time supper ended, the devil had put it into the heart of Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon, to betray Jesus.
Jesus knew that the Father had put all things into his hands, and that he had come from God and was going back to God,
so he rose from supper, laid aside his outer garments, took a towel, and wrapped it around his waist.
After that, he put water into the washbasin and began to wash his disciples' feet and to wipe them with the towel that was wrapped around his waist.
When he came to Simon Peter, Peter said to him, “Lord, are yoʋ going to wash my feet?”
Jesus answered him, “What I am doing yoʋ do not now understand, but afterward yoʋ will understand.”
Peter said to him, “Yoʋ shall never wash my feet.” Jesus answered him, “If I do not wash yoʋ, yoʋ have no part with me.”
Simon Peter said to him, “Lord, then wash not only my feet, but also my hands and my head.”
Jesus said to him, “He who has bathed has no need to wash, except for his feet, but is completely clean. And you are clean, but not all of you.”
(For he knew who would betray him; that is why he said, “You are not all clean.”)
When Jesus had washed their feet and collected his outer garments, he reclined again at the table and said to them, “Do you know what I have done for you?
You call me Teacher and Lord, and rightly so, for that is what I am.
So if I, your Lord and Teacher, have washed your feet, you also ought to wash one another's feet.
For I have given you an example so that you should do as I have done for you.
Truly, truly, I say to you, a servant is not greater than his master, nor is a messenger greater than the one who sent him.
Now that you know these things, you are blessed if you do them.
I am not speaking about all of you; I know whom I have chosen. But this Scripture must be fulfilled: ‘He who eats bread with me has lifted up his heel against me.’
I am telling you now before it happens, so that when it does happen, you will believe that I am he.
Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever receives the one I send receives me, and whoever receives me receives him who sent me.”
After saying these things, Jesus was troubled in his spirit and declared, “Truly, truly, I say to you, one of you will betray me.”
So the disciples began looking at one another, perplexed as to whom he was speaking about.
One of his disciples, the one whom Jesus loved, was reclining on Jesus' chest.
So Simon Peter motioned to him to ask Jesus whom he was talking about.
Leaning back on Jesus' chest, he said to him, “Lord, who is it?”
Jesus answered, “It is the one to whom I give this morsel after I have dipped it.” Then he dipped the morsel and gave it to Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon.
After Judas took the morsel, Satan entered into him. Then Jesus said to him, “What yoʋ are about to do, do quickly.”
(Now no one at the table knew why he said this to him.
Some were thinking, since Judas had the moneybag, that Jesus was saying to him, “Buy what we need for the feast,” or that he should give something to the poor.)
As soon as Judas took the morsel, he went out. And it was night.
When Judas had gone out, Jesus said, “Now the Son of Man is glorified, and God is glorified in him.
And if God is glorified in him, God will also glorify the Son in himself, and will glorify him immediately.
Little children, I am with you for a little while longer. You will seek me, and just as I said to the Jews, now I say to you also, ‘Where I am going, you cannot come.’
I give you a new commandment, that you love one another. Just as I have loved you, so you must love one another.
By this everyone will know that you are my disciples, if you have love for one another.”
Simon Peter said to him, “Lord, where are yoʋ going?” Jesus answered him, “Yoʋ cannot follow me now to the place where I am going, but afterward yoʋ will follow me.”
Peter said to him, “Lord, why can I not follow yoʋ now? I will lay down my life for yoʋ.”
Jesus answered him, “Yoʋ will lay down yoʋr life for me? Truly, truly, I say to yoʋ, a rooster will certainly not crow until yoʋ have denied me three times.”
“Let not your hearts be troubled. Believe in God; believe also in me.
In my Father's house there are many rooms. If it were not so, I would have told you. I am going there to prepare a place for you.
So when I go, it is to prepare a place for you. I will come again and receive you to myself, so that where I am you also may be.
You know where I am going, and you know the way.”
Thomas said to him, “Lord, we do not know where yoʋ are going, so how can we know the way?”
Jesus said to him, “I am the way, the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me.
If you had known me, you would have known my Father also. From now on you do know him and have seen him.”
Philip said to him, “Lord, show us the Father, and that will be enough for us.”
Jesus said to him, “Have I been with you for so long and still yoʋ do not know me, Philip? Anyone who has seen me has seen the Father, so how can yoʋ say, ‘Show us the Father’?
Do yoʋ not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me? The words that I speak to you I do not speak on my own authority, but the Father who abides in me does his works.
Believe me that I am in the Father and the Father is in me; but if not, believe me because of the works themselves.
Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever believes in me will also do the works that I do. He will even do greater works than these, because I am going to my Father.
Whatever you ask in my name I will do, so that the Father may be glorified in the Son.
If you ask me anything in my name, I will do it.
“If you love me, keep my commandments.
And I will ask the Father, and he will give you another Helper to abide with you forever—
the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it does not see him or know him. But you know him, because he abides with you and will be in you.
“I will not leave you as orphans; I am coming back to you.
Yet a little while and the world will see me no longer, but you will see me. Because I live, you also will live.
On that day you will know that I am in my Father, and you are in me, and I am in you.
Whoever has my commandments and keeps them is the one who loves me. He who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him and manifest myself to him.”
Judas (not Iscariot) said to him, “Lord, what has happened that yoʋ are about to manifest yoʋrself to us and not to the world?”
Jesus answered him, “If anyone loves me, he will keep my word. My Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our home with him.
Whoever does not love me does not keep my words. The word that you hear is not mine, but the Father's who sent me.
“I have said these things to you while abiding with you.
But the Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, will teach you everything and remind you of everything I have told you.
Peace I leave with you; my peace I give to you. Not as the world gives do I give to you. Let not your hearts be troubled, neither let them be afraid.
You heard me say to you, ‘I am going away and coming back to you.’ If you loved me, you would have rejoiced that I said, ‘I am going to the Father,’ because my Father is greater than I am.
I have told you now before it happens, so that when it does happen, you may believe.
I will not talk with you much longer, for the ruler of the world is coming, but he has no power over me.
Rather, I do just as the Father has commanded me, so that the world may know that I love the Father. Rise, let us go from here.
“I am the true vine, and my Father is the vinedresser.
Every branch in me that does not bear fruit he takes away, and every branch that does bear fruit he prunes so that it will bear more fruit.
You have already been pruned by the word I have spoken to you.
Abide in me, and I will abide in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit by itself unless it abides in the vine, neither can you bear fruit unless you abide in me.
I am the vine; you are the branches. Whoever abides in me, and I in him, bears much fruit, because apart from me you can do nothing.
If anyone does not abide in me, he is thrown out like a branch and withers. Such branches are gathered up, thrown into the fire, and burned.
If you abide in me and my words abide in you, you will ask for whatever you wish, and it will be done for you.
My Father is glorified when you bear much fruit, and by doing so you will be my disciples.
Just as the Father has loved me, so have I loved you; abide in my love.
If you keep my commandments, you will abide in my love, just as I have kept my Father's commandments and abide in his love.
I have told you these things so that my joy may abide in you, and so that your joy may be full.
“This is my commandment, that you love one another, just as I have loved you.
No one has greater love than this, that he lay down his life for his friends.
You are my friends if you do whatever I command you.
No longer do I call you servants, because a servant does not know what his master is doing; but I have called you friends, because I have made known to you everything I heard from my Father.
You did not choose me, but I chose you and appointed you that you should go and bear fruit, and that your fruit should abide, so that whatever you ask of the Father in my name he will give you.
I am giving you these commands so that you may love one another.
“If the world hates you, know that it hated me before it hated you.
If you were of the world, the world would love you as its own. However, because you are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, the world hates you.
Remember what I told you: ‘A servant is not greater than his master.’ If they persecuted me, they will persecute you also. If they kept my word, they will keep yours also.
But they will do all these things to you on account of my name, because they do not know him who sent me.
If I had not come and spoken to them, they would have no sin, but now they have no excuse for their sin.
Whoever hates me hates my Father also.
If I had not done among them the works that no one else had done, they would have no sin, but now they have seen and hated both me and my Father.
But this has happened to fulfill what is written in their law: ‘They hated me for no reason.’
“When the Helper comes, whom I will send you from the Father, the Spirit of truth who proceeds from the Father, he will testify about me.
You must also testify, because you have been with me from the beginning.
“I have said these things to you so that you will not fall away.
They will put you out of the synagogues; indeed, an hour is coming when anyone who kills you will think he is offering service to God.
They will do these things because they have not known the Father or me.
But I have said these things to you so that when the hour comes you will remember that I said them to you. I did not say these things to you from the beginning, because I was with you.
“But now I am going to him who sent me, yet none of you asks me, ‘Where are yoʋ going?’
Rather, sorrow has filled your hearts because I have said these things to you.
But I tell you the truth, it is to your advantage that I go away, for if I do not go away, the Helper will not come to you. But if I do go, I will send him to you.
And when he comes, he will convict the world concerning sin, righteousness, and judgment:
concerning sin, because they do not believe in me;
concerning righteousness, because I am going to my Father, and you will no longer see me;
and concerning judgment, because the ruler of this world has been condemned.
“I still have many things to say to you, but you cannot bear them now.
When the Spirit of truth comes, he will guide you into all truth, for he will not speak on his own authority, but whatever he hears he will speak, and he will declare to you what is to come.
He will glorify me, for he will receive from me what is mine and declare it to you.
All that the Father has is mine. That is why I said that the Spirit will receive from me what is mine and declare it to you.
“In a little while you will not see me; and again after a little while, you will see me, for I am going to the Father.”
Then some of his disciples said to one another, “What does he mean by saying to us, ‘In a little while you will not see me; and again after a little while, you will see me,’ and, ‘for I am going to the Father’?”
So they kept saying, “What does he mean by saying, ‘a little while’? We do not know what he is talking about.”
Jesus knew that they wanted to ask him about this, so he said to them, “Are you asking one another what I meant when I said, ‘In a little while, you will not see me; and again after a little while, you will see me’?
Truly, truly, I say to you, you will weep and lament, but the world will rejoice. You will be sorrowful, but your sorrow will turn to joy.
When a woman is giving birth, she has pain because her hour has come. But when her baby is born, she no longer remembers the anguish because of her joy that a child has been born into the world.
So you also have sorrow now, but I will see you again, and your hearts will rejoice, and no one will take your joy away from you.
In that day you will ask nothing of me. Truly, truly, I say to you, whatever you ask of the Father in my name he will give you.
Until now you have not asked for anything in my name. Ask, and you will receive, so that your joy may be full.
“I have told you these things in figures of speech, but an hour is coming when I will no longer use figures of speech but will tell you plainly about the Father.
In that day you will ask in my name, and I do not say to you that I will ask the Father on your behalf,
for the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me and have come to believe that I came from God.
I came from the Father and have come into the world, and now I am leaving the world and going to the Father.”
His disciples said to him, “Behold, now yoʋ are speaking plainly and not using any figure of speech.
Now we know that yoʋ know all things and have no need for anyone to question yoʋ; because of this we believe that yoʋ came from God.”
Jesus answered them, “Now do you believe?
Behold, an hour is coming, and has now come, when you will be scattered, each to yoʋr own home, and will leave me all alone. Yet I am not alone, for the Father is with me.
I have said these things to you so that in me you may have peace. In the world you will have tribulation, but take heart; I have overcome the world.”
After saying these things, Jesus lifted up his eyes to heaven and said, “Father, the hour has come; glorify yoʋr Son so that yoʋr Son may also glorify yoʋ,
just as yoʋ have given him authority over all flesh, to give eternal life to everyone yoʋ have given him.
This is eternal life, that they may know yoʋ, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom yoʋ have sent.
I have glorified yoʋ on earth. I have completed the work yoʋ have given me to do.
And now, Father, glorify me in yoʋr presence with the glory I had with yoʋ before the world existed.
“I have revealed yoʋr name to the people yoʋ have given me out of the world. They were yoʋrs; yoʋ gave them to me, and they have kept yoʋr word.
They now know that everything yoʋ have given me is from yoʋ.
For I have given them the words that yoʋ gave me, and they have received them and truly know that I came from yoʋ. They have also come to believe that yoʋ sent me.
I ask on their behalf; I do not ask on behalf of the world, but on behalf of those yoʋ have given me, for they are yoʋrs.
All who are mine are also yoʋrs, and all who are yoʋrs are also mine, and I have been glorified in them.
I will no longer remain in the world, but they are in the world, and I am coming to yoʋ. Holy Father, keep them in yoʋr name, which yoʋ have given me, so that they may be one, just as we are one.
While I was with them in the world, I kept them safe by the power of yoʋr name. I have guarded those yoʋ have given me, and not one of them has perished except the son of destruction, so that the Scripture might be fulfilled.
But now I am coming to yoʋ, and I speak these things in the world so that they may have my joy made full within them.
I have given them yoʋr word, and the world has hated them because they are not of the world, just as I am not of the world.
I do not ask yoʋ to take them out of the world, but to keep them from the evil one.
They are not of the world, just as I am not of the world.
Sanctify them by yoʋr truth; yoʋr word is truth.
Just as yoʋ have sent me into the world, so I have sent them into the world.
For their sakes I sanctify myself, so that they too may be sanctified by the truth.
“I do not ask on behalf of them alone, but also on behalf of those who will believe in me through their word,
that they may all be one, just as yoʋ, Father, are in me, and I am in yoʋ, that they also may be one in us, so that the world may believe that yoʋ sent me.
I have given them the glory that yoʋ gave me, so that they may be one, just as we are one,
I in them and yoʋ in me, so that they may be perfected into one, and so that the world may know that yoʋ have sent me and have loved them just as yoʋ have loved me.
Father, I want those yoʋ have given me to be with me where I am, so that they may see my glory, which yoʋ gave me because yoʋ loved me before the foundation of the world.
Righteous Father, though the world does not know yoʋ, I know yoʋ, and these men know that yoʋ have sent me.
I have made yoʋr name known to them, and will continue to make it known, so that the love with which yoʋ have loved me may be in them, and so that I may be in them.”
After saying these things, Jesus went out with his disciples across the Kidron Valley, where there was a garden, which he entered along with his disciples.
Now Judas, who betrayed him, also knew the place, because Jesus had often met there with his disciples.
So Judas took a cohort of soldiers and officers from the chief priests and Pharisees, and they went there with lanterns, torches, and weapons.
Then Jesus, knowing everything that would happen to him, went out and said to them, “Who are you looking for?”
They answered him, “Jesus of Nazareth.” Jesus said to them, “I am he.” (Judas, who betrayed him, was also standing with them.)
When Jesus said to them, “I am he,” they drew back and fell to the ground.
So again he asked them, “Who are you looking for?” They said, “Jesus of Nazareth.”
Jesus answered, “I told you that I am he. So if you are looking for me, let these men go.”
He said this to fulfill the word he had spoken: “I have not lost a single one of those yoʋ have given me.”
Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, drew it and struck the high priest's servant, cutting off his right ear. (The servant's name was Malchus.)
But Jesus said to Peter, “Put yoʋr sword back in its sheath; shall I not drink the cup the Father has given me?”
Then the cohort of soldiers, along with its commander and the Jewish officers, arrested Jesus, bound him,
and led him away first to Annas, for he was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was high priest that year.
(It was Caiaphas who had advised the Jews that it was better for one man to perish for the people.)
Now Simon Peter was following Jesus, as was the other disciple. That disciple was known to the high priest, so he went with Jesus into the high priest's courtyard,
but Peter stood outside at the gate. So the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, went out, spoke to the gatekeeper, and brought Peter in.
Then the servant girl who was the gatekeeper said to Peter, “Yoʋ are not also one of this man's disciples, are yoʋ?” He said, “I am not.”
(Now the servants and the officers had made a charcoal fire, because it was cold, and they were standing there warming themselves. Peter was also standing with them, warming himself.)
Meanwhile, the high priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and his teaching.
Jesus answered him, “I have spoken openly to the world. I have always taught in the synagogues and in the temple courts, where the Jews always assemble together. I have said nothing in secret.
Why do yoʋ question me? Question those who heard what I said to them. Behold, they know what I said.”
When Jesus said this, one of the officers standing nearby slapped him and said, “Is that how yoʋ answer the high priest?”
Jesus answered him, “If I have spoken wrongly, testify as to what was wrong; but if I have spoken well, why are yoʋ hitting me?”
(Annas had sent him bound to Caiaphas the high priest.)
Meanwhile, Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. So they said to him, “Yoʋ are not also one of his disciples, are yoʋ?” He denied it and said, “I am not.”
But one of the servants of the high priest, who was a relative of the man whose ear Peter had cut off, said, “Did I not see yoʋ with him in the garden?”
Peter denied it again, and immediately a rooster crowed.
Then the Jews led Jesus away from Caiaphas to the governor's headquarters. It was now early in the morning. They themselves did not go into the governor's headquarters so that they would not be defiled, but could eat the Passover.
So Pilate went out to them and said, “What accusation do you bring against this man?”
They answered him, “If he were not an evildoer, we would not have handed him over to yoʋ.”
Pilate said to them, “You take him and judge him according to your own law.” The Jews said to him, “It is not lawful for us to put anyone to death.”
(This happened to fulfill what Jesus had said when he indicated the kind of death he was going to die.)
Then Pilate went into his headquarters again, called Jesus over, and said to him, “Are yoʋ the king of the Jews?”
Jesus answered him, “Do yoʋ say this of yoʋr own accord, or have others spoken to yoʋ about me?”
Pilate answered, “Am I a Jew? Yoʋr own nation and the chief priests have handed yoʋ over to me. What have yoʋ done?”
Jesus answered, “My kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this world, my servants would be fighting to keep me from being delivered up to the Jews. But as it is, my kingdom is not from here.”
Pilate said to him, “So yoʋ are a king?” Jesus answered, “Yoʋ have said yoʋrself that I am a king. The reason I was born and the reason I came into the world is to testify to the truth. Everyone who is of the truth listens to my voice.”
Pilate said to him, “What is truth?” After he said this, he again went out to the Jews and said to them, “I find no fault in him.
But you have a custom that I release for you one man at the Passover. So do you want me to release for you the king of the Jews?”
They all cried out again, “Not this man, but Barabbas!” (Now Barabbas was an insurrectionist.)
Then Pilate took Jesus and flogged him.
The soldiers twisted together a crown of thorns, put it on his head, and then clothed him with a purple garment.
They kept saying, “Hail, King of the Jews!” and striking him in the face.
Once again Pilate came out and said to the Jews, “Behold, I am bringing him out to you so that you may know that I find no fault in him.”
Jesus then came out wearing the crown of thorns and the purple garment, and Pilate said to them, “Behold, the man!”
When the chief priests and the officers saw him, they cried out, “Crucify, crucify him!” But Pilate said to them, “You take him and crucify him, for I find no fault in him.”
The Jews answered him, “We have a law, and according to our law he must die, for he made himself out to be the Son of God.”
When Pilate heard this, he was even more afraid.
He went back into his headquarters and said to Jesus, “Where are yoʋ from?” But Jesus gave him no answer.
So Pilate said to him, “Yoʋ do not speak to me? Do yoʋ not know that I have authority to crucify yoʋ, and authority to release yoʋ?”
Jesus answered, “Yoʋ would have no authority over me if it had not been given to yoʋ from above. Therefore he who handed me over to yoʋ has greater sin.”
From that point forward Pilate was seeking to release him, but the Jews cried out, “If yoʋ release this man, yoʋ are not a friend of Caesar; everyone who makes himself out to be a king opposes Caesar.”
When Pilate heard this, he brought Jesus out and sat down on the judgment seat at a place called the Stone Pavement (or in Hebrew, Gabbatha).
It was about the sixth hour on the day of Preparation for the Passover, and he said to the Jews, “Behold, your king!”
But they cried out, “Away with him, away with him, crucify him!” Pilate said to them, “Shall I crucify your king?” The chief priests answered, “We have no king but Caesar.”
Then Pilate handed Jesus over to them to be crucified. So they took Jesus and led him away.
Carrying his own cross, he went out to a location called the Place of the Skull (which in Hebrew is called Golgotha).
There they crucified him, and with him two others, one on each side, with Jesus in the middle.
Pilate also wrote a notice and put it on the cross. It read, “Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews.”
Many of the Jews read this notice, because the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city, and it was written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin.
Then the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate, “Do not write, ‘The King of the Jews,’ but rather, ‘This man said, “I am the king of the Jews.” ’ ”
Pilate answered, “What I have written, I have written.”
When the soldiers crucified Jesus, they took his garments and divided them into four parts, a part for each soldier. They also took his tunic, which was seamless. It was woven in one piece from top to bottom,
so they said to one another, “Let us not tear it apart, but cast lots for it to decide whose it will be.” This happened to fulfill the Scripture that says, “They divided my garments among themselves, and for my clothing they cast lots.” This is what the soldiers did.
Standing by the cross of Jesus were his mother, his mother's sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene.
When Jesus saw his mother and the disciple whom he loved standing nearby, he said to his mother, “Woman, behold, yoʋr son.”
Then he said to the disciple, “Behold, yoʋr mother.” And from that hour the disciple took her into his own home.
After this, when Jesus saw that everything was now finished, in order to fulfill the Scripture he said, “I am thirsty.”
A jar full of sour wine was there, so they filled a sponge with sour wine, put it around a hyssop branch, and brought it up to his mouth.
When Jesus had received the sour wine, he said, “It is finished.” Then he bowed his head and gave up his spirit.
Since it was the day of Preparation (for that Sabbath was a high day), the Jews asked Pilate to have the men's legs broken and their bodies taken away, so that the bodies would not remain on the cross on the Sabbath.
So the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first man and of the other who had been crucified with him.
But when they came to Jesus, they did not break his legs since they saw that he was already dead.
Instead, one of the soldiers pierced Jesus' side with a spear, and immediately blood and water came out.
He who saw this has testified, and his testimony is true, and he knows that he speaks what is true, so that you may believe.
For these things happened so that the Scripture would be fulfilled: “No bone of his will be broken.”
And, as another Scripture says, “They will look on him whom they have pierced.”
After these things, Joseph of Arimathea, who was a disciple of Jesus (but secretly for fear of the Jews), asked Pilate if he could take away Jesus' body. Pilate gave him permission, so he came and took away the body.
With him came Nicodemus (who had previously come to Jesus by night). He brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes that weighed about seventy-five pounds.
So they took Jesus' body and wrapped it in linen cloths with the spices, as is the custom of the Jews in preparing a body for burial.
Near the place where Jesus was crucified there was a garden, and in the garden there was a new tomb in which no one had ever been laid.
Because it was the Jewish day of Preparation and since the tomb was nearby, they laid Jesus there.
On the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene came to the tomb early, while it was still dark, and she saw that the stone had been moved away from the tomb.
So she ran and went to Simon Peter and the other disciple, the one whom Jesus loved, and said to them, “They have taken the Lord out of the tomb, and we do not know where they have laid him.”
So Peter went out, along with the other disciple, and they began making their way to the tomb.
The two were running together, but the other disciple outran Peter and reached the tomb first.
Stooping down to look in, he saw the linen cloths lying there, but he did not go in.
Then Simon Peter, who had been following him, arrived and went into the tomb. He saw the linen cloths lying there
and the facecloth that had been on Jesus' head. But it was not lying with the linen cloths; it was folded up separately in another place.
Then the other disciple, who had reached the tomb first, also went in. He saw and believed.
(For they did not yet understand the Scripture that Jesus must rise from the dead.)
Then the disciples went back to their homes.
But Mary stood near the tomb, weeping outside. As she was weeping, she stooped down to look into the tomb
and saw two angels in white sitting where Jesus' body had been laid, one at the head and one at the feet.
They said to her, “Woman, why are yoʋ weeping?” She said to them, “They have taken away my Lord, and I do not know where they have laid him.”
After saying this, she turned around and saw Jesus standing there, but she did not know it was Jesus.
Jesus said to her, “Woman, why are yoʋ weeping? Who are yoʋ looking for?” Supposing that he was the gardener, she said to him, “Sir, if yoʋ have carried him away, tell me where yoʋ have laid him, and I will take him away.”
Jesus said to her, “Mary!” She turned and said to him, “Rabboni!” (which means “Teacher”).
Jesus said to her, “Do not hold on to me, for I have not yet ascended to my Father. But go to my brothers and tell them that I am ascending to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.”
So Mary Magdalene went and told the disciples that she had seen the Lord and that he had said these things to her.
In the evening of that day, the first day of the week, when the disciples were gathered together with the doors locked for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood among them and said to them, “Peace be with you.”
After saying this, he showed them his hands and his side, and the disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord.
Again Jesus said to them, “Peace be with you. As the Father has sent me, so I am sending you.”
After saying this, he breathed on them and said to them, “Receive the Holy Spirit.
If you remit the sins of any, their sins are remitted; if you retain the sins of any, their sins are retained.”
Now Thomas (called Didymus), one of the twelve, was not with them when Jesus came.
So the other disciples said to him, “We have seen the Lord.” But he said to them, “Unless I see the nail marks in his hands and put my finger where the nails were, and put my hand into his side, I will certainly not believe.”
Eight days later, Jesus' disciples were again inside, and Thomas was with them. Although the doors were locked, Jesus came and stood among them and said, “Peace be with you.”
Then he said to Thomas, “Put yoʋr finger here and look at my hands. Reach out yoʋr hand and put it into my side. Do not doubt but believe.”
In response Thomas said to him, “My Lord and my God!”
Then Jesus said to him, “Because yoʋ have seen me, have yoʋ come to believe? Blessed are those who have not seen and yet have come to believe.”
Jesus performed many other signs in the presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book.
But these have been written so that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that by believing you may have life in his name.
After this Jesus again manifested himself to the disciples, by the Sea of Tiberias. He manifested himself in this way:
Simon Peter, Thomas (called Didymus), Nathanael (from Cana of Galilee), the sons of Zebedee, and two of Jesus' other disciples were together.
Simon Peter said to them, “I am going fishing.” They said to him, “We will go with yoʋ.” So they immediately went out and got into the boat, but that night they caught nothing.
When daybreak came, Jesus stood on the shore, but the disciples did not know it was Jesus.
Jesus said to them, “Children, have you caught any fish to eat?” They answered him, “No.”
He said to them, “Cast the net on the right side of the boat, and you will find some.” So they cast it and were unable to draw it in because of the large number of fish.
Then the disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, “It is the Lord!” When Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he put on his outer garment (for he had taken it off) and plunged into the sea.
But the other disciples came in the boat, dragging the net full of fish, for they were not far from shore, only about a hundred yards away.
When they had gone ashore, they saw a charcoal fire there with a fish lying on it, and bread.
Jesus said to them, “Bring some of the fish you have just caught.”
So Simon Peter went aboard and drew the net ashore, full of large fish, one hundred fifty-three of them. Although there were so many, the net had not torn.
Then Jesus said to them, “Come eat breakfast.” Now none of the disciples dared to ask him, “Who are yoʋ?” because they knew it was the Lord.
Then Jesus came, took the bread, and gave it to them. He did likewise with the fish.
This was now the third time that Jesus had been revealed to his disciples after he had been raised from the dead.
When they had eaten breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter, “Simon, son of Jonah, do yoʋ love me more than these?” Peter said to him, “Yes, Lord, yoʋ know that I care for yoʋ.” Jesus said to him, “Feed my lambs.”
Jesus said to him a second time, “Simon, son of Jonah, do yoʋ love me?” Peter said to him, “Yes, Lord, yoʋ know that I care for yoʋ.” Jesus said to him, “Tend my sheep.”
Then Jesus said to him the third time, “Simon, son of Jonah, do yoʋ care for me?” Peter was grieved that Jesus said to him the third time, “Do yoʋ care for me?” And he said to him, “Lord, yoʋ know everything; yoʋ know that I care for yoʋ.” Jesus said to him, “Feed my sheep.
Truly, truly, I say to yoʋ, when yoʋ were younger, yoʋ would dress yoʋrself and walk wherever yoʋ wanted to go; but when yoʋ grow old, yoʋ will stretch out yoʋr hands, and another will dress yoʋ and bring yoʋ where yoʋ do not want to go.”
(He said this to indicate the kind of death by which Peter would glorify God.) After saying this, he said to Peter, “Follow me.”
Then Peter turned around and saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following them (the one who had leaned back on Jesus' chest at the supper and said, “Lord, who is it that is going to betray yoʋ?”)
When Peter saw him, he said to Jesus, “Lord, what about him?”
Jesus said to him, “If I wish for him to remain until I come, what is that to yoʋ? Yoʋ follow me!”
So the rumor spread among the brothers that this disciple would not die. Yet Jesus did not tell him that he would not die; he only said, “If I wish for him to remain until I come, what is that to yoʋ?”
This is the disciple who is testifying about these things and who has written these things, and we know that his testimony is true.
There are also many other things that Jesus did. If every one of them were to be written down, I suppose that not even the world itself would have room for the books that would be written. Amen.
The first account I compiled, O Theophilus, was about all that Jesus began to do and teach
until the day he was taken up, after he had given commands through the Holy Spirit to the apostles he had chosen.
He presented himself alive to them, after his suffering, by many convincing proofs, appearing to them over the course of forty days and speaking about the kingdom of God.
While he was with them, he commanded them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of the Father, “Which,” he said, “you heard about from me.
For John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit not many days from now.”
So when they had come together, they asked him, “Lord, are yoʋ going to restore the kingdom to Israel at this time?”
He said to them, “It is not for you to know the times or seasons that the Father has set by his own authority,
but you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes upon you, and you will be witnesses to me in Jerusalem, in all Judea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.”
After he said this, he was lifted up as they looked on, and a cloud took him out of their sight.
As he went, they were gazing up into the sky, when behold, two men in white clothing stood beside them.
They said, “Men of Galilee, why are you standing here staring into the sky? This Jesus who was taken up from you into heaven will come back in the same way you have seen him go into heaven.”
Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is near Jerusalem, a Sabbath day's journey away.
After entering the city, they went up to the upper room where they were staying. Those present were Peter, James, John, Andrew, Philip, Thomas, Bartholomew, Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus, Simon the Zealot, and Judas the son of James.
With one accord they were all devoting themselves to prayer and supplication, along with Jesus' brothers and several women, including Mary the mother of Jesus.
In those days Peter stood up among the disciples (a crowd of about one hundred twenty people who were gathered together). He said,
“Brothers, it was necessary for this Scripture to be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit foretold by the mouth of David concerning Judas, who became a guide to those who arrested Jesus.
For he was numbered with us and received his share in this ministry.”
(Now this man Judas had acquired a field with the wages of unrighteousness, and falling headfirst, his body burst open, and all his intestines gushed out.
This became known to all who were dwelling in Jerusalem, so that in their language the field was called Akeldama, that is, Field of Blood.)
Peter continued, “For it is written in the Book of Psalms: ‘May his homestead become desolate; let there be no one to dwell in it,’ and, ‘May another take his position as overseer.’
Therefore, one of the men who have accompanied us during the entire time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,
beginning from the baptism of John up to the day when Jesus was taken up from us, must become a witness with us of his resurrection.”
So they put forward two men, Joseph called Barsabas (who was given the name Justus), and Matthias.
Then they prayed, “Lord, yoʋ know the hearts of all; show us which of these two men yoʋ have chosen
to receive the share of this ministry and apostleship from which Judas turned away to go to his own place.”
Then they cast lots for them, and the lot fell to Matthias, so he was added to the eleven apostles.
When the day of Pentecost came, all the believers were in the same place with one accord.
Suddenly a sound like a mighty rushing wind came from heaven, and it filled the whole house where they were sitting.
Divided tongues that looked like fire appeared to them and rested on each one of them.
Then they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began speaking in other tongues as the Spirit enabled them.
Now there were devout Jews from every nation under heaven dwelling in Jerusalem.
When this sound occurred, the multitude came together, and they were bewildered because each one of them heard his own language being spoken.
They were all astonished and amazed, saying to one another, “Behold, are not all these who are speaking Galileans?
How then do we each hear them in our own native languages?
Parthians, Medes, Elamites; those who dwell in Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia,
Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the districts of Libya that are near Cyrene; visitors from Rome (both Jews and converts to Judaism),
Cretans and Arabs—we hear them speaking about the mighty acts of God in our own tongues.”
And they were all amazed and greatly perplexed, saying to one another, “What could this mean?”
But others scoffed at the believers, saying, “They are filled with new wine.”
Then Peter stood up with the eleven, lifted up his voice, and declared to them, “Men of Judea and all who dwell in Jerusalem, let this be known to you, and give ear to my words.
These men are not drunk, as you suppose, for it is only the third hour of the day.
But this is what was spoken through the prophet Joel:
‘In the last days, says God, I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh. Your sons and your daughters will prophesy, your young men will see visions, and your old men will dream dreams.
Even upon my male and female servants I will pour out my Spirit in those days, and they will prophesy.
I will perform wonders in the heavens above and signs on the earth below: blood, fire, and mist of smoke.
The sun will be turned to darkness and the moon to blood, before the coming of the great and glorious day of the Lord.
And everyone who calls upon the name of the Lord will be saved.’
“Men of Israel, listen to these words: Jesus of Nazareth, a man attested to you by God with miracles, wonders, and signs that God did through him in your midst, just as you yourselves well know,
this man, who was delivered up by the deliberate plan and foreknowledge of God, you took and put to death, having him nailed to the cross by the hands of lawless men.
But God raised him up, releasing him from the pangs of death, because it was impossible for death to keep its hold on him.
For David says about him, ‘I saw the Lord always before me, for he is at my right hand so that I will not be shaken.
Therefore my heart was glad and my tongue rejoiced; moreover, my flesh will dwell in hope.
For yoʋ will not abandon my soul to Hades, nor will yoʋ let yoʋr Holy One see corruption.
Yoʋ have made known to me the paths of life; yoʋ will fill me with joy by yoʋr presence.’
“Brothers, I can say to you with confidence concerning our patriarch David that he died and was buried, and his tomb is with us to this day.
So then, because he was a prophet and knew that God had sworn an oath to him that from among his descendants, according to the flesh, he would raise up the Christ to sit on his throne,
David foresaw what would happen and spoke about the resurrection of the Christ, saying that his soul was not abandoned to Hades and that his flesh did not see corruption.
This Jesus God has raised up, of which we are all witnesses.
Therefore, having been exalted to the right hand of God and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this that you now see and hear.
For David did not ascend to heaven, but he himself says, ‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at my right hand
until I make yoʋr enemies a footstool for yoʋr feet.” ’
Therefore, let all the house of Israel know with certainty that God has made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom you crucified.”
When they heard this, they were pierced to the heart and said to Peter and the rest of the apostles, “Brothers, what should we do?”
Peter said to them, “Repent and be baptized, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.
For this promise is for you, for your children, and for all who are far off, as many as the Lord our God calls to himself.”
With many other words he testified and exhorted them, saying, “Be saved from this crooked generation.”
Then those who gladly received his word were baptized, and about three thousand souls were added on that day.
And they devoted themselves to the teaching of the apostles and to fellowship, to the breaking of bread and to prayer.
A sense of awe came upon every soul, and many wonders and signs were being done by the apostles.
All who believed were together and had all things in common.
They were selling their possessions and belongings, and distributing the proceeds to all, as anyone had need.
Day by day as they continued meeting together with one accord in the temple courts and breaking bread from house to house, they shared food together with gladness and simplicity of heart,
praising God and enjoying the favor of all the people. And the Lord added to the church daily those who were being saved.
One day Peter and John were going up together to the temple at the hour of prayer, the ninth hour.
And a man who was lame from his mother's womb was being carried in. Every day people would lay him at the gate of the temple called the Beautiful Gate so that he could ask for alms from those who were entering the temple courts.
When he saw Peter and John about to enter the temple courts, he began asking for alms.
But Peter, along with John, looked at him intently and said, “Look at us.”
So the man gave them his attention, expecting to receive something from them.
But Peter said, “I have no silver or gold, but what I do have I give to yoʋ. In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk.”
Then Peter took hold of him by the right hand and raised him up, and at once his feet and ankles were made strong.
Leaping up, he stood and began walking. Then he entered the temple courts with them, walking and leaping and praising God.
When all the people saw him walking and praising God,
they recognized him as the man who used to sit at the Beautiful Gate of the temple asking for alms. And they were filled with wonder and amazement at what had happened to him.
As the lame man who had been healed clung to Peter and John, all the people ran together to them at the portico called Solomon's, utterly astonished.
When Peter saw this, he addressed the people: “Men of Israel, why are you amazed at this, or why are you staring at us as though by our own power or godliness we have made this man walk?
The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob—the God of our fathers—has glorified his servant Jesus, whom you delivered up and denied in the presence of Pilate, even though Pilate had decided to release him.
Yes, you denied the Holy and Righteous One and asked for a murderer to be granted to you.
You put to death the Author of life, whom God raised from the dead, of which we are witnesses.
By faith in his name, his name has given strength to this man whom you see and know, and the faith that is through Jesus has given him this perfect health in the presence of you all.
“Now, brothers, I know that you acted in ignorance, as did your rulers also.
But in this way God fulfilled what he had foretold through the mouths of all his prophets, that the Christ would suffer.
Therefore repent and turn back so that your sins may be wiped away, that times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord,
and that he may send Jesus, the Christ who has been appointed for you.
Heaven must receive him until the time comes for the restoration of all things, which God declared by the mouths of all his holy prophets long ago.
For Moses said to our fathers, ‘The Lord our God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your brothers. You must listen to everything he tells you.
Every soul who does not listen to that prophet will be utterly destroyed from among the people.’
Indeed, all the prophets who have spoken, beginning with Samuel and continuing with those who came afterward, also proclaimed these days.
You are the sons of the prophets and of the covenant that God made with our fathers when he said to Abraham, ‘In yoʋr offspring all the families of the earth will be blessed.’
God raised up his servant Jesus and sent him first to you, to bless you by turning each of you from your evil ways.”
As Peter and John were speaking to the people, the priests, the captain of the temple guard, and the Sadducees came to them,
greatly annoyed because they were teaching the people and proclaiming in Jesus the resurrection from the dead.
So they arrested them and took them into custody until the next day, for it was already evening.
But many who heard the word believed, and the number of men who believed came to about five thousand.
On the next day, the rulers, elders, and scribes were gathered together in Jerusalem,
along with Annas the high priest, Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and all who were members of the high-priestly family.
After making Peter and John stand before them, they began to question them: “By what power or by what name did you do this?”
Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them, “Rulers of the people and elders of Israel,
if we are being examined today about a good deed done to a disabled man and by what means he has been healed,
let it be known to you all, and to all the people of Israel, that this man is standing before you in good health by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified and whom God raised from the dead.
This Jesus is the stone that was rejected by you, the builders, which has become the cornerstone.
There is salvation in no other, for there is no other name given among men by which we must be saved.”
When they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and when they realized that they were uneducated and untrained men, they were amazed and recognized that they had been with Jesus.
But since they could see the man who had been healed standing there with them, they had nothing to say in opposition.
So they ordered Peter and John to step out from the Sanhedrin while they conferred with one another,
saying, “What should we do with these men? For it is evident to all who dwell in Jerusalem that a notable sign has been done through them, and we cannot deny it.
But so that it may not spread any further among the people, we will strictly warn them to speak no more in this name to any of the people.”
Then they called them in and ordered them not to speak or teach at all in the name of Jesus.
But Peter and John answered them, “Whether it is right in the sight of God to listen to you rather than to God, you must judge.
For we cannot help but speak about what we have seen and heard.”
So after threatening Peter and John further, they released them, finding no way to punish them, because all the people were glorifying God for what had happened.
For the man on whom this sign of healing had been performed was more than forty years old.
After being released, Peter and John went to their own people and reported all that the chief priests and the elders had said to them.
When they heard this, they lifted up their voices with one accord to God and said, “Master, yoʋ are God, who made the heavens, the earth, the sea, and all that is in them.
It is yoʋ who said through the mouth of yoʋr servant David, ‘Why do the nations rage, and the peoples plot foolish things?
The kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers are gathered together, against the Lord and against his Anointed.’
For indeed both Herod and Pontius Pilate, along with the Gentiles and the people of Israel, were gathered together against yoʋr holy servant Jesus, whom yoʋ anointed,
to do whatever yoʋr hand and yoʋr plan had foreordained to take place.
And now, Lord, take note of their threats and grant it to yoʋr servants to speak yoʋr word with all boldness,
as yoʋ stretch out yoʋr hand to heal and to perform signs and wonders through the name of yoʋr holy servant Jesus.”
After they prayed, the place where they were gathered together was shaken, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began speaking the word of God with boldness.
Now the hearts and souls of the multitude of believers were one, and no one was saying that any of their belongings was his own, but everything they owned was held in common.
With great power the apostles were giving testimony to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and great grace was upon them all.
There was no one needy among them, for all who owned plots of land or houses sold them and brought the proceeds of what was sold.
They laid the money at the feet of the apostles, and the proceeds were distributed to anyone who had need.
Joses, whom the apostles called Barnabas (which means “Son of Encouragement”), a Levite and Cypriot by birth,
also sold a field he owned and then brought the money and laid it at the apostles' feet.
Now a man named Ananias, along with his wife Sapphira, sold a piece of property
and kept back some of the proceeds, with his wife also being aware of it. He brought a portion of the proceeds and laid it at the apostles' feet.
But Peter said, “Ananias, why has Satan filled yoʋr heart to lie to the Holy Spirit and keep back some of the proceeds of the plot of land?
While it remained unsold, did it not remain yoʋrs? And once it was sold, was it not under yoʋr control? How is it that yoʋ have put this thing in yoʋr heart? Yoʋ have not lied to men but to God.”
When Ananias heard these words, he fell down and breathed his last breath. And great fear came upon all who heard about it.
Then the young men rose, wrapped up his body, carried him out, and buried him.
About three hours later, his wife came in, not knowing what had happened.
Peter said to her, “Tell me if you sold the plot of land for such and such a price.” She said, “Yes, for such a price.”
Peter said to her, “Why is it that you have agreed to put the Spirit of the Lord to the test? Behold, the feet of those who buried yoʋr husband are at the door, and they will carry yoʋ out.”
At once she fell down at his feet and breathed her last breath. When the young men came in, they found her dead, so they carried her out and buried her beside her husband.
And great fear came upon the whole church and upon all who heard these things.
Now many signs and wonders were taking place among the people by the hands of the apostles, and all the believers were together with one accord in Solomon's portico.
No one else dared to join them, but the people held them in high regard.
Yet more and more people believed in the Lord and were added to their number, a multitude of both men and women.
As a result, people carried the sick out into the streets and laid them on beds and mats, so that when Peter came by at least his shadow might fall on one of them.
A multitude from the towns all around Jerusalem also gathered together, bringing the sick and those harassed by unclean spirits, and they were all healed.
Then the high priest rose up, along with all who were with him (that is, the sect of the Sadducees), and they were filled with jealousy.
So they arrested the apostles and put them in a public jail.
But during the night an angel of the Lord opened the doors of the prison, brought them out, and said,
“Go stand in the temple courts and tell the people everything about this new life.”
When they heard this, they entered the temple courts at dawn and began teaching. When the high priest came, along with those who were with him, they called together the Sanhedrin—that is, the entire eldership of the people of Israel—and sent officers to the prison to have the apostles brought before them.
But when the officers arrived, they did not find them in the prison. So they returned and reported,
“We found the prison locked up in complete security and the guards standing in front of the doors, but when we opened the doors, we found no one inside.”
When the high priest, the captain of the temple guard, and the chief priests heard this report, they were greatly perplexed by it, wondering what might come of this.
Then someone came and told them, “Behold, the men you put in prison are standing in the temple courts teaching the people!”
So the captain went with the officers and brought the apostles without the use of force, for they were afraid the people might stone them.
After bringing the apostles in, they had them stand before the Sanhedrin, and the high priest asked them,
“Did we not strictly command you not to teach in this name? Yet behold, you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching, and you are determined to bring the blood of this man upon us.”
But Peter and the apostles answered, “We must obey God rather than men.
The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom you murdered by hanging him on a cross.
God exalted him to his right hand as Leader and Savior to grant repentance to Israel and remission of sins.
Concerning these things we are his witnesses, and so is the Holy Spirit, whom God has given to those who obey him.”
When they heard this, they were furious and resolved to put them to death,
but a Pharisee named Gamaliel, a teacher of the law who was held in honor by all the people, stood up in the Sanhedrin and gave orders to put the apostles outside for a little while.
Then he said to the Sanhedrin, “Men of Israel, give careful consideration to what you are about to do to these men.
For before these days Theudas rose up, declaring himself to be somebody, and a number of men, about four hundred, responded to the call to join him. He was put to death, and all his followers were scattered and came to nothing.
After this man, Judas the Galilean rose up in the days of the census and drew away many people after him. He also perished, and all his followers were scattered.
So I say to you now, keep away from these men and leave them alone, for if this plan or this undertaking is of men, it will be stopped;
but if it is of God, you cannot put a stop to it. You will only find yourselves fighting against God.”
They were persuaded by him, and after calling in the apostles, they beat them, commanded them not to speak in the name of Jesus, and released them.
So the apostles went out from the presence of the Sanhedrin, rejoicing that they had been considered worthy to suffer dishonor for the name of Jesus.
And every day, in the temple courts and from house to house, they did not cease teaching and preaching the good news that Jesus is the Christ.
In those days, as the disciples increased in number, a complaint arose against the Hebrews on the part of the Hellenists that their widows were being overlooked in the daily distribution of food.
So the twelve called the multitude of the disciples together and said, “It is not proper for us to neglect the word of God to wait on tables.
Therefore, brothers, look for seven men among you who have a good reputation and are full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom, whom we can appoint for this need.
But we will devote ourselves to prayer and to the ministry of the word.”
This proposal pleased the whole multitude, so they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and the Holy Spirit, together with Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolaus, an Antiochean convert to Judaism.
They set these men before the apostles, who then prayed and laid their hands on them.
So the word of God continued to increase, and the number of disciples continued to multiply greatly in Jerusalem, and a large number of priests became obedient to the faith.
Now Stephen, a man full of faith and power, was performing great wonders and signs among the people.
But some men from the synagogue of the Freedmen (as it was called), along with some of the Cyrenians and Alexandrians, and some men from Cilicia and Asia, rose up and began to argue with Stephen.
But they were not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit with which he was speaking.
Then they induced some men to say, “We heard Stephen speaking blasphemous words against Moses and against God.”
They also stirred up the people, the elders, and the scribes. So they came up to Stephen, seized him, and brought him to the Sanhedrin.
Then they put forward false witnesses who said, “This man does not stop speaking blasphemous words against the holy place and against the law.
For we heard him saying that this Jesus of Nazareth will destroy this place and change the customs that Moses handed down to us.”
And all who were sitting in the Sanhedrin stared at Stephen intently and saw that his face was like the face of an angel.
Then the high priest said, “Are these accusations true?”
Stephen said, “Brothers and fathers, listen. The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Haran,
and said to him, ‘Leave yoʋr land and yoʋr relatives, and go to a land I will show yoʋ.’
Then he left the land of the Chaldeans and dwelt in Haran. After his father died, God relocated him to this land in which you now dwell.
He gave him no inheritance in it, not even the length of a footstep, but promised to give it to him for a possession, and to his descendants after him, even though he had no child.
God told him that his descendants would be sojourners in a foreign land, and that the people of that land would enslave them and mistreat them for four hundred years.
‘But I will judge the nation whom they serve as slaves,’ God said, ‘and afterward they will come out of that country and serve me in this place.’
Then he gave Abraham the covenant of circumcision, and Abraham became the father of Isaac and circumcised him on the eighth day. Later Isaac became the father of Jacob, and Jacob became the father of the twelve patriarchs.
“The patriarchs became jealous of Joseph and sold him into Egypt. But God was with him
and delivered him out of all his afflictions. He gave Joseph favor and wisdom before Pharaoh, king of Egypt, so Pharaoh appointed him as ruler over Egypt and over all his household.
Then a famine came upon all the land of Egypt and Canaan, along with great suffering, and our fathers could find no food.
But when Jacob heard that there was grain in Egypt, he sent our fathers out the first time.
On their second visit, Joseph made himself known to his brothers again, and Joseph's family became known to Pharaoh.
Then Joseph sent and called for his father Jacob and all his relatives, seventy-five people in all.
So Jacob went down to Egypt, and there he died, he and our fathers.
Later their bodies were moved to Shechem and laid in the tomb that Abraham had bought for a sum of money from the sons of Hamor, the father of Shechem.
“As the time drew near for God to fulfill the promise he had sworn to Abraham, our people increased and multiplied in Egypt
until there arose another king who did not know Joseph.
This king dealt shrewdly with our people and mistreated our fathers, making them abandon their newborn babies so that they would not survive.
At that time Moses was born, and he was beautiful in God's sight. For three months he was brought up in his father's house,
and when he was abandoned, Pharaoh's daughter took him in and brought him up as her own son.
So Moses was trained in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and he was mighty in words and deeds.
“When Moses reached forty years of age, it came into his heart to visit his brothers, the sons of Israel.
When he saw one of them being wronged, he came to the aid of the man who was being oppressed and avenged him by striking down the Egyptian who was oppressing him.
Moses assumed that his brothers would understand that God was granting them deliverance by his hand, but they did not understand.
The next day Moses came upon two Israelites who were fighting and urged them to make peace, saying, ‘Men, you are brothers; why are you hurting each other?’
But the one who was hurting his neighbor thrust Moses aside and said, ‘Who appointed yoʋ to be a ruler and judge over us?
Do yoʋ want to kill me as yoʋ killed that Egyptian yesterday?’
At this remark Moses fled and became a sojourner in the land of Midian, where he became the father of two sons.
“After forty years had passed, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in the wilderness of Mount Sinai, in a flame of fire in a bush.
When Moses saw it, he was amazed at the sight. As he drew near to look at it, the voice of the Lord came to him:
‘I am the God of yoʋr fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.’ Moses began to tremble and did not dare to look.
Then the Lord said to him, ‘Remove the sandals from yoʋr feet, for the place where yoʋ are standing is holy ground.
I have surely seen the mistreatment of my people in Egypt. I have heard their groaning and have come down to deliver them. Now come, I will send yoʋ to Egypt.’
“This is the same Moses they had rejected, saying, ‘Who appointed yoʋ to be a ruler and judge?’ He is the one God sent as a ruler and redeemer by the hand of the angel who appeared to him in the bush.
He is the one who led them out, performing wonders and signs in the land of Egypt, at the Red Sea, and in the wilderness for forty years.
This is the same Moses who said to the sons of Israel, ‘The Lord our God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your brothers.’
This is the man who was with our fathers in the assembly in the wilderness when the angel spoke to him on Mount Sinai. He received a living word to give to us.
Our fathers were unwilling to obey him. Instead, they thrust him aside, and in their hearts they turned back to Egypt,
saying to Aaron, ‘Make us gods who will go before us, for we do not know what has happened to this Moses who led us out of the land of Egypt.’
In those days they made an idol in the form of a calf, brought a sacrifice to the idol, and rejoiced at the works of their hands.
But God turned away from them and gave them up to serve the host of heaven, just as it is written in the book of the prophets: ‘Was it to me that you offered slain beasts and sacrifices for forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel?
No! You took up the tabernacle of Molech and the star of your god Remphan, the images you made so that you could worship them, so I will send you into exile beyond Babylon.’
“Our fathers had the tabernacle of the testimony in the wilderness, just as God had directed when he spoke to Moses and told him to make it according to the pattern he had seen.
Receiving it in turn, our fathers brought it in with Joshua when they dispossessed the nations whom God drove out from their presence. It remained there until the days of David,
who found favor before God and asked if he could provide a dwelling place for the God of Jacob.
But it was Solomon who built a house for him.
Yet the Most High does not dwell in temples made by human hands, just as the prophet says,
‘Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool. What house will you build for me, says the Lord, or what place is there for my rest?
Has not my hand made all these things?’
“You stiff-necked people, uncircumcised in heart and ears, you always resist the Holy Spirit! As your fathers did, so you do also.
Which of the prophets did your fathers not persecute? They even killed those who foretold the coming of the Righteous One, whose betrayers and murderers you have now become,
you who received the law as ordained by angels yet have not kept it.”
When the members of the Sanhedrin heard these things, they were cut to the heart and began gnashing their teeth at him.
But Stephen, full of the Holy Spirit, gazed into heaven and saw the glory of God and Jesus standing at the right hand of God.
He said, “Behold, I see the heavens opened and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God.”
But they cried out with a loud voice, stopped their ears, and rushed at him with one accord.
Then they drove him out of the city and began stoning him. Meanwhile, the witnesses laid their cloaks at the feet of a young man named Saul.
They continued stoning Stephen while he prayed, “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit!”
Then he fell to his knees and cried out with a loud voice, “Lord, do not hold this sin against them!” After saying this, he fell asleep.
And Saul approved of his execution. On that day a great persecution arose against the church in Jerusalem, and all the believers except the apostles were scattered throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria.
Devout men carried Stephen away for burial and made great lamentation over him.
But Saul was ravaging the church. Entering house after house, he dragged off both men and women and put them in prison.
Now those who had been scattered went around preaching the message of good news.
Philip went down to a city of Samaria and began proclaiming to them the Christ.
With one accord the crowds paid close attention to what Philip said as they listened to him and saw the signs he was performing.
For unclean spirits came out of many who had them, crying out with a loud voice, and many who were paralyzed or lame were healed.
And there was great joy in that city.
Now a man named Simon had previously practiced magic in the city and amazed the people of Samaria, declaring himself to be someone great.
From the least to the greatest, they paid close attention to him, saying, “This man is the great power of God.”
They all paid close attention to him because he had amazed them with his magical arts for a long time.
But when they believed Philip as he preached good news about the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women.
Even Simon himself believed. After he was baptized, he kept close company with Philip and was amazed as he saw miracles and signs taking place.
When the apostles in Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent them Peter and John.
These two went down and prayed for the Samaritan believers to receive the Holy Spirit,
for the Spirit had not yet fallen upon any of them; they had only been baptized in the name of Christ Jesus.
Then Peter and John laid their hands on the Samaritan believers, and they received the Holy Spirit.
When Simon saw that the Holy Spirit was given through the laying on of the apostles' hands, he offered them money,
saying, “Give this power to me as well, so that whomever I lay my hands on may receive the Holy Spirit.”
But Peter said to him, “May yoʋr silver be destroyed with yoʋ, because yoʋ thought yoʋ could acquire the gift of God with money!
Yoʋ have no share or portion in this matter, for yoʋr heart is not right before God.
Therefore repent of this wickedness of yoʋrs, and plead with God in the hope that the intention of yoʋr heart might be forgiven yoʋ.
For I see that yoʋ are bitterly envious and in bondage to unrighteousness.”
In response Simon said, “Pray to the Lord for me so that nothing you have said will happen to me.”
After Peter and John had testified and spoken the word of the Lord, they returned to Jerusalem, preaching the good news in many villages of the Samaritans as they went.
Now an angel of the Lord said to Philip, “Rise and go toward the south, to the road that goes from Jerusalem down to Gaza.” (This is a desert road.)
So he rose and went. And behold, there was an Ethiopian eunuch, a court official in charge of the entire treasury of Candace, the queen of the Ethiopians. This man had come to Jerusalem to worship
and was sitting in his chariot on his way back home, reading the prophet Isaiah.
The Spirit said to Philip, “Go over and join that chariot.”
So Philip ran up to it and heard the man reading the prophet Isaiah. He said, “Do yoʋ understand what yoʋ are reading?”
The man said, “How can I, unless someone guides me?” So he invited Philip to come up and sit with him.
This is the passage of Scripture that he was reading: “Like a sheep he was led to slaughter, and like a lamb is silent before its shearer, so he did not open his mouth.
In his humiliation he was denied justice. Who will tell of his posterity? For his life was taken from the earth.”
The eunuch said to Philip, “I ask yoʋ, who does the prophet say this about? About himself, or about someone else?”
Then Philip opened his mouth to speak, and beginning from this Scripture, he told him the good news about Jesus.
As they were going along the road, they came to some water, and the eunuch said, “Behold, here is water! What prevents me from being baptized?”

So he ordered the chariot to stop, and the two of them went down into the water, both Philip and the eunuch, and Philip baptized him.
When they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught Philip away, and the eunuch saw him no more, but went on his way rejoicing.
Philip, however, found himself at Azotus, and as he passed through that region, he preached the gospel in all the towns until he came to Caesarea.
Meanwhile Saul, still breathing out threats and murder against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest
and asked for letters from him to the synagogues in Damascus, so that if he found any who belonged to the Way, whether men or women, he might bring them to Jerusalem as prisoners.
As he was going along, he drew near to Damascus, and suddenly a light from heaven flashed around him.
Falling to the ground, he heard a voice saying to him, “Saul, Saul, why are yoʋ persecuting me?”
Saul said, “Who are yoʋ, Lord?” The Lord said, “I am Jesus, whom yoʋ are persecuting.
But rise and enter the city, and yoʋ will be told what yoʋ must do.”
The men who were traveling with Saul stood speechless, hearing the voice but seeing no one.
Saul rose from the ground, and although his eyes were open, he saw no one. So they led him by the hand and brought him to Damascus.
He went three days without seeing, and neither ate nor drank.
Now there was a disciple in Damascus named Ananias. The Lord said to him in a vision, “Ananias.” He said, “Behold, here I am, Lord.”
Then the Lord said to him, “Get up and go to the street called Straight, and at the house of Judas look for a man of Tarsus named Saul. For behold, he is praying,
and in a vision he has seen a man named Ananias coming in and laying his hand on him so that he might receive his sight.”
But Ananias answered, “Lord, I have heard from many about how much evil this man has done to yoʋr saints in Jerusalem.
And here he has authority from the chief priests to arrest all who call upon yoʋr name.”
But the Lord said to him, “Go, for he is a vessel chosen by me to bring my name before Gentiles, kings, and the sons of Israel.
I will show him how much he must suffer for my name's sake.”
So Ananias went and entered the house. Laying his hands on Saul, he said, “Brother Saul, the Lord, who appeared to yoʋ on the road by which yoʋ came, has sent me so that yoʋ may receive yoʋr sight and be filled with the Holy Spirit.”
Immediately something like scales fell from Saul's eyes, and he received his sight. Then he rose and was baptized,
and after taking some food, he was strengthened. For several days Saul was with the disciples in Damascus.
Immediately he began preaching in the synagogues that the Christ is the Son of God.
All who heard it were amazed and said, “Is this not the man who in Jerusalem tried to destroy those who call upon this name, and has he not come here for the purpose of bringing them as prisoners to the chief priests?”
But Saul grew stronger and kept confounding the Jews who dwelt in Damascus, proving that this man Jesus is the Christ.
When many days had past, the Jews took counsel together to kill him,
but their plot became known to Saul. They started watching the gates both day and night so that they might kill him.
But the disciples took him by night and let him down through a window in the city wall, lowering him in a basket.
When Saul arrived in Jerusalem, he tried to join the disciples, but they were all afraid of him because they did not believe that he was a disciple.
Barnabas, however, took him and brought him to the apostles. He related to them how Saul had seen the Lord on the road and that the Lord had spoken to him, and how he had been preaching boldly in Damascus in the name of Jesus.
So Saul stayed with them and would go into Jerusalem and speak boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus.
He would also speak and debate with the Hellenists, but they were trying to kill him.
When the brothers found out about it, they brought him down to Caesarea and sent him off to Tarsus.
So the churches throughout all Judea, Galilee, and Samaria had peace and were being strengthened. Continuing in the fear of the Lord and in the encouragement of the Holy Spirit, they were being multiplied.
Now as Peter was traveling from place to place, he went down to the saints who dwelt in Lydda.
There he found a man named Aeneas, who was paralyzed and had been confined to a mat for eight years.
Peter said to him, “Aeneas, Jesus Christ has now healed yoʋ; rise and roll up yoʋr mat.” Immediately he rose,
and all who dwelt in Lydda and Sharon saw him and turned to the Lord.
Now in Joppa there was a disciple named Tabitha (which means “Dorcas”). She was always doing good works and charitable acts.
In those days she became sick and died, so they washed her body and laid it in an upper room.
Lydda was near Joppa, so when the disciples heard that Peter was there, they sent for him, urging him not to delay in coming to them.
So Peter rose and went with them. When he arrived, they brought him to the upper room, and all the widows stood before him, weeping and showing him all the tunics and cloaks that Dorcas had made while she was still with them.
But Peter sent them all outside, knelt down, and prayed. Turning toward the body, he said, “Tabitha, arise.” Then she opened her eyes, and seeing Peter, she sat up.
He gave her his hand and raised her up. Then he called in the saints and the widows and presented her alive.
This became known throughout all Joppa, and many believed in the Lord.
And Peter remained in Joppa for many days with a tanner named Simon.
Now there was a man in Caesarea named Cornelius, a centurion of what was called the Italian cohort.
He was a devout man who feared God along with his entire household; he gave generously to those in need and always prayed to God.
About the ninth hour of the day he saw clearly in a vision an angel of God, who came in and said to him, “Cornelius!”
Staring at him intently, Cornelius was afraid and said, “What is it, Lord?” The angel said to him, “Yoʋr prayers and charitable acts have ascended as a memorial offering before God.
Now send men to Joppa and have them bring back Simon, who is called Peter.
He is staying with a tanner named Simon, whose house is by the sea.”
When the angel who spoke to him went away, Cornelius called two of his servants and a devout soldier from among his attendants.
After explaining everything to them, he sent them to Joppa.
On the next day, as the men were traveling along and approaching the city, Peter went up on the housetop to pray at about the sixth hour.
He became hungry and wanted to eat, and as they were preparing a meal, a trance fell upon him.
He saw heaven opened and an object like a large sheet coming down to him. It was tied at its four corners and was being lowered to the earth.
In it were all kinds of four-footed animals of the earth, as well as wild beasts, reptiles, and birds of the sky.
Then a voice came to him: “Rise, Peter, kill and eat.”
But Peter said, “Surely not, Lord! For I have never eaten anything that is defiled or unclean.”
The voice came to him again a second time: “Do not regard as defiled what God has made clean.”
This happened three times, and then the object was taken up again into heaven.
While Peter was greatly perplexed, pondering within himself what the vision he had seen might mean, behold, the men sent by Cornelius had asked for Simon's house and were standing at the gate.
They called out and asked if Simon, who was called Peter, was staying there.
As Peter continued pondering the vision, the Spirit said to him, “Behold, some men are looking for yoʋ.
Now get up, go downstairs, and go with them without any misgivings, for I have sent them.”
So Peter went down to the men and said, “Behold, I am the one you are looking for. For what reason have you come?”
They said, “Cornelius, a centurion, a righteous and God-fearing man, who is well spoken of by the entire Jewish nation, was directed by a holy angel to send for yoʋ to come to his house and to hear a message from yoʋ.”
So Peter invited them in and put them up for the night. The next day Peter went with them, and some of the brothers from Joppa accompanied him.
The following day they entered Caesarea. Cornelius was expecting them and had called together his relatives and close friends.
When Peter entered the house, Cornelius met him, fell at his feet, and worshiped him.
But Peter raised him up, saying, “Stand up; I too am just a man.”
As Peter talked with him, he went in and found many people gathered together.
Peter said to them, “You know that it is forbidden for a Jewish man to keep company with or associate with a foreigner, but God has shown me that I should call no one defiled or unclean.
That is why I came without objection when I was sent for. I ask then, what is the reason you have sent for me?”
Cornelius said, “Four days ago I was fasting until this hour. At the ninth hour I was praying in my house, and behold, a man stood before me in bright clothing.
The man said, ‘Cornelius, yoʋr prayer has been heard, and yoʋr charitable acts have been remembered before God.
Therefore send to Joppa and ask for Simon, who is called Peter. He is staying by the sea in the house of a tanner named Simon. When he arrives, he will speak to yoʋ.’
So I sent for yoʋ at once, and yoʋ have done well by coming. Now then, we are all here in the presence of God to hear all that yoʋ have been commanded by God.”
Then Peter opened his mouth and said, “Now I truly understand that God shows no partiality,
but in every nation anyone who fears him and does what is right is acceptable to him.
You yourselves know the message he sent to the sons of Israel, preaching the good news of peace through Jesus Christ, who is Lord of all,
the message that spread throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee after the baptism that John preached:
how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Spirit and power, who then went around doing good and healing all who were oppressed by the devil, because God was with him.
We are witnesses of everything he did both in the country of the Jews and in Jerusalem. They put him to death by hanging him on a cross,
but God raised him up on the third day and allowed him to be seen,
not by all the people, but by us, the witnesses who had been chosen beforehand by God, who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead.
He commanded us to preach to the people and to testify that he is the one who has been appointed by God as judge of the living and the dead.
All the prophets testify about him that everyone who believes in him receives remission of sins through his name.”
While Peter was still speaking these words, the Holy Spirit fell upon all who were listening to the message.
All the believers from among the circumcised who had come with Peter were astonished, because the gift of the Holy Spirit was being poured out even on the Gentiles.
For they heard them speaking in tongues and magnifying God. Then Peter responded,
“Can anyone withhold water for baptizing these people who have received the Holy Spirit just as we have?”
So he gave orders to have them baptized in the name of the Lord. Then they asked him to stay on for a few days.
Now the apostles and the brothers who were in Judea heard that the Gentiles had also received the word of God.
So when Peter came up to Jerusalem, those of the circumcision faction began disputing with him,
saying, “Yoʋ went into the house of uncircumcised men and ate with them!”
But Peter began to explain the situation to them, step by step, saying,
“I was praying in the city of Joppa, and in a trance I saw a vision of an object like a large sheet coming down, being lowered from heaven by its four corners, and it came to me.
As I stared at it, I looked closely and saw four-footed animals of the earth, as well as wild beasts, reptiles, and birds of the sky.
Then I heard a voice saying to me, ‘Rise, Peter, kill and eat.’
But I said, ‘Surely not, Lord! For nothing defiled or unclean has ever entered my mouth.’
The voice from heaven responded to me a second time: ‘Do not regard as defiled what God has made clean.’
This happened three times, and then everything was drawn up again into heaven.
And behold, at that very moment three men arrived at the house where I was; they had been sent to me from Caesarea.
The Spirit told me to go with them without any misgivings. These six brothers also went with me, and we went into the man's house.
He told us how he had seen an angel standing in his house and saying to him, ‘Send men to Joppa and have them bring back Simon, who is called Peter;
he will speak a message to yoʋ by which yoʋ will be saved, yoʋ and yoʋr entire household.’
As I began to speak, the Holy Spirit fell upon them, just as he had fallen upon us at the beginning.
Then I remembered what the Lord had said: ‘John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.’
If then God gave them the same gift that he gave us when we believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, how could I stand in God's way?”
When the apostles and brothers heard this, they ceased their objections and began glorifying God, saying, “Then to the Gentiles also God has granted the repentance that leads to life.”
Now those who had been scattered because of the persecution that arose over Stephen traveled as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch, speaking the word to no one except Jews.
But there were some Cypriot and Cyrenian men among them who went to Antioch and began speaking to the Hellenists, preaching the good news about the Lord Jesus.
The hand of the Lord was with them, and a large number of people believed and turned to the Lord.
News of this reached the ears of the church in Jerusalem, and they sent Barnabas out to go to Antioch.
When he arrived and saw the grace of God, he rejoiced and began exhorting all the believers to remain true to the Lord with resolute hearts.
For he was a good man, full of the Holy Spirit and faith, and a large number of people were added to the Lord.
Then Barnabas went to Tarsus to look for Saul.
When he found him, he brought him to Antioch. So for an entire year they met with the church and taught a large number of people, and it was in Antioch that the disciples were first called Christians.
In those days some prophets came down to Antioch from Jerusalem.
One of them, named Agabus, stood up and indicated by the Spirit that a severe famine was about to come upon the entire world (which indeed took place in the time of Claudius Caesar).
So the disciples, each according to his own ability, determined to send relief to the brothers who dwelt in Judea.
This they did, sending it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.
About that time King Herod arrested some who belonged to the church in order to harm them.
He killed James the brother of John with the sword.
And when he saw that this pleased the Jews, he proceeded to arrest Peter also. (This took place during the Feast of Unleavened Bread.)
After seizing him, he put him in prison, handing him over to be guarded by four squads of four soldiers each. Herod planned to bring him out to the people after the Passover.
So Peter was kept in prison, but the church was earnestly praying to God for him.
The very night before Herod was going to bring him out, Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains, while the guards in front of the door were keeping watch over the prison.
And behold, an angel of the Lord stood before Peter, and a light shone in the cell. The angel struck Peter on the side and woke him up, saying, “Get up quickly!” And the chains fell off Peter's hands.
Then the angel said to him, “Get dressed and put on yoʋr sandals.” And Peter did so. Then the angel said to him, “Put on yoʋr cloak and follow me.”
So Peter went out and followed him, but he did not realize that what the angel was doing was really happening; he thought he was seeing a vision.
After they passed the first and second guard, they came to the iron gate leading into the city. It opened for them on its own, and they went out. When they had gone the length of one street, the angel immediately left him.
When Peter came to his senses, he said, “Now I truly know that the Lord has sent his angel and rescued me from the hand of Herod and from everything the Jewish people were expecting to happen.”
When Peter realized this, he went to the house of Mary, the mother of John (who was called Mark), where many had gathered together and were praying.
Peter knocked at the door of the gate, and a servant girl named Rhoda came to answer.
When she recognized Peter's voice, she was so overjoyed that she did not open the gate, but ran in and reported that Peter was standing in front of the gate.
They said to her, “Yoʋ are out of yoʋr mind.” But when she kept insisting that it was so, they said, “It is his angel.”
Meanwhile Peter continued knocking, and when they opened the gate, they saw him and were astonished.
But motioning to them with his hand to be silent, he told them how the Lord had brought him out of prison. He also said, “Tell these things to James and to the brothers.” Then he left and went to another place.
When daybreak came, there was a great commotion among the soldiers as to what had become of Peter.
When Herod searched for him but did not find him, he questioned the guards and ordered them to be led away and executed. Then he went down from Judea to Caesarea and spent time there.
Now Herod was having an angry dispute with the people of Tyre and Sidon. So they came to him with one accord, and having won over Blastus, the king's personal attendant, they asked for peace, because their country was supplied with food from the king's country.
On an appointed day Herod dressed himself in royal clothing, sat down on the platform, and made a speech to them.
The people kept shouting, “The voice of a god and not of a man!”
Immediately an angel of the Lord struck Herod down because he did not give glory to God, and he was eaten by worms and breathed his last breath.
But the word of God increased and multiplied.
And when Barnabas and Saul completed their ministry, they returned to Jerusalem and brought with them John, who was called Mark.
Now at the church in Antioch there were certain prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Simeon (who was called Niger), Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen (who had been brought up with Herod the tetrarch), and Saul.
As they were serving the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, “Set apart for me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them.”
So after they had fasted and prayed, they laid their hands on them and sent them off.
Being sent out by the Holy Spirit, the two of them went down to Seleucia, and from there they sailed to Cyprus.
When they arrived at Salamis, they proclaimed the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews. (They also had John as their assistant.)
When they had gone across the island to Paphos, they came across a certain magician, a Jewish false prophet named Bar-Jesus.
He was with the proconsul Sergius Paulus, an intelligent man, who summoned Barnabas and Saul, seeking to hear the word of God.
But the magician Elymas (for that is what his name means) opposed them, seeking to turn the proconsul away from the faith.
But Saul, also known as Paul, filled with the Holy Spirit, looked intently at Elymas
and said, “O son of the devil, full of all deceit and all trickery, enemy of all righteousness, will yoʋ not cease perverting the straight paths of the Lord?
And now, behold, the hand of the Lord is against yoʋ, and yoʋ will be blind, unable to see the sun for a period of time.” Immediately a mist and darkness fell upon him, and he was going around seeking people to lead him by the hand.
When the proconsul saw what had happened, he believed, for he was astonished at the teaching of the Lord.
Then Paul and his companions set sail from Paphos and went to Perga in Pamphylia, but John left them and returned to Jerusalem.
Continuing on from Perga, they came to Antioch in Pisidia. On the Sabbath day they went into the synagogue and sat down.
After the reading of the Law and the Prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent them a message, saying, “Brothers, if you have any word of exhortation for the people, speak it.”
Standing up, Paul motioned with his hand and said, “Men of Israel, and you who fear God, listen.
The God of this people chose our fathers and exalted the people during their sojourn in the land of Egypt, and with an uplifted arm he led them out of that country.
For about forty years, he put up with them in the wilderness,
and after destroying seven nations in the land of Canaan, he gave his people their land as an inheritance.
After that he gave them judges for about four hundred and fifty years, up to the time of the prophet Samuel.
Then the people asked for a king, and God gave them Saul the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, who reigned for forty years.
After removing Saul, God raised up David as their king, about whom he testified, ‘I have found David the son of Jesse to be a man after my own heart; he will do all that I want him to do.’
From this man's offspring God brought salvation to Israel, according to his promise,
after John had first preached a baptism of repentance to Israel in advance of the coming Savior.
Now as John was completing his course, he said, ‘Who do you suppose that I am? I am not he. But behold, one is coming after me, the sandals of whose feet I am not worthy to untie.’
“Brothers, sons of the family of Abraham, and those among you who fear God, to you the message of this salvation has been sent.
Since those who dwell in Jerusalem, along with their rulers, failed to recognize this man and the voices of the prophets that are read every Sabbath, they fulfilled their words by condemning him.
Even though they found no grounds for a death sentence, they asked Pilate to have him killed.
When they had fulfilled all that was written about him, they took him down from the cross and laid him in a tomb.
But God raised him from the dead,
and for many days he was seen by those who had come up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are his witnesses to the people.
And we preach to you the good news that what God promised to our fathers, he has fulfilled to us, their children, by raising up Jesus,
just as it is written in the second Psalm, ‘Yoʋ are my son; today I have begotten yoʋ.’
As for the fact that he raised him from the dead, no longer to return to corruption, God has spoken in this way: ‘I will give you the holy and sure blessings of David.’
Therefore it also says in another place: ‘Yoʋ will not let yoʋr Holy One see corruption.’
For when David had served God's purpose in his own generation, he fell asleep, was added to his fathers, and saw corruption.
But he whom God raised up did not see corruption.
Therefore let it be known to you, brothers, that through this man remission of sins is proclaimed to you,
and by this man everyone who believes is set free from everything from which you could not be set free by the law of Moses.
So beware that what is said in the prophets does not happen to you:
‘Behold, you scoffers, be amazed and perish, for I am doing a work in your days that you will certainly not believe, even if someone tells you about it.’ ”
Now as Paul and Barnabas were going out from the synagogue of the Jews, the Gentiles were urging them to speak about these things on the next Sabbath.
And when the meeting of the synagogue was dispersed, many of the Jews and the devout converts to Judaism followed Paul and Barnabas, who spoke to them and persuaded them to continue in the grace of God.
On the following Sabbath, nearly the entire city was gathered together to hear the word of God.
But when the Jews saw the crowds, they were filled with jealousy and began to contradict what Paul was saying, opposing him and slandering him.
But Paul and Barnabas spoke boldly, saying, “It was necessary for the word of God to be spoken first to you. But since you are rejecting it and do not judge yourselves to be worthy of eternal life, behold, we are turning to the Gentiles.
For this is what the Lord has commanded us: ‘I have appointed yoʋ to be a light to the Gentiles, so that yoʋ may bring salvation to the ends of the earth.’ ”
When the Gentiles heard this, they began rejoicing and glorifying the word of the Lord, and all who were appointed to eternal life believed.
So the word of the Lord spread throughout that entire region.
But the Jews incited the devout women of high standing and the prominent men of the city. They stirred up persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and drove them out of their region.
But Paul and Barnabas shook off the dust from their feet in protest against them and went to Iconium.
And the disciples were filled with joy and with the Holy Spirit.
At Iconium Paul and Barnabas went together into the synagogue of the Jews and spoke in such a way that a great multitude of both Jews and Greeks believed.
But the Jews who refused to believe stirred up and corrupted the minds of the Gentiles to be against the brothers.
So Paul and Barnabas spent a long time there, speaking boldly for the Lord, who was testifying to the message of his grace by granting signs and wonders to be done by their hands.
But the population of the city was divided; some were with the Jews, and some were with the apostles.
And when an attempt was made by both the Gentiles and the Jews, together with their rulers, to mistreat them and stone them,
Paul and Barnabas became aware of it and fled for refuge to the Lycaonian cities of Lystra and Derbe and to the surrounding region.
There they continued to preach the gospel.
Now there was a man sitting in Lystra who could not use his feet. He had been lame from his mother's womb and had never walked.
This man listened to Paul as he was speaking. Paul looked at him intently, and when he saw that he had faith to be healed,
he said with a loud voice, “Stand up on yoʋr feet!” So the man leaped up and began to walk.
When the crowds saw what Paul had done, they lifted up their voices, saying in Lycaonian, “The gods have come down to us in the likeness of men.”
Barnabas they called Zeus, and Paul they called Hermes, since he was the one who took the lead in speaking.
Then the priest of the shrine of Zeus that was located in front of their city brought bulls and garlands to the city gates, intending to offer sacrifices together with the crowds.
But when the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard about it, they tore their clothes and rushed into the crowd, crying out,
“Men, why are you doing these things? We also are men with the same nature as you. We are bringing you good news, telling you to turn from these worthless things to the living God, who made the heavens, the earth, the sea, and all that is in them.
In past generations he allowed all the nations to go their own way,
although he did not leave himself without a witness in that he did good by giving you rain from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness.”
Yet even by saying these things, they barely restrained the crowds from offering sacrifices to them.
Then some Jews came from Antioch and Iconium and persuaded the crowds. They stoned Paul and dragged him out of the city, supposing that he was dead.
But when the disciples gathered around him, he rose and entered the city. The next day he went on with Barnabas to Derbe.
After preaching the gospel in that city and making many disciples, Paul and Barnabas returned to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch,
strengthening the souls of the disciples, exhorting them to continue in the faith, and telling them that through many tribulations we must enter the kingdom of God.
And when they had appointed elders for them in every church, with prayer and fasting they entrusted them to the Lord in whom they had come to believe.
After passing through Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia,
and when they had spoken the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia.
From there they sailed to Antioch, where they had been committed to the grace of God for the work they had now completed.
After they arrived and gathered the church together, they reported all that God had done through them, and how he had opened a door of faith to the Gentiles.
And they stayed there with the disciples for some time.
Then some men came down from Judea and were teaching the brothers: “If you are not circumcised according to the custom of Moses, you cannot be saved.”
Therefore, when Paul and Barnabas had a great dissension and debate with them, the brothers appointed Paul and Barnabas and some others from among the believers to go up to the apostles and elders in Jerusalem to discuss this issue.
After being sent on their way by the church, they passed through Phoenicia and Samaria and brought great joy to all the brothers when they described in detail the conversion of the Gentiles.
When they arrived in Jerusalem, they were welcomed by the church, the apostles, and the elders, and they reported all that God had done through them.
But some of the believers who belonged to the sect of the Pharisees stood up, saying, “It is necessary to circumcise the Gentiles and command them to keep the law of Moses.”
So the apostles and the elders gathered together to consider this matter.
After there had been much debate, Peter stood up and said to them, “Brothers, you know that in the early days God made a choice among us, that by the words of my mouth the Gentiles would hear the message of the gospel and believe.
And God, who knows the heart, testified to them by giving them the Holy Spirit, just as he did to us.
He made no distinction between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith.
Now then, why are you putting God to the test by placing a yoke on the neck of the disciples that neither our fathers nor we have been able to bear?
On the contrary, we believe that we are saved by the grace of the Lord Jesus in the same way they are.”
Then the entire assembly fell silent as they listened to Barnabas and Paul tell of all the signs and wonders God had performed through them among the Gentiles.
When they had finished speaking, James replied, “Brothers, listen to me.
Simeon has related how God first visited the Gentiles, to take from among them a people for his name.
The words of the prophets are in agreement with this, just as it is written:
‘After this I will return and rebuild the tabernacle of David that has fallen; I will rebuild its ruins and erect it again,
so that the rest of mankind may seek the Lord, even all the Gentiles who are called by my name, says the Lord, who does all these things.’
All God's works are known to him from long ago.
Therefore my judgment is that we not create difficulties for those among the Gentiles who turn to God,
but that we write to them, telling them to abstain from things defiled by idols, from fornication, from what has been strangled, and from blood.
For from generations of old, Moses has had those who preach him in every city, because he is read in the synagogues every Sabbath.”
Then it seemed good to the apostles and to the elders, together with the whole church, to send men chosen from among them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas, namely, Judas (called Barsabbas) and Silas, leading men among the brothers,
and to send with them this letter they had written: “The apostles, elders, and brothers, to the Gentile brothers in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia: Greetings.
Since we have heard that certain men, whom we did not authorize, have gone out from us and troubled you with their words, unsettling your minds by saying that you must be circumcised and keep the law,
it seemed good to us, having come to one accord, to send you men chosen from among us, along with our beloved Barnabas and Paul,
who have risked their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore we have sent Judas and Silas, who will tell you the same things in their own words.
For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us to lay upon you no further burden than these essentials:
You must abstain from what has been sacrificed to idols, from blood, from what has been strangled, and from fornication. If you keep yourselves from these things, you will do well. Farewell.”
So when these men had been sent off, they went to Antioch, and after gathering the congregation together, they delivered the letter.
When the people read it, they rejoiced over its encouragement.
Then Judas and Silas, who were themselves prophets, encouraged and strengthened the brothers with many words.
After spending some time there, they were sent off to the apostles in peace by the brothers.

But Paul and Barnabas stayed in Antioch, teaching and preaching, along with many others, the good news of the word of the Lord.
After some days had gone by, Paul said to Barnabas, “Let us return and visit our brothers in every city where we proclaimed the word of the Lord, to see how they are doing.”
Now Barnabas wanted to bring John, who was called Mark.
But Paul thought it best not to bring this man who had deserted them in Pamphylia and had not gone on with them in their work.
So there arose a sharp disagreement, with the result that they parted from one another. Barnabas took Mark and sailed off to Cyprus,
but Paul chose Silas and departed, once he had been committed by the brothers to the grace of God.
And he went through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the churches.
Paul went on to Derbe and Lystra, and behold, a disciple named Timothy was there. He was the son of a Jewish woman who was a believer, but his father was a Greek.
He was well spoken of by the brothers in Lystra and Iconium.
Paul wanted this man to go on with him, so he took him and circumcised him because of the Jews who were in those places, for they all knew that his father was a Greek.
As they went through the cities, they delivered the decisions that had been reached by the apostles and the elders in Jerusalem for the Gentile believers to obey.
So the churches were strengthened in the faith and increased in number every day.
Then Paul and his companions went through Phrygia and the region of Galatia, having been forbidden by the Holy Spirit from speaking the word in Asia.
When they reached Mysia, they tried to go on toward Bithynia, but the Spirit did not allow them.
So passing by Mysia, they went down to Troas.
During the night Paul had a vision. A Macedonian man was standing there, urging him, “Come over to Macedonia and help us!”
After Paul saw the vision, we immediately endeavored to go on to Macedonia, concluding that the Lord had called us to preach the gospel to them.
So we set sail from Troas and followed a straight course to Samothrace, and on the next day we went to Neapolis.
From there we went on to Philippi, which is a Roman colony and a leading city of that district of Macedonia. We stayed in that city for several days.
On the Sabbath day we went outside the city to a riverside, where it was customary for there to be prayer. We sat down and began speaking to the women who had gathered together.
One of those listening to us was a woman named Lydia. She was a worshiper of God from the city of Thyatira and a seller of purple cloth. The Lord opened her heart to respond to what Paul was saying.
After she was baptized, along with her household, she urged us, “If you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come stay at my house.” And she persuaded us to do so.
One day, as we were on our way to prayer, we were met by a slave girl who had a spirit of divination. She had brought her masters much profit by fortune-telling.
She followed along behind Paul and us and kept crying out, “These men are servants of the Most High God, who proclaim to us a way of salvation.”
She kept on doing this for many days, and Paul became so annoyed that he turned and said to the spirit, “I command yoʋ in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her.” And it came out that very hour.
When her masters saw that their hope for profit was gone, they seized Paul and Silas, dragged them to the marketplace, and set them before the authorities.
After bringing them to the magistrates, they said, “These men are seriously disturbing our city. They are Jews,
and they are proclaiming customs that are not lawful for us as Romans to accept or practice.”
The crowd rose up together against them, and the magistrates tore their garments off them and ordered them to be beaten with rods.
After inflicting many blows upon them, they threw them into prison, ordering the jailer to keep them under close guard.
When he received this order, he put them in the inner prison and fastened their feet in the stocks.
About midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God, and the prisoners were listening to them.
Suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken. Immediately all the doors opened, and all the chains came loose.
Then the jailer was awakened, and when he saw that the doors of the prison were open, he drew his sword and was about to kill himself, assuming that the prisoners had escaped.
But Paul cried out with a loud voice, “Do yoʋrself no harm, for we are all here.”
Calling for lights, the jailer rushed in and fell down trembling before Paul and Silas.
Then he brought them out and said, “Sirs, what must I do to be saved?”
They said, “Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and yoʋ will be saved, yoʋ and yoʋr household.”
Then they spoke the word of the Lord to him and to everyone in his household.
He then took them in that hour of the night and washed their wounds. Then he was baptized at once, along with his entire household.
After bringing Paul and Silas into his house, he set a meal before them. And he rejoiced, along with his entire household, because he had come to believe in God.
When daybreak came, the magistrates sent their officers, saying, “Release those men.”
So the jailer reported these words to Paul, saying, “The magistrates have sent orders for you to be released. Therefore come out now and go in peace.”
But Paul said to them, “They beat us in public without a trial, even though we are Roman citizens, and they threw us into prison. And now they are sending us away secretly? Certainly not! Rather, let them come and escort us out themselves.”
So the officers reported these words to the magistrates, and the magistrates were afraid when they heard that the men were Roman citizens.
So they came and spoke to them in a conciliatory manner. As they escorted them out, they begged them to leave the city.
So Paul and Silas came out of the prison and went to Lydia's house. And after seeing the brothers and encouraging them, they departed.
When Paul and his companions had traveled through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue of the Jews.
As was his custom, Paul went in to them, and for three Sabbaths he reasoned with them from the Scriptures,
explaining and presenting evidence that it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead, saying, “This Jesus whom I am proclaiming to you is the Christ.”
Some of the Jews were persuaded and joined Paul and Silas, as did a large number of the devout Greeks and quite a few prominent women.
But the Jews who refused to believe rounded up some evil men from the marketplace and formed a mob, setting the city in an uproar. They attacked Jason's house, seeking to bring Paul and Silas out to the public assembly.
But when they could not find them, they dragged Jason and some other brothers to the city officials, shouting, “These men who have turned the world upside down have come here also,
and Jason has welcomed them. They all act contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another king, Jesus.”
And they stirred up the crowd and the city officials who heard these things.
But when the city officials had received a security bond from Jason and the others, they released them.
As soon as it was night the brothers sent Paul and Silas to Berea. When they arrived, they went to the synagogue of the Jews.
Now these Jews were more noble than those in Thessalonica, and they received the word with great eagerness, examining the Scriptures every day to see if what Paul said was true.
As a result, many of them believed, as did quite a few of the Greek women of high standing and the men.
But when the Jews of Thessalonica found out that Paul was proclaiming the word of God in Berea also, they went there as well, agitating the crowds.
Then the brothers immediately sent Paul away, as though he were going by sea, but Silas and Timothy remained in Berea.
Those who escorted Paul brought him as far as Athens, and after they had received an order for Silas and Timothy to come to him as soon as possible, they departed.
While Paul was waiting for them in Athens, his spirit was provoked within him when he saw that the city was full of idols.
So he reasoned in the synagogue with the Jews and the devout Greeks, and in the marketplace every day with those who happened to be there.
Some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers also conversed with him. Some said, “What is this babbler trying to say?” But others said, “He seems to be a proclaimer of foreign deities.” (They said this because he was preaching the good news about Jesus and the resurrection.)
So they took him and brought him to the Areopagus, saying, “May we know what this new teaching is that yoʋ are presenting?
For yoʋ are bringing some strange things to our ears, and we would like to know what they mean.”
(Now all the Athenians and the foreigners who dwelt there would spend their time in nothing else but talking about and listening to whatever the newest idea might be.)
Paul then stood before the Areopagus and said, “Men of Athens, I see just how religious you are in every way.
For as I was going around and closely observing yoʋr objects of worship, I even found an altar that had been inscribed: ‘To an unknown god.’ I proclaim to you therefore the one whom you worship in ignorance.
The God who made the world and everything in it, who is Lord of heaven and earth, does not dwell in temples made by hands,
neither is he served by the hands of men, as though he needed anything. Rather, he himself continually gives life and breath to all mankind.
From one bloodline he created every nation of mankind to dwell on the entire face of the earth. He determined their appointed times and the boundaries of where they would dwell,
so that they might seek the Lord and perhaps feel their way toward him and find him, though he is not far from any one of us.
For in him we live and move and have our being, as even some of your own poets have said: ‘For we also are his offspring.’
Being then the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the divine being is like gold, silver, or stone, an image formed by the skill and imagination of man.
Therefore, having overlooked the times of ignorance, God now commands all people everywhere to repent,
because he has set a day on which he is going to judge the world in righteousness by a man he has appointed. He has provided assurance of this to everyone by raising this man from the dead.”
Now when they heard about the resurrection of the dead, some began to scoff, but others said, “We wish to hear about this from yoʋ again.”
So Paul departed from them,
but some of the people joined him and believed, among whom were Dionysius the Areopagite, a woman named Damaris, and others with them.
After this, Paul departed from Athens and went to Corinth.
There he found a Jew named Aquila, of Pontus by birth, who had recently come from Italy along with his wife Priscilla, because Claudius had ordered all the Jews to leave Rome. Paul came to them,
and because he was of the same trade, he stayed with them and worked, for they were tentmakers by trade.
Every Sabbath he reasoned in the synagogue and tried to persuade both Jews and Greeks.
When Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia, Paul was compelled by the Spirit and testified to the Jews that Jesus is the Christ.
But when the Jews opposed him and reviled him, he shook out his garments and said to them, “Your blood be upon your own heads! I am innocent. From now on I will go to the Gentiles.”
So he moved on from there and went to the house of a man named Justus, a worshiper of God, whose house was next door to the synagogue.
Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, believed in the Lord together with his whole household. And many of the Corinthians, when they heard, believed and were baptized.
One night the Lord said to Paul in a vision: “Do not be afraid, but speak and do not be silent.
For I am with yoʋ, and no one will attack yoʋ to do yoʋ harm, for I have many people in this city.”
So Paul stayed for a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.
But when Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews rose up with one accord against Paul and brought him before the judgment seat,
saying, “This man is persuading people to worship God in a manner contrary to the law.”
But just as Paul was about to open his mouth to speak, Gallio said to the Jews, “If it were a matter of some crime or evil misdeed, O Jews, I would bear with you, as is reasonable.
But since it is a question about words, names, and your own law, see to it yourselves, for I do not want to be a judge of such things.”
So he drove them away from the judgment seat.
Then all the Greeks took Sosthenes, the ruler of the synagogue, and began beating him in front of the judgment seat. But none of these things were of any concern to Gallio.
After staying in Corinth for many more days, Paul took leave of the brothers and set sail for Syria, and Priscilla and Aquila were with him. (Now he had shaved his head in Cenchreae because he was under a vow.)
When he arrived at Ephesus, he left Priscilla and Aquila there, but he himself went into the synagogue and reasoned with the Jews.
When they asked him to stay with them for a longer period of time, he declined.
However, as he took leave of them, he said, “I must by all means keep the coming feast in Jerusalem, but I will return to you again, God willing.” Then he set sail from Ephesus.
When he arrived at Caesarea, he went up and greeted the church, and then went down to Antioch.
After spending some time there, he departed and went from place to place throughout the region of Galatia and Phrygia, strengthening all the disciples.
Meanwhile a Jew named Apollos, an Alexandrian by birth, arrived in Ephesus. He was an eloquent man, well-versed in the Scriptures.
He had been instructed in the way of the Lord. Being fervent in spirit, he spoke and accurately taught the facts about the Lord, though he knew only about the baptism of John.
He began to speak boldly in the synagogue, but when Aquila and Priscilla heard him, they took him aside and explained to him the way of God in greater detail.
And when Apollos wanted to cross over to Achaia, the brothers wrote to the disciples, encouraging them to receive him. When he arrived, he was a great help to those who had become believers through grace,
for he powerfully refuted the Jews in public, showing by the Scriptures that Jesus is the Christ.
While Apollos was in Corinth, Paul went through the interior regions and came to Ephesus, where he came across some disciples.
He said to them, “Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you believed?” They said to him, “No, we have not even heard that there is a Holy Spirit.”
So Paul said to them, “Into what then were you baptized?” They said, “Into John's baptism.”
Then Paul said, “John baptized with a baptism of repentance, telling the people to believe in the one who was to come after him, that is, in Christ Jesus.”
On hearing this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
And when Paul laid his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came upon them, and they began speaking in tongues and prophesying.
There were about twelve men in all.
Over a period of three months Paul would go into the synagogue and speak boldly, reasoning and persuading the people about the kingdom of God.
But some became hardened and refused to believe, speaking evil of the Way in front of the congregation. So Paul left them and took the disciples with him, reasoning daily in the lecture hall of a man named Tyrannus.
This continued for two years, so that all who dwelt in Asia, both Jews and Greeks, heard the word of the Lord Jesus.
Now God was performing extraordinary miracles by the hands of Paul,
so that even cloths or aprons that had touched his skin were placed upon the sick, and their diseases left them, and evil spirits came out of them.
Then some of the itinerant Jewish exorcists attempted to invoke the name of the Lord Jesus over those who had evil spirits. They would say, “We adjure you by the Jesus whom Paul preaches.”
Seven sons of Sceva, a Jewish high priest, were doing this.
But one day an evil spirit responded, “I know Jesus, and I am acquainted with Paul, but who are you?”
Then the man who had the evil spirit jumped on them, overpowered them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled from the house naked and wounded.
When this became known to all the Jews and Greeks who dwelt in Ephesus, fear fell upon them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was being magnified.
Many who had become believers came forward, confessing and disclosing their practices,
while many who practiced magical arts brought their books together and began burning them in front of everyone. When the value of the books was added up, the total came to fifty thousand silver coins.
In this way the word of the Lord was increasing and prevailing mightily.
After these things had taken place, Paul resolved in his spirit to pass through Macedonia and Achaia and go on to Jerusalem, saying, “After I have been there, I must see Rome also.”
So he sent two of his helpers, Timothy and Erastus, to Macedonia, while he himself stayed in Asia for a period of time.
About that time a great disturbance arose concerning the Way.
For a man named Demetrius, a silversmith who made silver shrines of Artemis, brought in a great deal of business to the craftsmen.
He gathered these men together, along with those who worked in similar trades, and said, “Men, you know that our wealth is derived from this business.
You also see and hear that, not only in Ephesus, but in nearly all of Asia, this man Paul has persuaded and drawn away a considerable crowd, saying that gods made by hands are not gods at all.
Not only is there the danger that this trade of ours might come into disrepute, but also that the temple of the great goddess Artemis might be regarded as nothing, and that her magnificence might be brought down, whom all Asia and the world worship.”
When they heard this, they were filled with rage and began crying out, “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!”
So the whole city was filled with confusion, and they rushed with one accord into the amphitheater, seizing Gaius and Aristarchus, Macedonians who were Paul's traveling companions.
Although Paul wanted to go into the public assembly, the disciples would not let him.
Even some of the provincial officials of Asia, who were friends of Paul, sent word to him, begging him not to venture into the amphitheater.
Now some were shouting one thing, and some were shouting another, for the assembly was confused, and the majority did not know for what reason they had come together.
So the Jews put forward Alexander, who was then brought before the crowd. Alexander motioned with his hand, wishing to make a defense to the public assembly.
But when they realized he was a Jew, a single outcry arose from them all as they shouted for about two hours, “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!”
When the city clerk had quieted the crowd, he said, “Men of Ephesus, who is there that does not know that the city of the Ephesians is the temple keeper of the great goddess Artemis and of the image that fell down from Zeus?
Therefore, since these facts are undeniable, you must keep calm and not do anything rash.
For you have brought these men here who are neither temple robbers nor blasphemers of your goddess.
So if Demetrius and his fellow craftsmen have a complaint against anyone, the courts are open, and there are proconsuls; let them bring charges against one another.
But if you seek anything concerning other matters, it must be settled in the lawful assembly.
For we are in danger of being charged with rioting in connection with today's events, since there is no reason we can give to account for this disorderly gathering.” And after saying this, he dismissed the assembly.
After the uproar ceased, Paul summoned the disciples, said goodbye, and departed to go to Macedonia.
After going through those regions and encouraging the believers with many words, he came to Greece,
where he stayed for three months. As he was about to set sail for Syria, a plot was made against him by the Jews, so the decision was made to return by way of Macedonia.
Sopater of Berea accompanied him as far as Asia, and so did Aristarchus and Secundus of Thessalonica, Gaius of Derbe, Timothy, and Tychicus and Trophimus of Asia.
These men went on ahead and waited for us in Troas.
But we sailed from Philippi after the Feast of Unleavened Bread, and five days later we came to them at Troas, where we stayed for seven days.
On the first day of the week, as the disciples were gathered together to break bread, Paul addressed them, intending to depart the next day, and he prolonged his message until midnight.
Now there were many lamps in the upper room where we were gathered together,
and a young man named Eutychus, who was sitting on the window sill, sank into a deep sleep while Paul continued speaking for a long time. Overcome by sleep, he fell down from the third story and was picked up dead.
But Paul went down and threw himself on the young man. Taking him in his arms, he said, “Do not be alarmed, for his life is in him.”
Then Paul went back upstairs, and after he had broken bread and eaten, he conversed with the disciples for a long time, until dawn; that was how he departed.
And they brought the boy home alive and were comforted beyond measure.
Then we went to the ship and set sail for Assos, intending to take Paul on board there, for that is what he had arranged, since he himself intended to go by land.
When he met us in Assos, we took him on board and went to Mitylene.
We set sail from there and arrived off Chios on the following day. The next day we reached Samos and stayed in Trogyllium, and the day after that we came to Miletus.
For Paul had decided to sail past Ephesus so as not to spend time in Asia, because he was hurrying to arrive in Jerusalem, if possible, by the day of Pentecost.
From Miletus Paul sent to Ephesus and called for the elders of the church.
When they came to him, he said to them, “You yourselves know how I lived the whole time I was with you, from the day I first set foot in Asia,
serving the Lord with all humility and with many tears and trials, which came upon me because of the plots of the Jews.
You know that I did not hold back from declaring to you anything that was beneficial, and from teaching you in public and from house to house,
testifying to both Jews and Greeks about repentance toward God and faith in our Lord Jesus.
And now, behold, I am going to Jerusalem, compelled by the Spirit, not knowing what will happen to me there,
except that the Holy Spirit testifies in every city that imprisonment and afflictions await me.
But I take no account of these things, nor do I regard my life as precious to myself, if only I may complete my course with joy and the ministry that I received from the Lord Jesus, to testify to the gospel of the grace of God.
“And now, behold, I know that none of you among whom I have gone about preaching the kingdom of God will see my face again.
Therefore I testify to you this day that I am innocent of the blood of you all.
For I have not held back from declaring to you the whole counsel of God.
So keep watch over yourselves and over the entire flock. The Holy Spirit has appointed you as their overseers, to shepherd the church of our Lord and God, which he obtained with his own blood.
For I know that after my departure fierce wolves will enter in among you, not sparing the flock.
Even from your own number men will rise up, speaking perverse things to draw the disciples away after them.
Therefore be watchful, remembering that, night and day, for three years I did not stop admonishing each one of you, with tears.
And now, brothers, I entrust you to God and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up and give you an inheritance among all who are sanctified.
I coveted no one's silver, gold, or clothing.
You yourselves know that these hands of mine ministered to my own needs and to the needs of those who were with me.
In all things I have shown you that we must labor in this way and help those who are weak, remembering what the Lord Jesus himself said, ‘It is more blessed to give than to receive.’ ”
After saying these things, Paul knelt down and prayed with them all.
There was much weeping among them all, and they threw their arms around Paul's neck and kissed him,
being especially grieved over his statement that they would see his face no more. Then they accompanied him to the ship.
After we parted from them and set sail, we followed a straight course and came to Cos. The next day we reached Rhodes, and from there we went to Patara.
When we found a ship crossing over to Phoenicia, we went on board and set sail.
After coming in sight of Cyprus, we passed it on the left, sailed to Syria, and arrived at Tyre, for there the ship was to unload its cargo.
Then we found some disciples and stayed there for seven days. Through the Spirit they kept telling Paul not to go up to Jerusalem,
but when our days there came to an end, we left and went on our way. All the disciples accompanied us, along with their wives and children, until we were outside of the city. Then we knelt down on the beach and prayed.
After saying goodbye to one another, we got on board the ship, and they returned to their homes.
When we completed the voyage from Tyre, we arrived at Ptolemais. After greeting the brothers, we stayed with them for one day.
The next day Paul and his companions left and went to Caesarea. We entered the house of Philip the evangelist, who was one of the seven, and stayed with him.
(He had four virgin daughters who prophesied.)
After we had been there for several days, a prophet named Agabus came down from Judea.
He came to us and took Paul's belt, and binding his own feet and hands, he said, “Thus says the Holy Spirit, ‘In this way the Jews in Jerusalem will bind the man who owns this belt and deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.’ ”
When we heard this, we and the local residents urged Paul not to go up to Jerusalem.
But Paul responded, “What are you doing, weeping and breaking my heart? For I am ready not only to be imprisoned, but even to die in Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.”
Since he would not be persuaded, we said, “The Lord's will be done,” and then we kept silent.
After those days we packed up our belongings and went up to Jerusalem.
Some of the disciples from Caesarea went with us, bringing us to a Cypriot man named Mnason, an early disciple, with whom we were to stay.
When we arrived in Jerusalem, the brothers warmly welcomed us.
The following day Paul went in with us to James, and all the elders were present.
After greeting them, he reported in detail what God had done among the Gentiles through his ministry.
When they heard this, they began glorifying the Lord. Then they said to him, “Yoʋ see, brother, how many thousands of Jews there are who have become believers, and they are all zealous for the law.
They have been informed that yoʋ teach all the Jews who live among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children or walk according to our customs.
What then is to be done? The assembly will surely meet, for they will hear that yoʋ have come.
So yoʋ must do what we tell yoʋ. There are four men who are under a vow.
Take these men and purify yoʋrself along with them and pay their expenses, so that they may shave their heads. Then everyone will know that there is no truth to what they have been told about yoʋ, but that yoʋ yoʋrself also walk in an orderly manner, keeping the law.
But as for the Gentiles who have become believers, we have written a letter with our judgment that they should observe no such thing, except that they should keep themselves from what has been sacrificed to idols, from blood, from what has been strangled, and from fornication.”
Then Paul took the men, and on the next day he purified himself with them and went to the temple, giving notice of when the days of their purification would be completed and the offering would be presented for each of them.
When the seven days were about to be completed, the Jews from Asia saw Paul in the temple courts and began stirring up the entire crowd. They seized him,
crying out, “Men of Israel, help us! This is the man who teaches everyone everywhere against our people, our law, and this place. Furthermore, he has even brought Greeks into the inner courts of the temple and has defiled this holy place.”
(For they had seen Trophimus the Ephesian in the city with Paul, and they assumed that Paul had brought him into the inner courts of the temple.)
Then the entire city was in an uproar, and the people rushed together. They seized Paul and dragged him out of the temple courts, and the gates were immediately shut.
But as they were trying to kill him, a report went up to the commander of the Roman cohort that all Jerusalem was in an uproar.
At once he took soldiers and centurions and ran down to them. When the mob saw the commander and the soldiers, they stopped beating Paul.
Then the commander came up, took him into custody, and commanded him to be bound with two chains. He then asked who he was and what he had done.
But some in the crowd were shouting one thing, and some were shouting another, and since the commander could not find out any reliable information because of the uproar, he ordered Paul to be taken away to the barracks.
When Paul reached the steps, he had to be carried by the soldiers because of the violence of the crowd.
For the mob of people was following behind, crying out, “Away with him.”
As Paul was about to be brought into the barracks, he said to the commander, “Do I have permission to speak to yoʋ?” The commander said, “Yoʋ know how to speak Greek?
Then yoʋ are not the Egyptian who before these days incited a revolt and led four thousand men of the Assassins out into the wilderness?”
Paul said, “I am a Jewish man from Tarsus of Cilicia, a citizen of an important city. Now I beg yoʋ, let me speak to the people.”
When the commander gave him permission, Paul stood on the steps and motioned with his hand to the people. When there was a great hush, he addressed them in the Hebrew language,
“Brothers and fathers, listen to the defense I now make to you.”
When they heard that he was addressing them in the Hebrew language, they became even more quiet. Then he said,
“I am a Jewish man, born in Tarsus of Cilicia, but brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel and instructed according to the strict manner of the law of our fathers, being zealous for God, just as all of you are today.
I persecuted this Way to the death, binding both men and women and putting them in prison,
as the high priest can testify about me, along with the whole council of elders. From them I received letters to the brothers in Damascus and then made my way there to make arrests and bring the prisoners back to Jerusalem to be punished.
“About noon, as I was going along and drawing near to Damascus, a great light from heaven suddenly flashed around me.
Then I fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to me, ‘Saul, Saul, why are yoʋ persecuting me?’
I answered, ‘Who are yoʋ, Lord?’ He said to me, ‘I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom yoʋ are persecuting.’
Those who were with me saw the light and were afraid, but they did not understand the voice of the one who was speaking to me.
Then I said, ‘What should I do, Lord?’ The Lord said to me, ‘Rise and go to Damascus, and there yoʋ will be told about all that has been appointed for yoʋ to do.’
But since I could not see because of the brightness of that light, I was led by the hand by those who were with me, and went into Damascus.
“Now a certain Ananias, a devout man according to the law, who was well spoken of by all the Jews dwelling there,
came and stood beside me. He said to me, ‘Brother Saul, receive yoʋr sight,’ and in that very hour I received my sight and saw him.
Then he said, ‘The God of our fathers has appointed yoʋ to know his will, to see the Righteous One, and to hear the voice coming from his mouth.
For yoʋ will be his witness to all people of what yoʋ have seen and heard.
And now why do yoʋ delay? Rise and be baptized, and wash away yoʋr sins, calling upon the name of the Lord.’
“When I returned to Jerusalem and was praying at the temple, I fell into a trance
and saw the Lord saying to me, ‘Make haste and get out of Jerusalem quickly, for they will not accept yoʋr testimony about me.’
So I said, ‘Lord, they know that in every synagogue I imprisoned and beat those who believe in yoʋ.
And when the blood of yoʋr witness Stephen was being shed, I myself stood there approving of his execution as I watched over the cloaks of those who were killing him.’
Then the Lord said to me, ‘Go, for I will send yoʋ far away to the Gentiles.’ ”
The crowd listened to Paul until he made this statement, but then they lifted up their voices and said, “Away with this man from the earth! For he should not be allowed to live.”
As they were crying out, throwing off their cloaks and flinging dust into the air,
the commander ordered Paul to be brought into the barracks, saying that he should be examined by flogging, to find out the reason why they were shouting at him in this way.
But as one of the soldiers was stretching Paul out with the straps, Paul said to the centurion standing nearby, “Is it lawful for you to whip a Roman citizen without a proper trial?”
When the centurion heard this, he went and reported it to the commander, saying, “Consider what yoʋ are about to do, for this man is a Roman citizen.”
So the commander went over and said to Paul, “Tell me, are yoʋ a Roman citizen?” He said, “Yes.”
The commander responded, “I acquired this citizenship with a large sum of money.” Paul said, “But I am a citizen by birth.”
So those who were about to examine him immediately drew back, and the commander was afraid when he realized that Paul was a Roman citizen and that he had bound him.
So the next day, wishing to know for certain why Paul was being accused by the Jews, the commander released him from his bonds and commanded the chief priests and their entire Sanhedrin to come. Then he brought Paul down and had him stand before them.
Looking intently at the Sanhedrin, Paul said, “Brothers, in all good conscience I have lived as a citizen before God to this day.”
At this the high priest Ananias commanded those who were standing beside Paul to strike him on the mouth.
Then Paul said to him, “God is about to strike yoʋ, yoʋ whitewashed wall! Are yoʋ sitting there judging me according to the law, and yet contrary to the law ordering me to be struck?”
Those standing nearby said, “Do yoʋ dare to insult God's high priest?”
Paul said, “I did not know, brothers, that he was the high priest. For it is written, ‘Yoʋ shall not speak evil of a ruler of yoʋr people.’ ”
Now when Paul realized that some were Sadducees and others were Pharisees, he cried out in the Sanhedrin, “Brothers, I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee. It is regarding the hope of the resurrection of the dead that I am on trial.”
When he said this, a dissension arose on the part of the Pharisees, and the assembly was divided.
(For the Sadducees say that there is no resurrection, and that there are neither angels nor spirits, but the Pharisees acknowledge them all.)
Then there arose a great clamor, and the scribes of the Pharisees' party stood up and argued vehemently, “We find no evil in this man. If a spirit has spoken to him, or an angel, let us not fight against God.”
When the dissension grew violent, the commander, exercising caution lest Paul be torn to pieces by them, ordered the troops to go down, take him away from them by force, and bring him into the barracks.
The following night the Lord stood near Paul and said, “Take courage, Paul, for as yoʋ have testified about me in Jerusalem, so yoʋ must also testify in Rome.”
When daybreak came, some of the Jews formed a conspiracy and bound themselves under a curse, saying that they would neither eat nor drink until they had killed Paul.
More than forty men had taken an oath to join this conspiracy.
They went to the chief priests and the elders and said, “We have bound ourselves under a solemn curse to taste nothing until we have killed Paul.
Now then, you and the council must make an official request to the commander to bring him down to you tomorrow, as though you would be investigating the facts about his case in greater detail. And we will be ready to kill him before he draws near to this place.”
But when the son of Paul's sister heard about this ambush, he went into the barracks and told Paul.
Then Paul called one of the centurions over and said, “Take this young man to the commander, for he has something to tell him.”
So he took the young man, brought him to the commander, and said, “The prisoner Paul called for me and asked me to bring this young man to yoʋ because he has something to tell yoʋ.”
So the commander took the young man by the hand, drew him aside privately, and asked, “What is it that yoʋ have to tell me?”
The young man said, “The Jews have agreed to ask yoʋ to bring Paul down to the Sanhedrin tomorrow, as though the members of the Sanhedrin would be inquiring about his case in greater detail.
Do not be persuaded by them, for more than forty men are lying in ambush for him. They have bound themselves under a curse not to eat or drink until they have killed him. They are now ready, waiting for yoʋr consent.”
So the commander sent the young man away, ordering him, “Tell no one that yoʋ have reported this to me.”
Then he called over two of the centurions and said, “Get two hundred soldiers ready by the third hour of the night to go to Caesarea, along with seventy horsemen and two hundred spearmen.
Provide mounts so that they may set Paul on one and bring him safely to Felix the governor.”
Then he wrote the following letter:
“Claudius Lysias, to the most excellent governor Felix: Greetings.
This man was seized by the Jews and was about to be killed by them when I came with the troops and rescued him, having learned that he was a Roman citizen.
Wishing to know the reason why they were accusing him, I brought him down to their Sanhedrin.
I discovered that he was being accused about questions of their own law, but had no accusation against him that deserved death or imprisonment.
When I was informed that a plot was about to be executed against this man by the Jews, I sent him to yoʋ at once, also ordering his accusers to state before yoʋ the charges against him. Farewell.”
So the soldiers took Paul and brought him to Antipatris by night, just as they had been commanded.
The next day, they let the horsemen go on with him, while they returned to the barracks.
When the horsemen came to Caesarea and delivered the letter to the governor, they presented Paul to him as well.
After the governor read the letter, he asked what province Paul was from. When he learned that he was from Cilicia,
he said, “I will give yoʋ a hearing once yoʋr accusers have arrived.” Then he gave orders for him to be kept at Herod's headquarters.
Five days later the high priest Ananias came down with the elders and an attorney named Tertullus. They presented their case against Paul to the governor.
When Paul had been summoned, Tertullus began to present his case before Felix, saying, “Since we have experienced much peace because of yoʋ, and prosperity is coming to this nation by yoʋr foresight,
both in every way and in every place we acknowledge it, most excellent Felix, with the utmost gratitude.
But so that I may not detain yoʋ any further, I request that, in yoʋr forbearance, yoʋ would hear us briefly.
For we have found this man to be a pestilent fellow, an instigator of dissension among all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes.
He even tried to desecrate the temple, so we seized him.

By examining him yoʋrself yoʋ will be able to learn the truth about all these accusations we are making against him.”
The Jews also joined in the accusation, claiming that these things were so.
When the governor motioned for him to speak, Paul responded, “Knowing that yoʋ have been a judge over this nation for many years, I all the more cheerfully make my defense concerning these charges against me.
Yoʋ can ascertain that it has not been more than twelve days since I went up to worship in Jerusalem.
Neither in the temple courts, nor in the synagogues, nor anywhere in the city did they find me arguing with anyone or stirring up a crowd.
Nor can they offer any proof against me concerning the things of which they now accuse me.
But I confess this to yoʋ, that according to the Way, which they call a sect, I serve the God of our fathers, believing everything that is written throughout the Law and in the Prophets,
having a hope in God, which these men themselves also accept, that there will be a resurrection of the dead, both of the righteous and the unrighteous.
Because of this I strive the way I do, always having a clear conscience before God and men.
After being away for many years, I came to bring charitable gifts to my nation along with offerings.
While I was doing this, some Jews from Asia found me in the temple courts as I was completing the rite of purification, without any crowd or commotion.
They ought to be here before yoʋ and make an accusation if they have anything against me.
Or these men themselves should state what wrongdoing they found in me when I stood before the Sanhedrin,
other than this one thing that I cried out while standing among them: ‘It is regarding the resurrection of the dead that I am being tried by you today.’ ”
After hearing these things, Felix, who knew the facts concerning the Way in great detail, had them adjourn, saying, “When Lysias the commander comes down, I will decide your case.”
Then he ordered the centurion to keep Paul in custody, but to allow him a certain measure of freedom and not to prevent his own people from attending to his needs or visiting him.
After several days, when Felix came back with his wife Drusilla, who was Jewish, he sent for Paul and listened to him speak about faith in Christ.
But as Paul was discussing righteousness, self-control, and the coming judgment, Felix became frightened and said in response, “Go away for now, and when I get an opportunity I will call for yoʋ.”
At the same time he was hoping that Paul would give him money, so that he might release him. So he would send for Paul quite often and converse with him.
But after two years had passed, Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus. And wishing to gain favor with the Jews, Felix left Paul in prison.
Three days after arriving in the province, Festus went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea,
where the high priest and prominent Jewish men presented their case against Paul.
Asking for a favor against Paul, they urged Festus to summon him to Jerusalem, because they were planning an ambush to kill him on the way.
But Festus replied that Paul was being kept in custody in Caesarea, and that he himself was about to go there shortly.
“So,” he said, “let those among you who are influential go down with me, and if there is any fault in this man, they can bring charges against him.”
After staying among them for more than ten days, Festus went down to Caesarea. The next day he sat on the judgment seat and ordered Paul to be brought in.
When Paul arrived, the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem stood around him, bringing many serious charges against him that they could not prove.
Then Paul said in his own defense, “Neither against the law of the Jews, nor against the temple, nor against Caesar have I committed any offense.”
But Festus, wishing to gain favor with the Jews, responded to Paul, “Are yoʋ willing to go up to Jerusalem and stand trial before me there on these charges?”
Paul said, “I am standing before the judgment seat of Caesar, where I ought to stand trial. I have done the Jews no wrong, as yoʋ yoʋrself know very well.
If I am in the wrong and have done something that deserves death, I do not seek to escape death. But if none of the things these men accuse me of is true, no one can hand me over to them. I appeal to Caesar.”
After conferring with the council, Festus answered, “Yoʋ have appealed to Caesar; to Caesar yoʋ shall go.”
After several days had passed, King Agrippa and Bernice arrived at Caesarea and greeted Festus.
Since the king was staying there for several days, Festus presented Paul's case to him, saying, “There is a man who was left as a prisoner by Felix.
When I was in Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews presented their case and asked for a judgment against him.
I answered them that it is not the custom of the Romans to hand anyone over for destruction before the accused faces his accusers and has an opportunity to make his defense concerning the charges.
So when they had assembled here, I did not postpone the case, but on the next day I sat on the judgment seat and ordered the man to be brought in.
When his accusers stood up, they brought no charge against him of the sort I was expecting.
Instead they had certain points of disagreement with him about their own religion and about a man named Jesus who was dead, but whom Paul claimed was alive.
Since I was at a loss as to how to investigate this matter, I asked if he might be willing to go to Jerusalem and stand trial there on these charges.
But Paul appealed to be kept in custody for the decision of His Majesty the Emperor, so I ordered him to be held until I could send him to Caesar.”
Then Agrippa said to Festus, “I would like to hear the man myself.” Festus said, “Tomorrow yoʋ will hear him.”
So the next day Agrippa and Bernice came with great pomp and entered the auditorium along with the military commanders and the distinguished men of the city. Then Festus gave the command, and Paul was brought in.
Festus said, “King Agrippa and all you men who are present with us, you see this man, concerning whom the entire Jewish community has appealed to me, both in Jerusalem and here in this place, crying out that he ought not to live any longer.
But when I found that he had done nothing deserving death, and since he himself appealed to His Majesty the Emperor, I decided to send him.
Yet I have nothing definite to write to my lord about this man. Therefore I have brought him before you all, and especially before yoʋ, King Agrippa, so that after we have had this preliminary hearing, I may have something to write.
For it seems unreasonable to me to send a prisoner without indicating the charges against him.”
Then Agrippa said to Paul, “Yoʋ have permission to speak for yoʋrself.” So Paul stretched out his hand and began to make his defense:
“I consider myself fortunate that it is before yoʋ, King Agrippa, that I am about to make my defense today concerning all the things of which I am being accused by the Jews,
especially since yoʋ are acquainted with all the customs and controversies of the Jews. Therefore I beg yoʋ to listen to me patiently.
“All the Jews know about my manner of life from my youth up, which was spent from the beginning among my own nation in Jerusalem.
They have known about me for a long time, if they are willing to testify, that according to the strictest sect of our religion I lived as a Pharisee.
And now I am standing trial because of my hope in the promise God made to our fathers,
a promise that our twelve tribes hope to attain as they earnestly serve him night and day. Regarding this hope, King Agrippa, I am being accused by the Jews.
Why is it deemed unbelievable by you that God raises the dead?
“Indeed, I myself was convinced that I ought to do many things against the name of Jesus of Nazareth.
And that is just what I did in Jerusalem. I locked up many of the saints in prison by the authority I received from the chief priests, and when they were being put to death, I cast my vote against them.
I also punished them often in all the synagogues and tried to force them to blaspheme. And being furiously enraged against them, I pursued them even to foreign cities.
“While engaged in such things, I was on my way to Damascus with authority and commission from the chief priests,
when at midday, O king, I saw on the way a light from heaven, brighter than the sun, shining around me and those who were traveling with me.
When we had all fallen down to the ground, I heard a voice saying to me in the Hebrew language, ‘Saul, Saul, why are yoʋ persecuting me? It is hard for yoʋ to kick against the goads.’
I said, ‘Who are yoʋ, Lord?’ He said, ‘I am Jesus, whom yoʋ are persecuting.
But rise and stand on yoʋr feet, for I have appeared to yoʋ for this purpose, to appoint yoʋ as a servant and witness to the things yoʋ have seen and to the things in which I will appear to yoʋ.
I will rescue yoʋ from yoʋr own people and from the Gentiles, to whom I am sending yoʋ
to open their eyes so that they may turn away from darkness to light, and from the dominion of Satan to God, that they may receive remission of sins and an allotment among those who have been sanctified by faith in me.’
“Consequently, King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision,
but first to those in Damascus and then to those in Jerusalem, to all the region of Judea and to the Gentiles, I proclaimed that they should repent and turn to God, doing works consistent with repentance.
That is why the Jews seized me in the temple courts and were trying to kill me.
But having obtained help from God, I stand to this day testifying to both small and great, saying nothing except what the Prophets and Moses said would take place:
that the Christ would suffer and that, as the first to rise from the dead, he would proclaim light to our people and to the Gentiles.”
As Paul was saying these things in his own defense, Festus said with a loud voice, “Yoʋ are out of yoʋr mind, Paul. Too much learning is driving yoʋ insane!”
But Paul said, “I am not out of my mind, most excellent Festus, but I am speaking words of truth and good sense.
For the king knows about these things, to whom I am speaking boldly. I am convinced that none of these things has escaped his notice at all, for this has not been done in a corner.
Do yoʋ believe the Prophets, King Agrippa? I know that yoʋ believe.”
Agrippa said to Paul, “Do yoʋ think yoʋ can persuade me to become a Christian so quickly?”
Paul said, “Whether quickly or not, I pray to God that not only yoʋ but also all who are listening to me today would become as I am, except for these chains.”
After Paul said these things, the king stood up, along with the governor, Bernice, and those who were sitting with them.
After leaving the room, they began saying to one another, “This man is doing nothing that deserves death or imprisonment.”
And Agrippa said to Festus, “This man could have been released if he had not appealed to Caesar.”
When it was decided that we would sail to Italy, they transferred Paul and some other prisoners to a centurion named Julius, of the Augustan Cohort.
We got on board a ship of Adramyttium and put out to sea, intending to sail by the ports along the coast of Asia. With us was Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica.
The next day we put in at Sidon, and Julius treated Paul kindly, allowing him to go to his friends and receive care.
From there we put out to sea and sailed under the lee of Cyprus, because the winds were against us.
After sailing across the open sea off Cilicia and Pamphylia, we arrived at Myra of Lycia.
There the centurion found an Alexandrian ship that was sailing to Italy and put us on board.
We sailed along slowly for many days and arrived with difficulty off Cnidus. When the wind did not allow us to hold our course, we sailed under the lee of Crete off Salmone.
Sailing along the coast with difficulty, we came to a place called Fair Havens, which was near the city of Lasea.
Since much time had been lost and the voyage had now become dangerous because the Fast was already over, Paul advised the ship's officers,
“Men, I perceive that this voyage is going to result in damage and great loss, not only of the cargo and of the ship, but also of our lives.”
But the centurion was persuaded by the ship's captain and the shipowner rather than by what Paul said.
Because the harbor was not a suitable place for spending the winter, the majority made a decision to set sail from there also, hoping to somehow reach Phoenix, a harbor of Crete facing southwest and northwest, so that we could spend the winter there.
When a south wind started blowing gently, they thought that the opportunity had come for them to carry out their plan. So they weighed anchor and sailed closely along the shore of Crete.
But before long, a hurricane-force wind called Euroclydon swept down from the island.
When the ship was caught by the storm and could not head into the wind, we gave way to it and were driven along.
Running under the lee of a small island called Clauda, we were able with difficulty to secure the skiff.
After hoisting it up, the sailors used supports to undergird the ship. Then, fearing they might run aground on the Syrtis, they lowered the gear, and in this manner the ship was driven along.
The next day, because we were being severely battered by the storm, the sailors began throwing the cargo overboard.
On the third day we threw the ship's tackle overboard with our own hands.
When neither sun nor stars appeared for many days, and the violent storm continued to rage, all hope that we might be saved was lost.
Since there had been little desire to eat, Paul stood up among them and said, “Men, you should have listened to my advice not to set sail from Crete; then you would have spared yourselves this damage and loss.
But now I advise you to be of good cheer, for there will be no loss of life among you, but only of the ship.
For this very night an angel of the God to whom I belong and whom I serve stood beside me
and said, ‘Do not be afraid, Paul; yoʋ must stand before Caesar. And behold, God has granted yoʋ the safety of all who are sailing with yoʋ.’
Therefore be of good cheer, men, for I have faith in God that it will happen just as I have been told.
But we must run aground on some island.”
When the fourteenth night had come, as we were being driven across the Adriatic Sea, about midnight the sailors suspected that they were approaching some land.
So they took a sounding and found it to be twenty fathoms. After going a little farther, they took another sounding and found it to be fifteen fathoms.
Fearing that we might run aground on the rocks, they let down four anchors from the stern and prayed for daybreak to come.
Then the sailors tried to escape from the ship by lowering the skiff into the sea under the pretense that they were going to lay out anchors from the bow.
So Paul said to the centurion and the soldiers, “If these men do not remain in the ship you cannot be saved.”
Then the soldiers cut away the ropes of the skiff and let it drift away.
When daybreak was about to come, Paul encouraged them all to take some food, saying, “Today is the fourteenth day that you have continued in suspense without eating, having taken nothing.
Therefore I urge you to take some food, for this is important for your survival, since not a hair will fall from the head of any one of you.”
After saying this, Paul took some bread and gave thanks to God in the presence of them all. Then he broke it and began to eat.
They were all encouraged and took food themselves.
(Altogether there were two hundred seventy-six of us on the ship.)
When they had eaten their fill of food, they began to lighten the ship by throwing the wheat out into the sea.
When daybreak came, the sailors did not recognize the land. But they noticed a bay with a beach and decided that, if possible, they would run the ship ashore there.
So they cut away the anchors and left them in the sea, at the same time loosening the bands of the rudders. Then they hoisted the foresail up into the blowing wind and made for the beach.
But they struck a sandbar and ran the ship aground. The bow stuck fast and remained immovable, and the stern was being broken apart by the force of the waves.
The soldiers' plan was to kill the prisoners, so that none of them would swim away and escape.
But the centurion, wishing to save Paul's life, kept them from carrying out their plan. So he ordered those who could swim to jump overboard first and get to land,
and the rest were to follow, some on planks and some on pieces of the ship. And so it was that they were all brought safely to land.
Once they had safely reached shore, they found out that the island was called Malta.
The native people showed us extraordinary kindness. For they welcomed us all and kindled a fire because of the rain that had set in and because of the cold.
Paul gathered a bundle of sticks, and when he was putting them on the fire, a viper came out because of the heat and fastened on his hand.
When the native people saw the creature hanging from his hand, they said to one another, “This man is undoubtedly a murderer. Although he has been saved from the sea, the goddess Justice has not allowed him to live.”
But Paul shook the creature off into the fire and suffered no harm.
The people were expecting that he would soon swell up or suddenly fall down dead. But after waiting expectantly for a long time and seeing nothing unusual happen to him, they changed their minds and said that he was a god.
Now in the region around that place were lands that belonged to the chief man of the island, named Publius, who welcomed us and hospitably took care of us as his guests for three days.
Now it so happened that the father of Publius lay sick in bed, suffering from fevers and dysentery. So Paul went in to see him and healed him by praying and laying his hands on him.
After this happened, the rest of the people on the island who were sick also came and were healed.
So the people bestowed many honors on us, and when we were about to set sail, they provided us with the things we needed.
After three months, we set sail in an Alexandrian ship that had wintered at the island and that had the twin sons of Zeus as its figurehead.
Putting in at Syracuse, we stayed there for three days.
From there we took a circuitous course and arrived at Rhegium. After one day a south wind sprang up, and on the second day we came to Puteoli.
There we found some brothers and were invited to stay with them for seven days. And so we came to Rome.
When the brothers from Rome heard the news about us, they came out as far as the Forum of Appius and the Three Taverns to meet us. When Paul saw them, he gave thanks to God and took courage.
When we came into Rome, the centurion transferred the prisoners to the captain of the guard, but Paul was allowed to stay by himself, with the soldier who was guarding him.
After three days, Paul called together those who were prominent among the Jews. When they had gathered together, he said to them, “Brothers, though I had done nothing against our people or the customs of our fathers, I was delivered as a prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans.
When they examined me, they were willing to release me because there were no grounds for death in my case.
But when the Jews objected, I was forced to appeal to Caesar, not that I had any accusation to make against my own nation.
That is why I have asked to see you and speak with you, for it is on account of the hope of Israel that I am bound with this chain.”
They said to him, “We have received no letters from Judea about yoʋ, and none of the brothers who have come here have reported or spoken anything bad about yoʋ.
But we think it would be best to hear what yoʋr views are, for concerning this sect, we know that everywhere it is spoken against.”
When they had arranged a day to meet with Paul, many more came to him at his lodging. From morning until evening he explained the matter to them, testifying about the kingdom of God and trying to convince them about Jesus both from the Law of Moses and from the Prophets.
Some were convinced by what he said, but others refused to believe.
So they were in disagreement with one another and began to leave after Paul made this one final statement: “The Holy Spirit was right in saying to our fathers through the prophet Isaiah:
‘Go to this people and say, “Although you will hear, you will never understand, and although you will see, you will never perceive.”
For the heart of this people has become calloused; with their ears they have barely heard, and their eyes they have closed, lest they should see with their eyes, hear with their ears, and understand with their heart and turn back, and I would heal them.’
Therefore let it be known to you that the salvation of God has been sent to the Gentiles; they will listen.”
After Paul said these things, the Jews went away and had a great dispute among themselves.
For two whole years Paul stayed in his own rented house and welcomed all who came to him,
preaching the kingdom of God and teaching about the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness and without hindrance.
Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, set apart for the gospel of God,
which he promised beforehand through his prophets in the holy Scriptures,
concerning his Son, who was descended from David according to the flesh
and who was declared to be the Son of God in power according to the Spirit of holiness by the resurrection from the dead, Jesus Christ our Lord,
through whom we have received grace and apostleship to bring about the obedience of faith for the sake of his name among all the Gentiles,
including you who are also called to belong to Jesus Christ;
to all who are in Rome, beloved by God and called to be saints: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
First, I give thanks to my God through Jesus Christ for you all, because your faith is proclaimed in all the world.
For God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the gospel of his Son, that I continually remember you,
always pleading in my prayers that somehow by God's will I may now at last succeed in coming to you.
For I long to see you so that I may impart to you some spiritual gift, that you may be established,
that is, that while I am among you we may be mutually encouraged by each other's faith, both yours and mine.
I do not want you to be unaware, brothers, that I have often intended to come to you (but have been hindered until the present time) so that I might have some fruit among you as well, just as I have had among the other Gentiles.
I am under obligation both to Greeks and to barbarians, both to the wise and to the foolish;
thus the eagerness on my part to preach the gospel to you also who are in Rome.
For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, because it is the power of God for salvation to everyone who believes, both to the Jew first and also to the Greek.
For in it the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, just as it is written, “The righteous will live by faith.”
For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who suppress the truth by their unrighteousness.
Because what is known about God is evident among them, for God has made it evident to them.
For his invisible qualities, both his everlasting power and his divinity, have been plainly seen from the creation of the world, being perceived through what has been made, so that they are without excuse.
For although they knew God, they did not glorify him as God or give thanks, but they became futile in their thoughts, and their senseless hearts were darkened.
Claiming to be wise, they became fools
and exchanged the glory of the immortal God for images resembling mortal man, birds, four-footed animals, and reptiles.
Therefore God gave them up in the lusts of their hearts to impurity, to dishonor their bodies among themselves,
because they exchanged the truth of God for falsehood and worshiped and served the creature rather than the Creator, who is blessed forever. Amen.
For this reason God gave them up to dishonorable passions, for their women exchanged the natural function for that which is contrary to nature.
In the same way the men also, having abandoned the natural function of the female, were inflamed in their lust for one another, men committing shameful acts with men and receiving in themselves the due penalty for their error.
And just as they considered it worthless to have God in their knowledge, God gave them up to a worthless mind, to do what is not proper.
They are filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, evil, covetousness, and malice. They are full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, and maliciousness. They are gossips,
slanderers, haters of God, insolent, proud, boasters, inventors of evil, disobedient to parents,
senseless, untrustworthy, without natural affection, irreconcilable, and unmerciful.
Though they know the ordinance of God, that those who practice such things deserve death, they not only do them but also approve of those who practice them.
Therefore yoʋ are without excuse, O man, every one of you who judges. For on whatever grounds yoʋ judge another, yoʋ condemn yoʋrself, for yoʋ who judge do the same things.
Now we know that the judgment of God against those who do such things is in accordance with truth.
Do yoʋ suppose, O man—yoʋ who judge those who do such things and yet do them yoʋrself—that yoʋ will escape the judgment of God?
Or do yoʋ despise the riches of his kindness, forbearance, and patience, not knowing that the kindness of God leads yoʋ to repentance?
But according to yoʋr stubbornness and yoʋr unrepentant heart, yoʋ are storing up wrath for yoʋrself on the day of wrath, revelation, and the righteous judgment of God,
who will repay each person according to his works.
To those who by patient endurance in good works seek glory, honor, and immortality, he will give eternal life;
but for those who are self-seeking and obey unrighteousness instead of the truth, there will be anger and wrath.
There will be tribulation and distress for everyone who does evil, the Jew first and also the Greek;
but there will be glory, honor, and peace for everyone who does good, the Jew first and also the Greek.
For there is no partiality with God.
For all who have sinned without the law will also perish without the law, and all who have sinned under the law will be judged by the law.
For it is not the hearers of the law who are righteous before God, but the doers of the law will be justified.
For when Gentiles, who do not have the law, by nature do what is required by the law, they are a law to themselves, even though they do not have the law.
They show that what the law requires is written in their hearts, as their conscience bears witness with them and their conflicting thoughts accuse or even defend them
on the day when, according to my gospel, God will judge the secret thoughts of men through Jesus Christ.
Behold, yoʋ call yoʋrself a Jew and rely on the law and boast in God.
Yoʋ know his will and approve what is excellent, because yoʋ are instructed from the law.
And yoʋ have confidence that yoʋ yoʋrself are a guide for the blind, a light for those who are in darkness,
an instructor of the foolish, and a teacher of children, because yoʋ have in the law the embodiment of knowledge and truth.
Yoʋ then who teach others, do yoʋ not teach yoʋrself? Yoʋ who preach against stealing, do yoʋ steal?
Yoʋ who tell others not to commit adultery, do yoʋ commit adultery? Yoʋ who abhor idols, do yoʋ rob temples?
Yoʋ who boast in the law, do yoʋ dishonor God by transgressing the law?
As it is written, “The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you.”
Circumcision does indeed benefit yoʋ if yoʋ observe the law, but if yoʋ transgress the law, yoʋr circumcision has become uncircumcision.
If then an uncircumcised man keeps the ordinances of the law, will not his uncircumcision be regarded as circumcision?
Then he who is physically uncircumcised and carries out the law will judge yoʋ who, despite having the letter of the law and circumcision, transgress the law.
For he is not a Jew who is one outwardly, neither is circumcision something outward in the flesh;
but he is a Jew who is one inwardly, and circumcision is a matter of the heart, by the Spirit, not by the letter. Such a man's praise comes not from men but from God.
What then is the advantage of the Jew? Or what is the benefit of circumcision?
Much in every way. First of all, the Jews were entrusted with the oracles of God.
Now what if some of them were unfaithful? Will their unfaithfulness nullify the faithfulness of God?
Certainly not! Rather, let God be true even if every man is a liar, just as it is written, “So that yoʋ may be justified in yoʋr words, and prevail when yoʋ are judged.”
But if our unrighteousness demonstrates the righteousness of God, what shall we say? Is God, who inflicts wrath, unrighteous? (I speak in a human way.)
Certainly not! Otherwise, how could God judge the world?
For if through my lie the truth of God abounds to his glory, why am I still being judged as a sinner?
And why not say (just as some slanderously claim that we say), “Let us do evil that good may come”? Their condemnation is just.
What then? Are we Jews any better off? Not at all! For we have previously charged that both Jews and Greeks are all under sin,
just as it is written, “There is none righteous, not even one;
there is none who understands; there is none who seeks after God.
All have turned aside; together they have become useless; there is none who shows kindness, not even one.”
“Their throat is an open grave; with their tongues they deceive.” “The venom of asps is under their lips.”
“Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.”
“Their feet are swift to shed blood.
Ruin and misery are in their paths,
and the way of peace they have not known.”
“There is no fear of God before their eyes.”
Now we know that whatever the law says, it says to those who are under the law, so that every mouth may be stopped and all the world may be brought under the judgment of God.
For by the works of the law no flesh will be justified in his sight, for through the law comes knowledge of sin.
But now the righteousness of God has been revealed apart from the law, attested by the Law and the Prophets,
that is, the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ for all and upon all who believe; for there is no distinction.
For all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God,
being freely justified by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus,
whom God put forward as a sacrifice of atonement, through faith, by his blood. He did this to demonstrate his righteousness, because in his divine forbearance he had passed over the sins that had previously been committed.
He did so to prove in the present time that he is righteous and that he justifies the one who has faith in Jesus.
Where then is boasting? It is excluded. By what kind of law? By a law of works? No, but by the law of faith.
We conclude therefore that a person is justified by faith apart from the works of the law.
Or is God the God of the Jews only? Is he not the God of the Gentiles also? Yes, of the Gentiles also,
since God is one, who will justify the circumcised by faith and the uncircumcised through faith.
Do we then nullify the law through faith? Certainly not! On the contrary, we uphold the law.
What then shall we say that Abraham our father has discovered according to the flesh?
If Abraham was justified by works, he has something to boast about, but not before God.
For what does the Scripture say? “Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him as righteousness.”
Now to the one who works, his wages are not counted as a gift, but as something owed to him.
However, to the one who does not work but believes in him who justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted as righteousness,
just as David also speaks of the blessedness of the one to whom God counts righteousness apart from works:
“Blessed are those whose lawless deeds are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
Blessed is the man against whom the Lord will never count sin.”
Is this blessedness then only for the circumcised, or is it also for the uncircumcised? For we say, “Faith was counted to Abraham as righteousness.”
How then was it counted? When he was circumcised, or uncircumcised? Not when he was circumcised, but when he was uncircumcised.
He received the sign of circumcision as a seal of the righteousness that he had by faith while he was still uncircumcised, so that he might be the father of all who believe when they are uncircumcised, so that righteousness might be counted to them as well,
and so that he might be the father of those who are not only circumcised in the flesh, but who also walk in the footsteps of the faith that our father Abraham had when he was uncircumcised.
For the promise to Abraham, or to his offspring, that he would be the heir of the world was not through the law, but through the righteousness of faith.
For if those who are of the law are heirs, faith has been made void and the promise has been invalidated,
because the law brings wrath; for where there is no law, there is no transgression.
For this reason the promise comes by faith, so that it may be according to grace and be guaranteed to all Abraham's offspring, not only to the one who is of the law, but also to the one who is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all
(just as it is written, “I have made yoʋ the father of many nations”). He is our father in the presence of the God in whom he believed, who gives life to the dead and calls into being what does not yet exist.
Against all hope Abraham believed in hope that he would become the father of many nations according to what had been spoken: “So shall yoʋr offspring be.”
Because he was not weak in faith, he did not consider his own body, now as good as dead (since he was somewhere around a hundred years old), or the deadness of Sarah's womb.
And he did not waver in unbelief at the promise of God but was strengthened in faith, giving glory to God
and being fully assured that God was able to do what he had promised.
Therefore, “it was counted to him as righteousness.”
Now the statement “it was counted to him” was not written only for Abraham's sake,
but for ours also. It will be counted to us who believe in him who raised Jesus our Lord from the dead,
who was delivered up for our trespasses and raised for our justification.
Therefore, since we have been justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
through whom we have access by faith into this grace in which we stand, and we boast in the hope of the glory of God.
Not only that, but we also boast in our tribulations, knowing that tribulation produces endurance,
endurance produces proven character, proven character produces hope,
and hope does not put to shame, because the love of God has been poured out into our hearts through the Holy Spirit who has been given to us.
For when we were still weak, at the right time Christ died for the ungodly.
Rarely will anyone die for a righteous person, though perhaps for a good person someone might even dare to die.
But God demonstrated his own love for us in that, while we were still sinners, Christ died for us.
How much more then, since we have now been justified by his blood, will we be saved from wrath through him!
For if, while we were God's enemies, we were reconciled to him through the death of his Son, how much more will we be saved by his life now that we have been reconciled!
Not only that, but we also boast in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received reconciliation.
Therefore, just as sin came into the world through one man, and death came through sin, in this way death has come to all men, because all have sinned.
For until the law sin was in the world, but sin is not charged to anyone's account when there is no law.
Nevertheless, death reigned from Adam until Moses, even over those whose sins were not like the transgression of Adam, who was a type of the one to come.
But the gift is not like the trespass. For if many died through the trespass of the one man, how much more have the grace of God and the gift by the grace of the one man Jesus Christ abounded to many!
And the gift cannot be compared to the result of the one man's sin; for the judgment that arose from one trespass brought condemnation, but the gift that arose from many trespasses brought justification.
For if, by the trespass of the one man, death reigned through the one man, how much more will those who receive the abundance of grace and the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one man Jesus Christ!
So then, just as one trespass led to condemnation for all men, so one act of righteousness leads to justification and life for all men.
For just as many were made sinners through the disobedience of one man, so also many will be made righteous through the obedience of one man.
Now the law came in so that the trespass might abound. But where sin abounded, grace abounded all the more,
so that just as sin reigned in death, so also grace might reign through righteousness leading to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
What then shall we say? Should we continue in sin so that grace may abound?
Certainly not! How can we who have died to sin still live in it?
Or do you not know that all of us who have been baptized into Christ Jesus have been baptized into his death?
Therefore we were buried with him through baptism into death, so that just as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, we too might walk in newness of life.
For if we have become united with him in the likeness of his death, we will certainly also be united with him in the likeness of his resurrection.
For we know that our old self has been crucified with him so that the body of sin might be done away with, and we might no longer be enslaved to sin.
For he who has died has been set free from sin.
Now if we have died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him.
For we know that Christ, having been raised from the dead, dies no more; death no longer has dominion over him.
For the death that he died, he died to sin once for all; but the life that he lives, he lives to God.
So you also must consider yourselves to be dead to sin but alive to God in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Therefore do not let sin reign in your mortal bodies so that you obey it in the body's sinful desires.
And do not present your members to sin as instruments of unrighteousness, but present yourselves to God as alive from the dead, and present your members to God as instruments of righteousness.
For sin will have no dominion over you, for you are not under law but under grace.
What then? Should we sin because we are not under law but under grace? Certainly not!
Do you not know that when you present yourselves to someone as obedient slaves, you are slaves of the one whom you obey, either of sin leading to death, or of obedience leading to righteousness?
But thanks be to God that, though you were slaves of sin, you have become obedient from the heart to the pattern of teaching to which you were entrusted,
and having been set free from sin, you have become slaves to righteousness.
(I am speaking in human terms because of the weakness of your flesh.) For just as you presented your members as slaves to impurity and to lawlessness leading to more lawlessness, so now present your members as slaves to righteousness leading to sanctification.
For when you were slaves of sin, you were free with regard to righteousness.
So what fruit did you have at that time from the things of which you are now ashamed? The end result of those things is death.
But now that you have been set free from sin and become slaves of God, you have fruit that leads to sanctification, and the end result is eternal life.
For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Do you not know, brothers (for I am speaking to those who know the law), that the law has dominion over a person only as long as he lives?
For a married woman is bound by the law to her husband as long as he is alive, but if her husband dies, she is released from the law concerning her husband.
So then, she will be called an adulteress if she is joined to another man while her husband is alive. But if her husband dies, she is free from that law and is not committing adultery if she is joined to another man.
So then, my brothers, you also were put to death with respect to the law through the body of Christ, so that you might be joined to another, to him who was raised from the dead, so that we might bear fruit for God.
For when we were in the flesh, our sinful passions, which were aroused by the law, were at work in our members to bear fruit leading to death.
But now we have been released from the law, having died to that by which we were held, so that we may serve in the new way of the Spirit and not in the old way of the written code.
What then shall we say? Is the law sin? Certainly not! Yet I would not have known sin except through the law. For I would not have known covetousness if the law had not said, “Yoʋ shall not covet.”
But sin, seizing an opportunity through the commandment, produced in me every kind of covetousness. For apart from the law sin is dead.
Once I was alive apart from the law, but when the commandment came, sin came to life and I died.
So I found that the very commandment that was intended to bring life actually brought death.
For sin, seizing an opportunity through the commandment, deceived me and through it killed me.
So then, the law is holy, and the commandment is holy, righteous, and good.
Has that then which is good brought death to me? Certainly not! But sin, so that it would be shown to be sin, produced death in me through that which is good, so that through the commandment sin might become utterly sinful.
For we know that the law is spiritual, but I am of the flesh, sold as a slave to sin.
I do not understand what I do. Instead of doing what I want to do, I do the very thing I hate.
Now if I do the very thing I do not want to do, I agree that the law is good.
But now it is no longer I who do it, but sin that dwells in me.
For I know that nothing good dwells in me, that is, in my flesh. I have the desire to do what is right, but I find that the ability to carry it out is lacking.
For I do not do the good that I want to do, but I do the very evil that I do not want to do.
Now if I do the very thing I do not want to do, it is no longer I who do it, but sin that dwells in me.
I find then the law that when I want to do what is right, evil is present with me.
For I delight in the law of God in my inner being,
but I see another law at work in my members, warring against the law of my mind and making me a prisoner to the law of sin that is in my members.
Wretched man that I am! Who will rescue me from this body of death?
I thank God that he will do so through Jesus Christ our Lord! So then, with my mind I serve the law of God, but with my flesh I serve the law of sin.
Therefore, there is now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus, who walk not according to the flesh but according to the Spirit.
For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and death.
For what the law was powerless to do since it was weak through the flesh, God has done. By sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and as an offering for sin, he condemned sin in the flesh,
so that the requirement of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not according to the flesh but according to the Spirit.
For those who live according to the flesh set their minds on the things of the flesh, but those who live according to the Spirit set their minds on the things of the Spirit.
Now the mindset of the flesh is death, but the mindset of the Spirit is life and peace.
The mindset of the flesh is hostile to God, for it does not submit to the law of God; indeed, it is unable to do so.
That is why those who are in the flesh cannot please God.
You, however, are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if indeed the Spirit of God dwells in you. Now if anyone does not have the Spirit of Christ, he does not belong to Christ.
But if Christ is in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is alive because of righteousness.
And if the Spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you, he who raised Christ from the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies because of his Spirit who dwells in you.
So then, brothers, we are under obligation, not to the flesh, to live according to the flesh,
for if you live according to the flesh, you are going to die; but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live.
For all who are led by the Spirit of God are sons of God.
For you did not receive a spirit of slavery leading again to fear, but a spirit of adoption as sons, by which we cry out, “Abba! Father!”
The Spirit himself testifies with our spirit that we are children of God.
Now if we are children, we are also heirs, heirs of God and fellow heirs with Christ, if indeed we suffer with him so that we may also be glorified with him.
I consider that the sufferings of this present time are not worth comparing to the glory that will be revealed to us.
The creation waits with eager longing for the sons of God to be revealed.
For the creation was subjected to futility, not willingly, but because of him who subjected it, in hope
that the creation itself will also be set free from the slavery of corruption and brought into the freedom of the glory of the children of God.
For we know that all creation has been groaning together with labor pains until now.
Not only that, but we ourselves, who have the firstfruits of the Spirit, groan inwardly as we eagerly await our adoption as sons, the redemption of our bodies.
For in this hope we were saved. Now hope that is seen is not hope, for why would someone hope for what he already sees?
But if we hope for what we do not see, we eagerly wait for it with patient endurance.
In the same way the Spirit also helps us in our weaknesses. For we do not know what we ought to pray for, but the Spirit himself intercedes for us with inexpressible groanings.
And he who searches the hearts knows the mind of the Spirit, because the Spirit intercedes for the saints according to the will of God.
And we know that all things work together for the good of those who love God and are called according to his purpose.
Because those whom he foreknew he also foreordained to be conformed to the image of his Son, so that he might be the firstborn among many brothers.
And those whom he foreordained, he also called; and those whom he called, he also justified; and those whom he justified, he also glorified.
What then shall we say in response to these things? If God is for us, who can be against us?
He who did not spare his own Son but delivered him up for us all, how will he not also, along with him, graciously give us all things?
Who will bring an accusation against those whom God has chosen? It is God who justifies.
Who is to condemn? Christ is the one who died, but more than that, he was raised and is at the right hand of God, interceding for us.
Who can separate us from the love of Christ? Can tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or danger, or sword?
As it is written, “For yoʋr sake we face death all day long; we are regarded as sheep for slaughter.”
Yet in all these things we are more than conquerors through him who loved us.
For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor rulers, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other created thing, will be able to separate us from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
I am speaking the truth in Christ. My conscience confirms through the Holy Spirit that I am not lying when I say
that I have great sorrow and unceasing pain in my heart.
For I could wish that I myself were accursed, cut off from Christ for the sake of my brothers, my kinsmen according to the flesh.
They are Israelites, and to them belong the adoption as sons, the glory, the covenants, the giving of the law, the temple service, and the promises.
To them belong the patriarchs, and from them, according to the flesh, came the Christ, who is God over all, blessed forever. Amen.
It is not as though the word of God has failed. For not all Israelites truly belong to Israel,
and not all of Abraham's children are his true descendants, but, “Through Isaac yoʋr descendants will be counted.”
That is, it is not the children of the flesh who are the children of God; rather, the children of the promise are counted as descendants.
For this is what God promised: “About this time next year I will come, and Sarah will have a son.”
Not only that, but when Rebecca had conceived by one man, our father Isaac,
though her sons were not yet born and had done nothing good or evil, in order for the purpose of God's choice to stand (not because of works but because of him who calls),
she was told, “The older will serve the younger.”
As it is written, “Jacob I loved, but Esau I hated.”
What then shall we say? Is there injustice with God? Certainly not!
For he says to Moses, “I will have mercy on whom I have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion.”
So then, it does not depend on human will or effort, but on God's mercy.
For the Scripture says to Pharaoh, “I have raised yoʋ up for the very purpose of showing my power in yoʋ, so that my name might be declared in all the earth.”
So then, God has mercy on whom he wants to have mercy, and he hardens whom he wants to harden.
Yoʋ will say to me then, “Why does he still find fault? For who can resist his will?”
On the contrary, O man, who are yoʋ to answer back to God? Shall the thing formed say to him who formed it, “Why did yoʋ make me like this?”
Does the potter not have a right over the clay, to make out of the same lump one vessel for honorable use and another for dishonorable use?
What if God, although willing to show his wrath and to make his power known, endured with much patience vessels of wrath fitted for destruction,
in order to make known the riches of his glory upon vessels of mercy that he has prepared in advance for glory,
namely us whom he has called, not from the Jews only but also from the Gentiles?
As he says in Hosea, “Those who were ‘not my people’ I will call ‘my people,’ and those who were ‘not beloved’ I will call ‘beloved.’
And in the place where it was said to them, ‘You are not my people,’ there they will be called ‘sons of the living God.’ ”
And Isaiah cries out concerning Israel, “Though the number of the sons of Israel be as the sand of the sea, only the remnant will be saved.
For the Lord will settle the matter swiftly and justly; his sentence will be executed upon the earth without delay.”
And just as Isaiah foretold, “If the Lord of hosts had not left us any descendants, we would have been like Sodom and become like Gomorrah.”
What then shall we say? That Gentiles who were not pursuing righteousness have obtained righteousness, that is, the righteousness that is by faith.
But Israel, although they pursued a law of righteousness, did not attain a law of righteousness.
Why? Because they did not pursue it by faith, but as though it were by works of the law. They stumbled over the stone of stumbling,
as it is written, “Behold, I am placing in Zion a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense, yet no one who believes in him will be put to shame.”
Brothers, the desire of my heart and my prayer to God is that Israel may be saved.
I can testify that they have a zeal for God, but not according to knowledge.
For they do not understand the righteousness of God, and by seeking to establish their own righteousness, they have not submitted to God's righteousness.
For Christ is the end of the law so that there may be righteousness for everyone who believes.
Moses writes about the righteousness that is by the law: “The person who does these things will live by them.”
But the righteousness that is by faith speaks like this: “Do not say in yoʋr heart, ‘Who will go up to heaven?’ ” (that is, to bring Christ down)
“or, ‘Who will go down into the abyss?’ ” (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead).
But what does it say? “The word is near yoʋ, in yoʋr mouth and in yoʋr heart” (that is, the word of faith that we preach),
because if yoʋ confess with yoʋr mouth that Jesus is Lord and believe with yoʋr heart that God raised him from the dead, yoʋ will be saved.
For with the heart belief is exercised, resulting in righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made, resulting in salvation.
As the Scripture says, “No one who believes in him will be put to shame.”
For there is no distinction between Jew and Greek; the same Lord is Lord of all and richly blesses all who call upon him.
For “everyone who calls upon the name of the Lord will be saved.”
How then will they call upon him in whom they have not believed? And how will they believe in him whom they have not heard? And how will they hear without someone preaching?
And how will they preach unless they are sent? As it is written, “How beautiful are the feet of those who preach the gospel of peace, who preach good news of good things!”
But not all the Israelites have obeyed the gospel. For Isaiah says, “Lord, who has believed our report?”
So then, faith comes by hearing, and hearing comes through the word of God.
But I ask, have they not heard? On the contrary, “The message has gone out into all the earth, and the words to the ends of the world.”
Again I ask, did Israel not understand? First Moses says, “I will provoke you to jealousy by that which is not a nation; by a nation that has no understanding I will provoke you to anger.”
And Isaiah is even bold enough to say, “I was found by those who were not seeking me; I became known to those who were not asking for me.”
But to Israel he says, “All day long I have held out my hands to a disobedient and contrary people.”
I ask then, has God rejected his people? Certainly not! For I too am an Israelite, a descendant of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.
God has not rejected his people whom he foreknew. Do you not know what the Scripture says in the passage about Elijah, how he pleads with God against Israel, saying,
“Lord, they have killed yoʋr prophets and demolished yoʋr altars, and I alone am left, and they are seeking my life”?
But what does the divine response say to him? “I have reserved for myself seven thousand men who have not bowed down to Baal.”
So then, in the present time also there is a remnant chosen by grace.
Now if it is by grace, it is no longer by works, otherwise grace would no longer be grace. But if it is by works, it is no longer grace, otherwise work would no longer be work.
What then? Israel did not obtain what it was seeking. The chosen obtained it, but the rest were hardened,
as it is written, “God gave them a spirit of stupor, eyes not to see and ears not to hear, down to this very day.”
And David says, “Let their table become a snare and a trap, a stumbling block and a retribution to them.
Let their eyes be darkened so that they cannot see, and keep their backs forever bent.”
I ask then, did the Israelites stumble so as to fall? Certainly not! Rather, by their trespass salvation has come to the Gentiles, to provoke Israel to jealousy.
Now if their trespass means riches for the world, and their loss means riches for the Gentiles, how much more will it mean when their full number is included?
Now I am speaking to you who are Gentiles. Inasmuch as I am an apostle to the Gentiles, I glorify my ministry
if somehow I provoke my own people to jealousy and save some of them.
For if their rejection means reconciliation for the world, what will their acceptance mean but life from the dead?
If the dough offered as firstfruits is holy, so is the whole lump; and if the root is holy, so are the branches.
Now if some of the branches have been broken off, and yoʋ, a wild olive branch, have been grafted in among them and have become a fellow partaker of the root and richness of the olive tree,
do not boast against the branches. But if yoʋ do boast against them, remember that yoʋ do not sustain the root, but the root sustains yoʋ.
Yoʋ will say then, “Branches were broken off so that I could be grafted in.”
Right! They were broken off because of unbelief, but yoʋ stand because of faith. So do not be arrogant, but be afraid.
For if God did not spare the natural branches, perhaps he will not spare yoʋ either.
Consider therefore the kindness and severity of God: to those who have fallen, severity; but to yoʋ, kindness, if yoʋ continue in his kindness; otherwise yoʋ too will be cut off.
And if they do not continue in unbelief, they will be grafted in; for God is able to graft them in again.
For if yoʋ were cut off from what is by nature a wild olive tree and were grafted contrary to nature into a cultivated olive tree, how much more will the natural branches be grafted back into their own olive tree?
I do not want you to be unaware, brothers, of this mystery, lest you be wise in your own estimation: A partial hardening has come upon Israel until the full number of Gentiles has come in,
and in this way all Israel will be saved, as it is written, “The Deliverer will come from Zion and will remove ungodliness from Jacob.”
“And this will be my covenant with them, when I take away their sins.”
With respect to the gospel, the Israelites are enemies for your sake; but with respect to being chosen, they are beloved for the sake of the fathers.
For the gifts and calling of God are irrevocable.
Just as you were once disobedient to God but have now received mercy because of their disobedience,
so they too have now become disobedient in order that, by the mercy shown to you, they also may receive mercy.
For God has confined all in disobedience so that he might have mercy on all.
Oh the depth of the riches, wisdom, and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments and untraceable his ways!
“For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has become his counselor?”
“Or who has first given to God, that he should be repaid?”
For from him and through him and to him are all things. To him be the glory forever. Amen.
I urge you therefore, brothers, by the mercies of God, to present your bodies as living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God, your reasonable religious service.
Do not be conformed to this age, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, so that you may determine what is the good, acceptable, and perfect will of God.
For by the grace given to me I tell everyone among you not to think more highly of himself than he ought to think, but to think sensibly, in accordance with the measure of faith that God has distributed to each one of you.
For just as in one body we have many members, and all the members do not have the same function,
so we, who are many, are one body in Christ, and individually members of one another.
We have different gifts according to the grace given to us. If someone's gift is prophecy, he should prophesy in proportion to his faith;
if it is service, he should serve; if it is teaching, he should teach;
if it is exhortation, he should exhort; if it is giving, he should do so generously; if it is leadership, he should do so diligently; if it is showing mercy, he should do so cheerfully.
Love must be without hypocrisy. Abhor what is evil; cling to what is good.
Be devoted to one another in brotherly love. Take the lead in honoring one another.
Do not lack diligence in zeal, but be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.
Rejoice in hope, persevere in tribulation, and persist in prayer.
Contribute to the needs of the saints, and pursue hospitality.
Bless those who persecute you; bless, and do not curse.
Rejoice with those who rejoice, and weep with those who weep.
Be of the same mind toward one another. Do not be haughty, but associate with the lowly. Do not be wise in your own estimation.
Repay no one evil for evil, but have regard for what is right in the sight of all.
If possible, as far as it depends on you, be at peace with everyone.
Do not avenge yourselves, beloved, but leave room for the wrath of God, for it is written, “Vengeance is mine; I will repay, says the Lord.”
Therefore, “if yoʋr enemy is hungry, feed him; if he is thirsty, give him something to drink; for by doing so, yoʋ will heap coals of fire on his head.”
Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good.
Every person must be subject to the governing authorities. For there is no authority except from God, and the authorities that exist have been appointed by God.
So then, whoever resists authority opposes what God has instituted, and those who do so will bring judgment on themselves.
For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to evil works. Do yoʋ wish to have no fear of the one in authority? Do what is good, and yoʋ will have praise from him.
For he is God's servant for your good. But if yoʋ do evil, be afraid, for he does not bear the sword in vain. As God's servant, he is an avenger who executes wrath on the one who does evil.
Therefore it is necessary to be subject to authority, not only because of wrath, but also because of conscience.
That is also why you pay taxes, for the authorities are servants of God, attending continually to this work.
Therefore render to all their due: taxes to whom taxes are due, revenue to whom revenue is due, fear to whom fear is due, and honor to whom honor is due.
Owe nothing to anyone, except to love one another, for he who loves others has fulfilled the law.
For the commandments, “Yoʋ shall not commit adultery, Yoʋ shall not murder, Yoʋ shall not steal, Yoʋ shall not covet,” and whatever other commandments there may be, are summed up in this one command: “Yoʋ shall love yoʋr neighbor as yoʋrself.”
Love does no harm to its neighbor; therefore love is the fulfillment of the law.
And do this, knowing that the hour has now come for us to be awakened from sleep. For our salvation is nearer now than when we first believed.
The night is nearly over, and the day is almost here. So let us lay aside the works of darkness and put on the armor of light.
Let us walk properly, as in the day, not in revelries and drinking bouts, not in illicit affairs and sensual indulgences, not in strife and jealousy.
But put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh, to gratify its desires.
Receive anyone who is weak in faith, but not for the purpose of disputing about opinions.
One person believes that he may eat anything, but he who is weak eats only vegetables.
The one who eats must not despise the one who does not eat, and the one who does not eat must not judge the one who eats, for God has received him.
Who are yoʋ to judge the servant of another? To his own master he stands or falls. And he will be made to stand, for God is able to make him stand.
One person considers one day to be more important than another, while another person considers every day to be alike. Each one should be fully convinced in his own mind.
He who observes a particular day, observes it in honor of the Lord, while he who abstains from observing a particular day, abstains in honor of the Lord. He who eats, eats in honor of the Lord, for he gives thanks to God, while he who abstains from eating, abstains in honor of the Lord, and he gives thanks to God.
For none of us lives for himself, and none of us dies for himself.
If we live, we live for the Lord; and if we die, we die for the Lord. Therefore, whether we live or die, we belong to the Lord.
For this reason Christ died and then rose and lived again, so that he might be Lord over both the dead and the living.
Yoʋ, then, why do yoʋ judge yoʋr brother? Or yoʋ, why do yoʋ despise yoʋr brother? For we will all stand before the judgment seat of Christ.
For it is written, “As I live, says the Lord, every knee will bow before me, and every tongue will give praise to God.”
So then, each of us will give an account of himself to God.
Therefore let us no longer judge one another. Instead, resolve not to put any stumbling block or snare before your brother.
I know and am convinced in the Lord Jesus that nothing is unclean in and of itself, but it is unclean for anyone who considers it to be unclean.
If yoʋr brother is distressed by what yoʋ eat, yoʋ are no longer walking in love. Do not let what yoʋ eat destroy someone for whom Christ died.
And do not let what you consider good to be spoken of as evil.
For the kingdom of God is not a matter of eating and drinking, but of righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit.
Anyone who serves Christ in these things is acceptable to God and approved by men.
So then, let us pursue what brings about peace and mutual edification.
Do not tear down the work of God for the sake of food. Everything is indeed clean, but it is wrong for a person to eat anything that causes another to stumble.
It is good not to eat meat or drink wine or do anything by which yoʋr brother stumbles or is offended or made weak.
Do yoʋ have a firm belief about these things? Have it privately before God. Blessed is he who does not condemn himself by what he approves.
But whoever doubts is condemned if he eats, because his action is not based on faith; and anything that is not based on faith is sin.
Now we who are strong ought to bear with the weaknesses of those who are without strength; we ought not to please ourselves.
Let each of us please his neighbor for his good, to build him up.
For even Christ did not please himself, but as it is written, “The reproaches of those who reproached yoʋ fell on me.”
For everything that was written in former times was written for our instruction, so that through endurance and the encouragement of the Scriptures, we might have hope.
Now may the God of endurance and encouragement grant you to have the same mind toward one another, following the example of Christ Jesus,
so that with one accord and one voice you may glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore receive one another, just as Christ has received you, to the glory of God.
Now I say that Christ Jesus has become a servant to the circumcised on behalf of the truth of God in order to confirm the promises that were made to the fathers,
so that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy. As it is written, “Therefore I will confess yoʋ among the Gentiles; I will sing praise to yoʋr name.”
And again it says, “Rejoice, O Gentiles, with his people.”
And again, “Praise the Lord, all you Gentiles, and extol him, all you peoples.”
And again, Isaiah says, “The root of Jesse will appear, he who arises to rule the Gentiles; in him the Gentiles will hope.”
Now may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace as you trust in him, so that you may abound in hope by the power of the Holy Spirit.
I myself am convinced about you, my brothers, that you yourselves are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, and able to admonish others.
But I have written to you rather boldly in part, brothers, by way of reminder, because of the grace that was given to me by God
to be a minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles in the priestly service of the gospel of God, so that the Gentiles might become an acceptable offering, sanctified by the Holy Spirit.
Therefore I have a reason for boasting in Christ Jesus in my service to God.
For I will not dare to speak of anything other than what Christ has accomplished through me to bring about the obedience of the Gentiles, by word and deed,
by the power of signs and wonders, and by the power of the Spirit of God, so that from Jerusalem all the way around to Illyricum, I have fully preached the gospel of Christ.
And in this way I aspire to preach the gospel where the name of Christ has not been heard, so that I do not build upon another's foundation,
but as it is written, “Those who were not told about him will see, and those who have not heard will understand.”
That is why I have often been hindered from coming to you.
But now, since I no longer have a place in these regions, and since I have longed for many years to come to you,
I will come to you when I go to Spain. For I hope to see you when I pass through, and to have you send me on my way there, once I have first enjoyed your company for a while.
But now I am going to Jerusalem to serve the saints.
For Macedonia and Achaia have been pleased to make a contribution for the poor among the saints in Jerusalem.
They were pleased to do so, and indeed they owe it to them. For if the Gentiles have come to share in the spiritual blessings of the Jews, they owe it to the Jews to share with them their material blessings.
So when I have finished this task and have sealed to them this fruit, I will set out for Spain and visit you on the way.
And I know that when I come to you, I will come in the fullness of the blessing of the gospel of Christ.
Now I urge you, brothers, by our Lord Jesus Christ and by the love of the Spirit, to strive together with me in your prayers to God on my behalf.
Pray that I may be rescued from those in Judea who refuse to believe and that my ministry to Jerusalem may be acceptable to the saints,
so that I may come to you in joy by the will of God and be refreshed together with you.
May the God of peace be with you all. Amen.
I commend to you our sister Phoebe, who is a servant of the church in Cenchreae,
and I ask you to receive her in the Lord in a manner worthy of the saints and to assist her in whatever matter she may have need of you, for she has been a benefactor of many, including me.
Greet Prisca and Aquila, my fellow workers in Christ Jesus,
who risked their own necks for my life, to whom not only do I give thanks, but also all the churches of the Gentiles.
Greet also the church that meets in their house. Greet Epaenetus, my beloved friend, who is the firstfruits of Achaia for Christ.
Greet Mary, who has labored earnestly for us.
Greet Andronicus and Junia, my kinsfolk and my fellow prisoners, who are of note among the apostles, and who were in Christ before me.
Greet Amplias, my beloved friend in the Lord.
Greet Urbanus, our fellow worker in Christ, and Stachys, my beloved friend.
Greet Apelles, who is approved in Christ. Greet those of the household of Aristobulus.
Greet Herodion, my kinsman. Greet those of the household of Narcissus, who are in the Lord.
Greet Tryphaena and Tryphosa, who labor in the Lord. Greet the beloved Persis, who has labored earnestly in the Lord.
Greet Rufus, who is chosen in the Lord, and greet his mother, who has also been a mother to me.
Greet Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, and the brothers who are with them.
Greet Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas and all the saints who are with them.
Greet one another with a holy kiss. The churches of Christ greet you.
Now I urge you, brothers, to watch out for those who create divisions and obstacles contrary to the teaching that you have learned; avoid them.
For such people do not serve our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly. By smooth talk and fine speech they deceive the hearts of the unsuspecting.
Your obedience has become known to all, so I rejoice over you. But I want you to be wise about what is good and innocent about what is evil.
The God of peace will soon crush Satan under your feet. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
My fellow worker Timothy and my relatives Lucius, Jason, and Sosipater greet you.
I, Tertius, who wrote down this letter, greet you in the Lord.
Gaius, who is host to me and to the whole church, greets you. Erastus, the treasurer of the city, greets you, and so does Quartus, our brother.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.,



Paul, called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and Sosthenes our brother,
to the church of God in Corinth, to those who are sanctified in Christ Jesus and called to be saints, together with all who in every place call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both their Lord and ours:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I always give thanks to my God for you because of the grace of God that has been given to you in Christ Jesus.
For you have been enriched in him in every way, in all speech and all knowledge,
just as the testimony of Christ was confirmed among you,
so that you are not lacking in any gift as you eagerly await the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ.
He will strengthen you to the end, so that you will be blameless on the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
God is faithful, by whom you were called into the fellowship of his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.
Now I urge you, brothers, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you all agree in what you say and that there be no divisions among you, but that you be knit together in the same mind and in the same purpose.
For it has been disclosed to me about you, my brothers, by those of Chloe's household, that there are quarrels among you.
What I mean is this: One of you says, “I follow Paul,” while another says, “I follow Apollos,” or, “I follow Cephas,” or, “I follow Christ.”
Has Christ been divided? Was Paul crucified for you, or were you baptized into the name of Paul?
I give thanks to God that I baptized none of you, except Crispus and Gaius,
so that no one may say that I baptized into my own name.
(I also baptized the household of Stephanas. Beyond that, I do not recall if I baptized anyone else.)
For Christ did not send me to baptize, but to preach the gospel, and not with cleverness of speech, so that the cross of Christ would not be deprived of its power.
For the message of the cross is foolishness to those who are perishing, but to us who are being saved it is the power of God.
For it is written, “I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and the intelligence of the intelligent I will nullify.”
Where is the wise man? Where is the scribe? Where is the debater of this age? Has not God made the wisdom of this world foolish?
For since, in the wisdom of God, the world through its wisdom did not know God, it pleased God through the foolishness of our proclamation to save those who believe.
For Jews ask for a sign and Greeks seek wisdom,
but we preach Christ crucified, a stumbling block to Jews and foolishness to Greeks,
but to those who are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God.
For the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men.
Consider your calling, brothers, that not many of you were wise according to the flesh, not many were powerful, not many were of noble birth.
But God chose the foolish things of the world to shame the wise, and God chose the weak things of the world to shame the strong.
God chose what is lowly and despised in the world, things that are regarded as nothing, to nullify the things that are regarded as something,
so that no flesh might boast before God.
It is because of him that you are in Christ Jesus, who has become for us wisdom from God, and in whom we have righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.
Therefore, as it is written, “Let him who boasts, boast in the Lord.”
When I came to you, brothers, I did not come proclaiming to you the testimony of God with lofty speech or wisdom.
For I resolved to know nothing among you except Jesus Christ and him crucified.
I came to you in weakness and fear, and with much trembling.
And my word and my preaching were not with persuasive words of human wisdom, but with a demonstration of the Spirit and of power,
so that your faith would not be based on the wisdom of men, but on the power of God.
Now we speak wisdom among the mature, but not a wisdom of this age or of the rulers of this age, who are being brought to nothing.
On the contrary, we speak the hidden wisdom of God in a mystery, which God foreordained for our glory before time began.
None of the rulers of this age understood this wisdom, for if they had understood it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.
But, as it is written, “No eye has seen, no ear has heard, and no heart has imagined what God has prepared for those who love him.”
Now God has revealed these things to us through his Spirit. For the Spirit searches everything, even the depths of God.
For who among men knows the thoughts of a man except the man's spirit within him? In the same way, no one knows the thoughts of God except the Spirit of God.
Now we did not receive the spirit of the world, but the Spirit who is from God, so that we might understand what God has freely given us.
We speak about this, not with words taught by human wisdom but with words taught by the Holy Spirit, interpreting spiritual things to spiritual people.
The natural man does not accept what comes from the Spirit of God, because it is foolishness to him; he is not able to understand it because it is spiritually discerned.
But he who is spiritual makes judgments about all things, and yet he himself is not subject to any man's judgment.
“For who has known the mind of the Lord so as to advise him?” But we have the mind of Christ.
And so, brothers, I could not address you as spiritual men, but as men of the flesh, as infants in Christ.
I fed you milk, not solid food, for you were not yet able to receive it. Even now you are still not able,
for you are still of the flesh. For where there is jealousy, strife, and division among you, are you not of the flesh and behaving like mere men?
For when one says, “I follow Paul,” and another says, “I follow Apollos,” are you not of the flesh?
Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but servants through whom you believed, as the Lord has assigned to each?
I planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the growth.
So then, neither he who plants is anything, nor he who waters, but only God who gives the growth.
He who plants and he who waters are one, and each will receive his own reward according to his own labor.
For we are fellow workers of God; you are God's field, God's building.
According to the grace of God given to me, like a wise master builder I have laid a foundation, and another builds upon it. But each person must be careful how he builds upon it.
For no one can lay a foundation other than the one that has been laid, which is Jesus Christ.
If anyone builds upon this foundation with gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, or straw,
his work will become evident, for the Day will make it clear, because it is revealed by fire. And the fire will test each person's work and reveal what sort of work it is.
If the work that anyone has built remains, he will receive a reward.
If anyone's work is burned up, he will suffer loss; yet he himself will be saved, but only as through fire.
Do you not know that you are the temple of God and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?
If anyone destroys the temple of God, God will destroy him. For the temple of God is holy, which is what you are.
Let no one deceive himself. If anyone among you thinks he is wise in this age, he should become foolish so that he may become truly wise.
For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. As it is written, “He catches the wise in their craftiness,”
and again, “The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise, that they are futile.”
So then, let no one boast in men. For everything belongs to you,
whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas, or the world, or life or death, or things present or things to come—everything belongs to you,
and you belong to Christ, and Christ belongs to God.
People ought to regard us as servants of Christ and stewards of the mysteries of God.
Now it is required of stewards that they be found faithful.
But for me it is a very small thing if I am judged by you, or by any human court. Indeed, I do not even judge myself.
For I am conscious of nothing against myself, yet I am not thereby acquitted; but he who judges me is the Lord.
So then, do not judge anything before the appointed time. Wait until the Lord comes, who will bring to light what is hidden in darkness and reveal the intentions of the heart. At that time each person will receive his praise from God.
Now, brothers, I have applied these things to myself and Apollos for your sake, so that through us you may learn not to think beyond what is written, so that you may not be puffed up, with each one of you supporting one man against another.
For who regards yoʋ as superior? What do yoʋ have that yoʋ did not receive? And if yoʋ received it, why do yoʋ boast as though yoʋ did not receive it?
You are already full! You have already become rich! You have begun to reign without us! And how I wish that you really were reigning, so that we could reign with you!
For I think that God has put us apostles on display at the end of the procession, as sentenced to death, because we have become a spectacle to the world, both to angels and men.
We are fools for the sake of Christ, but you are wise in Christ. We are weak, but you are strong. You are esteemed, but we are dishonored.
To the present hour we hunger and thirst; we are poorly clothed and beaten down, with no home of our own.
We labor, working with our own hands. When we are reviled, we bless; when we are persecuted, we endure;
when we are slandered, we encourage. We have become like the refuse of the world, the scum of all things, even to this present time.
I am not writing this to shame you, but rather I am admonishing you as my beloved children.
For even if you had ten thousand guardians in Christ, you would not have many fathers. For in Christ Jesus I became a father to you through the gospel.
Therefore I urge you to be imitators of me.
That is why I have sent you Timothy, who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord. He will remind you of my ways in Christ, just as I teach them everywhere in every church.
But some of you have become puffed up, as though I were not coming to you.
But I will come to you soon, if the Lord wills, and I will find out not the talk of those who have become puffed up, but their power.
For the kingdom of God is demonstrated not by talk but by power.
What do you prefer? Shall I come to you with a rod, or with love and a spirit of gentleness?
It is actually reported that there is fornication among you, a kind of fornication that is not even named among the Gentiles, for a man has his father's wife.
And you are puffed up! You should have mourned instead and removed the man who did this from among you.
For though I am absent in body, I am present in spirit. And I have already judged the man who did this, just as though I were present.
So when you are gathered together in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ and I am with you in spirit, along with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ,
hand this man over to Satan for the destruction of his flesh, so that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.
Your boasting is not good. Do you not know that a little leaven leavens the whole lump?
Purge out the old leaven so that you may be a new lump of dough, since you really are unleavened. For Christ, our Passover lamb, has been sacrificed for us.
So then, let us celebrate the feast, not with old leaven, nor with the leaven of malice and evil, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
I wrote to you in my letter not to associate with fornicators.
Yet I certainly did not mean the fornicators of this world or the greedy or swindlers or idolaters, since you would then need to go out of the world.
But now I am writing to you not to associate with anyone who is named as a brother if he is a fornicator or greedy, an idolater or a reviler, a drunkard or a swindler; do not even eat with such a man.
For what have I to do with judging those who are outside the church? Do you not judge those who are inside the church?
God will judge those who are outside the church. “Therefore you must remove the evil person from among you.”
When any of you have a dispute against another, do yoʋ dare to go to court before the unrighteous and not before the saints?
Do you not know that the saints will judge the world? And if the world is to be judged by you, are you not competent to judge trivial cases?
Do you not know that we will judge angels, not to mention matters of this life?
If then you have disputes about such matters, do you seat as judges those who have no standing in the church?
I say this to your shame. Is there not a wise man among you, not even one, who would be able to decide between a man and his brother,
but one brother goes to court against another, and they do so before unbelievers?
As it is, to have lawsuits with one another is already a defeat for you. Why not rather be wronged? Why not rather be defrauded?
But you yourselves wrong, and you yourselves defraud, and you do these things to your own brothers!
Do you not know that the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived! Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor homosexuals, nor sodomites,
nor the greedy, nor thieves, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom of God.
And that is what some of you were. But you were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus and by the Spirit of our God.
“All things are lawful for me,” but not all things are beneficial. “All things are lawful for me,” but I will not be mastered by anything.
Food is for the stomach and the stomach for food, but God will do away with them both. The body is not meant for fornication but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body.
Now God raised the Lord and will also raise us up by his power.
Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ and make them members of a prostitute? Certainly not!
Do you not know that he who is joined to a prostitute is one with her in body? For it says, “The two will become one flesh.”
But he who is joined to the Lord is one with him in spirit.
Flee fornication. Every other sin that a person commits is outside the body, but he who commits fornication sins against his own body.
Do you not know that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit within you, whom you have received from God? You are not your own,
for you were bought with a price. Therefore glorify God with your body and with your spirit, which belong to God.
Now concerning the matters about which you wrote to me: “It is good for a man not to touch a woman.”
But because of the cases of fornication, each man should have his own wife, and each woman should have her own husband.
The husband should fulfill his marital duty to his wife, and likewise the wife to her husband.
The wife does not have authority over her own body, but the husband does. Likewise the husband does not have authority over his own body, but the wife does.
Do not deprive one another, except by mutual consent for a time, so that you may devote yourselves to fasting and prayer and then come together again so that Satan may not tempt you because of your lack of self-control.
Now I say this as a concession, not as a command.
For I wish that all people were as I am. But each has his own gift from God, one person in this manner and another in that manner.
Now to the unmarried and the widows I say: It is good for them if they remain even as I am.
But if they cannot exercise self-control, they should marry. For it is better to marry than to burn with passion.
Now to the married I give this command (not I, but the Lord): A wife must not separate from her husband
(but if she does separate, she must remain unmarried or else be reconciled to her husband), and a husband must not divorce his wife.
Now to the rest I say this (I, not the Lord): If any brother has an unbelieving wife, and she consents to dwell with him, he must not divorce her.
And if a woman has an unbelieving husband and he consents to dwell with her, she must not divorce him.
For the unbelieving husband is sanctified through his wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified through her husband. Otherwise your children would be unclean, but as it is, they are holy.
But if the unbelieving spouse separates, let it be so. The brother or the sister is not enslaved in such cases. God has called us to live in peace.
For how do yoʋ know, O wife, whether yoʋ will save yoʋr husband? Or how do yoʋ know, O husband, whether yoʋ will save yoʋr wife?
Nevertheless, each person should live the life that God has assigned to him and to which the Lord has called him. This is the rule I lay down in all the churches.
Was any man already circumcised when he was called? He should not remove the marks of circumcision. Was any man uncircumcised when he was called? He should not become circumcised.
Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but what matters is keeping the commandments of God.
Each person should remain in the calling in which he was called.
Were yoʋ a slave when yoʋ were called? Do not be concerned about it, but if yoʋ are able to become free, make the most of the opportunity.
For he who was called in the Lord as a slave is the Lord's freedman. In the same way, he who was called as a free man is Christ's slave.
You were bought with a price; do not become slaves of men.
Brothers, each person should remain with God in the condition in which he was called.
Now concerning virgins, I do not have a command from the Lord, but I give my judgment as one who has been shown mercy by the Lord to be trustworthy.
I think it is good then, on account of the present distress, for a man to remain as he is.
Are yoʋ pledged to marry a woman? Do not seek to be released. Are yoʋ free from such a commitment? Do not seek a wife.
But even if yoʋ do marry, yoʋ have not sinned. And if a virgin marries, she has not sinned. But those who marry will have tribulation in the flesh, and I am trying to spare you.
But I say this, brothers: The time is short. From now on those who have wives should live as though they had none,
and those who weep as though they were not weeping, and those who rejoice as though they were not rejoicing, and those who buy as though they did not possess,
and those who use this world as though they were not making full use of it. For the form of this world is passing away.
But I want you to be free from concern. The unmarried man is concerned about the affairs of the Lord, how he will please the Lord.
But the married man is concerned about the affairs of the world, how he will please his wife.
There is a difference between a wife and a virgin. The unmarried woman is concerned about the affairs of the Lord, how she may be holy both in body and in spirit. But the married woman is concerned about the affairs of the world, how she will please her husband.
I say this for your own benefit, not to lay any restraint upon you, but to promote proper behavior and devotion to the Lord without distraction.
Now if any man thinks that he is acting improperly toward his virgin daughter by not letting her marry, if she is past the bloom of her youth and it seems necessary to do so, he should do what he wants. He is not sinning by letting her get married.
But the man who stands firm in his heart, who is under no compulsion but has control over his own will, and has determined in his heart to keep his virgin daughter from marrying, does well.
So then, he who gives her in marriage does well, but he who does not give her in marriage does better.
A wife is bound by the law to her husband for as long as he lives. But if her husband dies, she is free to be married to anyone she wishes, but only in the Lord.
Yet in my judgment she is happier if she remains as she is. And I think that I too have the Spirit of God.
Now concerning food sacrificed to idols, we know that “we all have knowledge.” Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.
If anyone thinks he knows something, he has not yet come to know anything as he ought to know it.
But if anyone loves God, he is known by God.
With regard then to eating food sacrificed to idols, we know that “an idol is nothing in the world,” and that “there is no other God but one.”
For even if there are so-called gods, whether in heaven or on earth (as indeed there are many “gods” and many “lords”),
for us there is one God, the Father, from whom are all things, and we exist for him; and there is one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom are all things, and we exist through him.
However, not everyone possesses this knowledge. But some have idols in their conscience even now and eat such food as something sacrificed to idols, and since their conscience is weak, it is defiled.
But food does not bring us close to God. For we are no better off if we eat, and no worse off if we do not eat.
But be careful that this right of yours does not somehow become a stumbling block to the weak.
For if someone sees yoʋ, who have knowledge, reclining for a meal in the temple of an idol, will not his weak conscience be emboldened to eat food sacrificed to idols?
Should the weak brother, for whose sake Christ died, perish because of yoʋr knowledge?
When you sin in this way against your brothers and wound their weak conscience, you sin against Christ.
Therefore, if food causes my brother to stumble, I will certainly never eat meat, so that I will not cause my brother to stumble.
Am I not an apostle? Am I not free? Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? Are you not my work in the Lord?
If to others I am not an apostle, at least I am to you, for you are the seal of my apostleship in the Lord.
This is my defense to those who examine me.
Do we not have a right to eat and to drink?
Do we not have a right to take along a wife who is a sister in Christ, as do the other apostles, the brothers of the Lord, and Cephas?
Or is it only Barnabas and I who must work to support ourselves?
Who at any time serves as a soldier while supplying his own provisions? Who plants a vineyard and does not eat of its fruit? Or who tends a flock and does not drink of its milk?
Do I say this on human authority? Does not the law also say the same thing?
For in the law of Moses it is written, “Yoʋ shall not muzzle an ox while it is threshing.” Is it for oxen that God is concerned?
Or does he speak entirely for our sake? Yes, this was written for our sake, because he who plows ought to plow in hope, and he who threshes in hope ought to partake of his hope.
If we have sown spiritual blessings among you, is it too much if we reap material benefits from you?
If others have a share in this right over you, do not we have it even more? Nevertheless, we have not made use of this right, but we endure everything so that we may not give any hindrance to the gospel of Christ.
Do you not know that those who perform sacred services eat of the temple sacrifices, and those who attend to the altar have a share in the altar sacrifices?
In the same way, the Lord has commanded that those who proclaim the gospel should earn their living by the gospel.
But I have not used any of these rights, and I am not writing this so that such may be done in my case. For I would rather die than have anyone deprive me of my reason for boasting.
If I preach the gospel, I have no reason to boast, because I am compelled to preach, and woe to me if I do not preach the gospel.
If I do this voluntarily, I have a reward; but if I do it under compulsion, it is because I have been entrusted with a responsibility.
What then is my reward? That when I preach, I may present the gospel of Christ free of charge, so as not to make full use of my right in the gospel.
For though I am free from all, I have made myself a servant to all, in order to win as many as possible.
To the Jews I became like a Jew, so that I might win the Jews. To those under the law I became like one under the law, so that I might win those under the law.
To those outside the law I became like one outside the law (though I am not outside the law of God but under the law of Christ), so that I might win those outside the law.
To the weak I became like one who is weak, so that I might win the weak. I have become all things to all people, so that by all means I might save some.
I do this for the sake of the gospel, so that I may share in its blessings.
Do you not know that those who run in a race all run, but only one receives the prize? Run in such a way that you may obtain it.
Every athlete who competes exercises self-control in all things. They do so to receive a perishable wreath, but we do so to receive an imperishable crown.
Therefore I do not run aimlessly, nor do I box as though beating the air;
but I discipline my body and make it my slave, lest somehow after preaching to others I myself should be disqualified.
Now I do not want you to be unaware, brothers, that our fathers were all under the cloud, and all passed through the sea,
and all were baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea,
and all ate the same spiritual food,
and all drank the same spiritual drink. For they were drinking from the spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ.
Nevertheless, God was not pleased with most of them, for their bodies were scattered in the wilderness.
Now these things happened as examples for us, so that we would not crave evil things as they did.
So do not be idolaters, as some of them were; as it is written, “The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.”
We must not commit fornication as some of them did, and in a single day twenty-three thousand of them died.
We must not put Christ to the test, as some of them did and were killed by serpents.
And do not grumble as some of them did and were killed by the destroyer.
Now all these things happened to them as examples, and they were written down for our instruction, upon whom the end of the ages has come.
Therefore whoever thinks he stands must be careful not to fall.
No temptation has overtaken you except what is common to man. God is faithful; he will not allow you to be tempted beyond what you can bear, but with the temptation he will also provide the way out so that you can endure it.
Therefore, my beloved friends, flee from idolatry.
I am speaking as I would to sensible people; judge for yourselves what I am saying.
Is not the cup of blessing that we bless the communion of the blood of Christ? Is not the bread that we break the communion of the body of Christ?
Because we, who are many, are one bread and one body; for we all partake of the one bread.
Consider those who belong to Israel according to the flesh: Are they not united by eating the sacrifices of the altar?
What am I saying then? That an idol is anything, or that food sacrificed to an idol is anything?
No, I am saying that what the pagans sacrifice, they sacrifice to demons and not to God. I do not want you to be participants with demons.
You cannot drink both the cup of the Lord and the cup of demons. You cannot share in both the table of the Lord and the table of demons.
Or are we trying to provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than he is?
“All things are lawful for me,” but not all things are beneficial. “All things are lawful for me,” but not all things edify.
No one should seek his own good, but each person should seek the good of others.
Eat whatever is sold in the meat market, questioning nothing for the sake of conscience,
for “the earth is the Lord's and the fullness thereof.”
If one of the unbelievers invites you to dinner and you want to go, eat whatever is set before you, questioning nothing for the sake of conscience.
But if someone says to you, “This meat was sacrificed to an idol,” do not eat it, for the sake of the one who informed you and for the sake of conscience; for “the earth is the Lord's and the fullness thereof.”
But when I say “conscience,” I am not speaking about yoʋr own conscience, but the other person's conscience. For why is my freedom judged by another's conscience?
If I partake with thankfulness, why should I be criticized because of something for which I give thanks?
So whether you eat or drink or do anything, do it all for the glory of God.
Give no offense to Jews or Greeks or the church of God,
just as I also try to please everyone in everything I do, not seeking my own benefit, but the benefit of many, so that they may be saved.
Be imitators of me, as I am of Christ.
Now I praise you, brothers, because you remember me in everything and hold fast to the teachings that have been handed down, just as I delivered them to you.
But I want you to know that the head of every man is Christ, and the head of woman is man, and the head of Christ is God.
Every man who prays or prophesies with his head veiled disgraces his head,
and every woman who prays or prophesies with her head unveiled disgraces her head, for it is one and the same as having her head shaved.
If a woman will not veil herself, she should cut off her hair. But if it is disgraceful for a woman to cut off her hair or shave her head, she should wear a veil.
For a man ought not to have his head veiled, since he is the image and glory of God, but woman is the glory of man.
For man did not come from woman, but woman from man.
Neither was man created for the sake of woman, but woman for the sake of man.
That is why a woman ought to have a symbol of authority on her head, because of the angels.
Nevertheless, in the Lord neither is man independent of woman nor woman independent of man.
For just as woman came from man, so also man is born of woman, but all things come from God.
Judge for yourselves: Is it proper for a woman to pray to God with her head unveiled?
Does not even nature itself teach you that if a man has long hair it is a disgrace to him,
but if a woman has long hair it is her glory? For her long hair is given for a covering.
But if anyone is inclined to be contentious, we have no such custom, and neither do the churches of God.
Now in giving the following instructions, I do not praise you, since you come together not for the better, but for the worse.
For in the first place, I hear that there are divisions among you when you come together as a church, and in some part I believe it.
For there must be factions among you to show which of you are approved.
Now when you come together, it is not to eat the Lord's supper.
For when you eat, some of you eat your own supper without waiting for others. So one person is hungry while another gets drunk.
What! Do you not have houses for eating and drinking? Or do you despise the church of God and put to shame those who do not have anything? What should I say to you? Should I praise you for this? I do not praise you.
For I received from the Lord what I also delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus on the night in which he was betrayed took bread,
and when he had given thanks, he broke it and said, “Take and eat this bread; this is my body, which is broken for you. Do this in remembrance of me.”
In the same way, he also took the cup after supper, saying, “This cup is the new covenant in my blood. Do this, as often as you drink it, in remembrance of me.”
For as often as you eat this bread and drink this cup, you proclaim the Lord's death until he comes.
So then, whoever eats this bread or drinks the cup of the Lord in a manner unworthy of the Lord will be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
So a person should examine himself before he eats of the bread and drinks of the cup.
For he who eats and drinks in an unworthy manner eats and drinks judgment on himself, since he shows no regard for the body of the Lord.
That is why many among you are weak and sick, and a considerable number have fallen asleep.
If we would evaluate ourselves, we would not be judged.
But when we are judged by the Lord, we are disciplined so that we will not be condemned with the world.
So then, my brothers, when you come together to eat, wait for one another.
If anyone is hungry, he should eat at home, so that when you come together it will not result in condemnation. I will set the remaining matters in order when I come.
Now concerning spiritual gifts, brothers, I do not want you to be uninformed.
You know that when you were pagans you were somehow enticed and led astray to mute idols.
Therefore I make known to you that no one speaking by the Spirit of God calls Jesus accursed, and no one can call Jesus Lord except by the Holy Spirit.
Now there are varieties of gifts, but the same Spirit;
and there are varieties of ministries, but the same Lord;
and there are varieties of activities, but it is the same God who empowers all of them in everyone.
A manifestation of the Spirit is given to each person for the benefit of all.
To one person there is given a word of wisdom through the Spirit, to another a word of knowledge according to the same Spirit,
to another faith by the same Spirit, to another gifts of healing by the same Spirit,
to another the working of miracles, to another prophecy, to another the discernment of spirits, to another various kinds of tongues, and to another the interpretation of tongues.
All these gifts are empowered by one and the same Spirit, who distributes to each person individually just as he wills.
For just as the body is one and has many members, and all the members constitute one body even though they are many, so it is with Christ.
For by one Spirit we were all baptized into one body—whether Jews or Greeks, slave or free—and we have all been given to drink into one Spirit.
Even so the body does not consist of one member, but many.
If the foot should say, “Because I am not a hand, I am not a part of the body,” is it for that reason not a part of the body?
And if the ear should say, “Because I am not an eye, I am not a part of the body,” is it for that reason not a part of the body?
If the whole body were an eye, where would the sense of hearing be? If the whole body were an ear, where would the sense of smell be?
But as it is, God has placed each one of the members in the body just as he desired.
If they were all one member, where would the body be?
As it is, there are many members, yet one body.
The eye cannot say to the hand, “I have no need of yoʋ,” nor in turn can the head say to the feet, “I have no need of you.”
On the contrary, the members of the body that seem to be weaker are essential,
and the members of the body that we consider to be less honorable are clothed with more abundant honor. And our unpresentable parts are treated with greater modesty,
but our presentable parts have no need of it. Instead, God has put the body together, giving more abundant honor to the part that lacked it,
so that there would be no divisions in the body, but that the members would have the same concern for one another.
If one member suffers, all the other members suffer with it; if one member is honored, all the other members rejoice with it.
Now you are the body of Christ, and individually members of it.
And those whom God has appointed in the church are as follows: first apostles, second prophets, third teachers, next miracles, then gifts of healing, helping, leading, and various kinds of tongues.
Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are all teachers? Do all work miracles?
Do all have gifts of healing? Do all speak in tongues? Do all interpret?
No, but earnestly desire the better gifts. And now I will show you a far more excellent way.
If I speak in the tongues of men and of angels, but do not have love, I am a noisy gong or a clanging cymbal.
If I have the gift of prophecy and know all mysteries and all knowledge, and if I have all faith, so as to move mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing.
If I give away all my possessions to feed others, and if I deliver up my body to be burned, but do not have love, I receive no benefit.
Love is patient and kind. Love does not envy or boast. It is not puffed up
or rude. It does not seek its own way, it is not irritable, and it keeps no record of wrongs.
It does not rejoice over unrighteousness, but rejoices with the truth.
It bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, and endures all things.
Love never fails. But as for prophecies, they will come to an end; as for tongues, they will cease; as for knowledge, it will come to an end.
Now we know in part, and we prophesy in part.
Yet when the perfect comes, the partial will come to an end.
When I was a child, I spoke like a child, I thought like a child, and I reasoned like a child. But when I became a man, I set aside childish ways.
For now we see in a mirror by means of an obscure image, but then we will see face to face. Now I know in part, but then I will know fully, just as I have been fully known.
And now faith, hope, and love abide, these three; but the greatest of these is love.
Pursue love, and earnestly desire spiritual gifts, but even more that you may prophesy.
For he who speaks in a tongue speaks not to men but to God; for no one understands him, but he speaks mysteries in the Spirit.
But he who prophesies speaks edification, encouragement, and comfort to others.
He who speaks in a tongue edifies himself, but he who prophesies edifies the church.
Now I would like all of you to speak in tongues, but even more that you would prophesy. For greater is he who prophesies than he who speaks in tongues, unless someone interprets, so that the church may be edified.
Now, brothers, if I come to you speaking in tongues, how will I benefit you unless I speak to you with a revelation or knowledge or prophecy or teaching?
It is the same way with lifeless instruments that produce sound, such as the flute or harp. If they do not produce distinct notes, how will anyone recognize what is being played?
And if the trumpet does not produce a distinct sound, who will prepare himself for battle?
It is the same with you. If you do not produce intelligible speech with your tongue, how will anyone know what you are saying? You will just be speaking into the air.
There are undoubtedly many kinds of languages in the world, and none of them is without meaning.
If then I do not know the meaning of a particular language, I will be a foreigner to him who is speaking, and he who is speaking will be a foreigner to me.
It is the same with you. Since you earnestly desire spiritual gifts, seek to abound in them for the edification of the church.
Therefore anyone who speaks in a tongue should pray for the ability to interpret what he says.
For if I pray in a tongue, my spirit prays, but my mind is unfruitful.
What then should I do? I will pray with my spirit, but I will pray with my mind also. I will sing praise with my spirit, but I will sing praise with my mind also.
Otherwise, if yoʋ bless with yoʋr spirit, how will anyone in the position of an outsider say “Amen” when yoʋ give thanks, since he does not know what yoʋ are saying?
For yoʋ may very well be giving thanks, but the other person is not edified.
I give thanks to my God speaking in tongues more than you all.
Nevertheless, in church I would rather speak five words with my mind to instruct others, than ten thousand words in a tongue.
Brothers, do not be childish in your way of thinking. Rather, as to malice be infants, but in your way of thinking be mature.
In the law it is written, “With foreign tongues and with foreign lips I will speak to this people, and even then they will not listen to me, says the Lord.”
So then, tongues are a sign not for believers but for unbelievers, while prophecy is a sign not for unbelievers but for believers.
So if the whole church comes together and everyone is speaking in tongues, and outsiders or unbelievers come in, will they not say that you are out of your minds?
But if an unbeliever or outsider comes in while everyone is prophesying, he will be convicted by all and called to account by all.
The secrets of his heart will thus be revealed, and he will fall on his face and worship God, declaring that God is truly among you.
What then should you do, brothers? When you come together, each one of you has a psalm, a teaching, a tongue, a revelation, or an interpretation. Everything must be done for edification.
If any speak in a tongue, only two, or at the most three, should speak; they should each speak in turn, and someone must interpret.
But if there is no interpreter, they should keep quiet in the church and speak in tongues privately to God.
Two or three prophets should speak, and the others should evaluate what they say.
But if something is revealed to another who is seated, the first speaker should be silent.
For you can all prophesy one by one, so that all may learn and all may be encouraged.
Remember that the spirits of prophets are subject to the prophets.
For God is not a God of disorder but of peace; this is true in all the churches of the saints.
Your women should be silent in the churches, for they have not been permitted to speak, but must be in submission, just as the law says.
If they want to learn anything, they should ask their own husbands at home; for it is shameful for women to speak in church.
Or was it from you that the word of God came? Or are you the only ones it has reached?
If anyone thinks that he is a prophet or spiritual person, he should acknowledge that the things I am writing to you are commandments of the Lord.
But if anyone ignores this, let him be ignorant.
So then, brothers, earnestly desire to prophesy and do not forbid speaking in tongues.
Let all things be done decently and in order.
Now I make known to you, brothers, the gospel that I preached to you, which you received, in which you stand,
and by which you are being saved, if you hold fast to the message that I preached to you—unless you believed in vain.
For I delivered to you as of first importance what I also received: that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures,
that he was buried, that he was raised on the third day according to the Scriptures,
and that he appeared to Cephas, and then to the twelve.
Next he appeared to more than five hundred brothers at once, most of whom are still living, but some have fallen asleep.
Next he appeared to James, then to all the apostles.
Last of all, as to one born at the wrong time, he appeared to me as well.
For I am the least of the apostles, unworthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God.
But by the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace toward me was not in vain. On the contrary, I worked harder than all of them, yet not I, but the grace of God that was with me.
Whether then it was I or they, this is what we preach, and this is what you have come to believe.
Now if it is preached that Christ has been raised from the dead, how can some among you say that there is no resurrection of the dead?
If there is no resurrection of the dead, then not even Christ has been raised.
And if Christ has not been raised, then our preaching is in vain, and your faith is also in vain.
We are even found to be false witnesses about God, because we have testified against God that he raised Christ, whom he did not raise if indeed the dead are not raised.
For if the dead are not raised, not even Christ has been raised.
And if Christ has not been raised, your faith is futile; you are still in your sins.
Furthermore, those who have fallen asleep in Christ have also perished.
If for this life only we have hoped in Christ, we are of all people most to be pitied.
But as it is, Christ has been raised from the dead; he has become the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep.
For since death came through a man, the resurrection of the dead has also come through a man.
For just as all die in Adam, so all will be made alive in Christ.
But each in his own order: Christ the firstfruits, then, at his coming, those who belong to Christ.
Then comes the end, when he hands the kingdom over to God the Father, after he has abolished all rule and all authority and power.
For he must reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet.
The last enemy to be abolished is death.
For God “has put everything in subjection under his feet.” Now when it says that “everything has been put in subjection,” it is evident that it does not include God himself, who put everything in subjection to Christ.
Now when everything has been subjected to him, the Son himself will also be subjected to him who subjected everything to him, so that God may be all in all.
Otherwise, what are people doing when they get baptized for the dead? If the dead are not actually raised, why are people getting baptized for them?
And why do we put ourselves in danger every hour?
I die daily! Yes, just as surely as I boast about you in Christ Jesus our Lord.
If I fought with wild beasts at Ephesus with no more than human hopes, what did it benefit me? If the dead are not raised, “Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die.”
Do not be deceived: “Bad company corrupts good morals.”
Come to your senses, as is right, and stop sinning. For there are some who are ignorant of God. I say this to your shame.
But someone will say, “How are the dead raised? With what kind of body will they come?”
Fool! What yoʋ sow does not come to life unless it dies.
And what yoʋ sow is not the body that will be, but a bare kernel, perhaps of wheat or some other grain.
But God gives it a body just as he has determined, and he gives to each of the seeds its own body.
Not all flesh is the same flesh, but there is one kind for humans, another for animals, another for fish, and another for birds.
There are also heavenly bodies and earthly bodies, but the glory of heavenly bodies is one kind, and the glory of earthly bodies is another.
There is one glory of the sun, another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for star differs from star in glory.
So it is with the resurrection of the dead. The body that is sown is perishable, but it is raised imperishable.
It is sown in dishonor; it is raised in glory. It is sown in weakness; it is raised in power.
It is sown as a natural body; it is raised as a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body.
And so it is written, “The first man Adam became a living being.” The last Adam became a life-giving spirit.
However, the spiritual body is not first, but the natural body, then the spiritual body.
The first man was from the earth, made of dust; the second man is the Lord from heaven.
As was the man made of dust, so are those made of dust; and as is the heavenly man, so are those who are heavenly.
Just as we have borne the image of the man made of dust, let us also bear the image of the heavenly man.
Now I tell you, brothers, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, nor does what is perishable inherit what is imperishable.
Behold, I tell you a mystery: We will not all sleep, but we will all be changed,
in an instant, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet call. For the trumpet will sound, and the dead will be raised imperishable, and we will be changed.
For this perishable body must put on imperishability, and this mortal body must put on immortality.
Now when this perishable body has put on imperishability, and this mortal body has put on immortality, then this saying that is written will be fulfilled: “Death has been swallowed up in victory.”
“O Death, where is yoʋr sting? O Hades, where is yoʋr victory?”
Now the sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law.
But thanks be to God, who gives us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
So then, my beloved brothers, be steadfast and immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor in the Lord is not in vain.
Now concerning the collection for the saints, you must do what I have directed the churches of Galatia to do.
On the first day of every week, each one of you should set something aside, storing up whatever he may be prospered with, so that collections will not need to be taken when I come.
When I arrive, I will send those whom you approve by letters to carry your gift to Jerusalem.
If it is advisable for me to go as well, they can travel with me.
After I pass through Macedonia, I will come to you (for I will be passing through Macedonia),
and perhaps I will stay with you or even spend the winter, so that you may send me on my way wherever I may go.
But I do not wish to see you now only in passing; rather, I hope to stay with you for some time, if the Lord permits.
But I will stay in Ephesus until Pentecost,
for a great and effective door has been opened to me, and there are many adversaries.
If Timothy comes, make sure he has nothing to fear while he is with you, for he is doing the work of the Lord, just as I am.
Therefore let no one despise him. But send him on his way in peace so that he may come to me, for I am expecting him with the brothers.
Now concerning Apollos our brother, I strongly urged him to come to you with the other brothers, but it was not at all his will to come now. He will come when he has an opportunity.
Be watchful, stand firm in the faith, be men of courage, and be strong.
Everything you do should be done in love.
Brothers, you know that the household of Stephanas is the firstfruits of Achaia, and that they have devoted themselves to serving the saints. I urge you
to submit to such people and to everyone who joins together in the work and labors with them.
I rejoice over the coming of Stephanas, Fortunatus, and Achaicus, because these men have supplied what was lacking on your part.
For they have refreshed my spirit as well as yours. So give recognition to such men.
The churches of Asia greet you. Aquila and Priscilla greet you earnestly in the Lord, and so does the church that meets in their house.
All the brothers greet you. Greet one another with a holy kiss.
I, Paul, write this greeting with my own hand.
If anyone does not love the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be accursed. Our Lord has come!
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
My love be with you all in Christ Jesus. Amen.
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and Timothy our brother, to the church of God in Corinth, together with all the saints throughout Achaia:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and God of all comfort,
who comforts us in all our affliction, so that we can comfort those experiencing any kind of affliction with the comfort we ourselves have received from God.
For just as we share abundantly in the sufferings of Christ, so also our comfort abounds through Christ.
If we are afflicted, it is for your comfort and salvation, which helps you patiently endure the same sufferings that we suffer. And our hope for you is steadfast. If we are comforted, it is also for your comfort and salvation,
because we know that just as you share in our sufferings, so also you share in our comfort.
We do not want you to be unaware, brothers, of the affliction we experienced in Asia. For we were so utterly burdened beyond our strength that we despaired of life itself.
Indeed, we felt that we had received the sentence of death. But this happened so that we would not rely on ourselves, but on God, who raises the dead.
He rescued us from such a terrible death, and continues to rescue us. We have put our hope in him that he will rescue us yet again
as you join in helping us by your prayers. Then many will give thanks on your behalf for the favor granted to us through the prayers of many.
Now this is the reason for our confidence: Our conscience testifies that we have conducted ourselves in the world, and especially toward you, with integrity and godly sincerity, not by worldly wisdom, but by the grace of God.
For we are not writing anything to you other than what you can read and understand. And I hope that you will understand completely—
just as you have understood us in part—that on the day of the Lord Jesus you will be proud of us just as we will be proud of you.
Because I was confident of this, I intended to come to you first, so that you would be blessed by a second visit.
I wanted to visit you on my way to Macedonia and return to you from Macedonia, and then have you send me on my way to Judea.
Was I vacillating when I planned to do this? Or do I make my plans in a worldly manner, ready to say “Yes” and “No” at the same time?
As surely as God is faithful, our message to you did not waver between “Yes” and “No.”
For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, whom Silvanus, Timothy, and I preached among you, did not waver between “Yes” and “No.” On the contrary, in him God's answer has always been “Yes.”
For in him every one of God's promises is “Yes,” and in him we say “Amen” to the glory of God.
Now it is God who establishes us with you in Christ and who anointed us.
He has also sealed us and put his Spirit in our hearts as a guarantee.
I call upon God as a witness against me, that the reason I did not return to Corinth was to spare you.
Not that we rule over your faith; rather, we work with you for your joy, because by faith you stand firm.
So I made up my mind that I would not come to you again in sorrow.
For if I make you sorrowful, who is there to make me glad but the one whom I have made sorrowful?
That is why I wrote to you as I did, so that when I came I would not have sorrow from those who ought to make me rejoice. I had confidence about you all that my joy would be yours.
For I wrote to you out of great distress and anguish of heart and with many tears, not to cause you sorrow, but to let you know the abundant love I have for you.
Now if anyone has caused sorrow, he has caused it not to me, but in some measure (not to put it too severely) to all of you.
This punishment by the majority is enough for that person.
So you should forgive and comfort him instead, so that he will not be overwhelmed with excessive sorrow.
Therefore I urge you to reaffirm your love for him.
I wrote to you because I wanted to test your character and see if you would be obedient in everything.
Now if you forgive anyone of anything, I also forgive him. For if I have forgiven anyone of anything, I have done it for your sakes in the presence of Christ,
so that we might not be exploited by Satan. For we are not ignorant of his schemes.
Now when I came to Troas to preach the gospel of Christ, a door was opened for me in the Lord.
But I had no rest in my spirit because I did not find my brother Titus. So I took leave of the people there and went on to Macedonia.
But thanks be to God, who always leads us in triumphal procession in Christ, and through us spreads the fragrance of the knowledge of Christ everywhere.
For we are a sweet fragrance of Christ ascending to God among those who are being saved and among those who are perishing;
to the latter we are a smell of death leading to death, but to the former we are a fragrance of life leading to life. And who is equal to such a task?
For we are not like others who peddle the word of God for profit. On the contrary, in Christ we speak with sincerity in the presence of God, as men sent from God.
Are we beginning to commend ourselves again? Do we need, as some do, letters of recommendation to you or letters of recommendation from you?
You are our letter, written on our hearts, known and read by all.
You show that you are a letter from Christ, delivered by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not on stone tablets, but on tablets of human hearts.
Such is the confidence that we have in God through Christ.
Not that we are competent in and of ourselves to claim that anything comes from us, but our competence comes from God.
He has made us competent to be ministers of a new covenant, not of the letter, but of the Spirit. For the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life.
Now if the ministry of death, which was engraved in letters on stone, came with glory, so that the sons of Israel could not gaze at the face of Moses because of its glory (a glory that was fading away),
will not the ministry of the Spirit be even more glorious?
For if the ministry of condemnation was glorious, the ministry of righteousness abounds in glory even more.
For what was once glorious now has no glory in comparison with the glory that surpasses it.
And if what was fading away came with glory, what remains will be even more glorious.
Therefore, since we have such a hope, we act with great boldness.
We are not like Moses, who would put a veil over his face so that the sons of Israel would not gaze at the end of what was fading away.
But their minds were hardened, for to this day the same veil remains unlifted when the old covenant is read. Only in Christ is this veil taken away.
But to this day, when Moses is read, a veil lies over their hearts.
But whenever someone turns to the Lord, the veil is taken away.
Now the Lord is the Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom.
And we all, with unveiled faces reflecting the glory of the Lord, are being transformed into the same image from one degree of glory to another; this comes from the Lord, who is the Spirit.
Therefore, since we have this ministry through God's mercy, we do not lose heart.
Rather, we have renounced shameful hidden deeds; we do not act deceitfully or distort the word of God, but by openly proclaiming the truth we commend ourselves to everyone's conscience in the sight of God.
But even if our gospel is veiled, it is veiled among those who are perishing.
The god of this age has blinded the minds of unbelievers like them, so that the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God, might not dawn upon them.
For what we preach is not ourselves, but Christ Jesus as Lord, and ourselves as your servants for Jesus' sake.
For God, who commanded light to shine out of darkness, has shone in our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.
But we have this treasure in jars of clay, to show that this extraordinary power is from God and not from us.
We are afflicted in every way, but not crushed; perplexed, but not in despair;
persecuted, but not forsaken; struck down, but not destroyed;
always carrying about in our bodies the death of the Lord Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may also be revealed in our bodies.
For we who live are always being delivered up to death for Jesus' sake, so that the life of Jesus may also be revealed in our mortal flesh.
So then, death is at work in us, but life is at work in you.
It is written, “I believed, therefore I spoke.” With that same spirit of faith we also believe, therefore we also speak.
For we know that he who raised the Lord Jesus will also raise us through Jesus and bring us with you into his presence.
All of this is for your benefit, so that grace, as it extends to more and more people, may cause thanksgiving to abound to the glory of God.
Therefore we do not lose heart. Even though on the outside we are wasting away, on the inside we are being renewed day by day.
For our light and momentary affliction is bringing about for us an eternal weight of glory far beyond all measure,
as we look not to what is seen, but to what is unseen. For what is seen is temporary, but what is unseen is eternal.
Now we know that if the earthly tent we live in is destroyed, we have a building from God, an eternal house in heaven, not made by human hands.
For in this tent we groan, longing to be further clothed with our heavenly dwelling,
because when we are clothed, we will not be found naked.
For while we are in this tent, we groan and are burdened, not because we want to be unclothed, but further clothed, so that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life.
Now he who has prepared us for this very thing is God, who has also given us the Spirit as a guarantee.
Therefore we have courage at all times, and we know that while we are at home in the body we are away from the Lord.
For we walk by faith, not by sight.
Yes, we have courage and would rather be away from the body and at home with the Lord.
Therefore, whether we are at home or away, we aspire to be pleasing to him.
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, so that each of us may receive his due for what he has done in the body, whether good or evil.
Therefore, because we know what it is to fear the Lord, we persuade others. What we are is known to God, and I hope that it is known in your consciences as well.
For we are not commending ourselves to you again, but we are giving you an opportunity to boast about us, so that you may be able to answer those who boast about outward appearances and not about matters of the heart.
If we are out of our mind, it is for God; if we are in our right mind, it is for you.
For the love of Christ compels us, because we have concluded that if one died for all, then all have died.
And he died for all so that those who live may no longer live for themselves, but for him who died for them and was raised.
So from now on we regard no one according to the flesh. Even if we have known Christ according to the flesh, we no longer know him in that way.
Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation. Old things have passed away; behold, all things have become new.
And all these things are from God, who reconciled us to himself through Jesus Christ and gave us the ministry of reconciliation,
namely, that God was reconciling the world to himself in Christ, not counting people's trespasses against them. And he has committed to us the message of reconciliation.
Therefore, we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God were making an appeal through us. We plead on Christ's behalf: “Be reconciled to God.”
For God made him who did not know sin to be a sin offering for us, so that in him we might become the righteousness of God.
As God's fellow workers, we urge you not to receive the grace of God in vain.
For he says, “At a favorable time I listened to yoʋ, and in a day of salvation I helped yoʋ.” Behold, now is the favorable time; now is the day of salvation.
We are putting no obstacle in anyone's way, so that our ministry may not be discredited.
Rather, as servants of God we commend ourselves in every way: in great endurance, in afflictions, in hardships, in distresses,
in beatings, in imprisonments, in riots, in labors, in sleepless nights, in hunger,
in purity, in knowledge, in patience, in kindness, in the Holy Spirit, in genuine love,
in the word of truth, in the power of God; with weapons of righteousness for the right hand and the left,
through glory and dishonor, through bad report and good report; regarded as deceivers, and yet true;
as unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and behold, we live; as punished, and yet not put to death;
as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, yet possessing everything.
O Corinthians, we have spoken freely to you; our hearts have been opened wide.
You are not restricted by us, but by your own affections.
Now in return—I am speaking as I would to my own children—open your hearts to us.
Do not be unequally yoked with unbelievers. For what partnership is there between righteousness and lawlessness? What fellowship does light have with darkness?
What harmony does Christ have with Belial? What portion does a believer have with an unbeliever?
And what agreement does the temple of God have with idols? For you are the temple of the living God, just as God said, “I will dwell in them and walk among them. I will be their God, and they will be my people.
Therefore, come out from among them and be separate, says the Lord. Touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you.
I will be a father to you, and you will be sons and daughters to me, says the Lord Almighty.”
Therefore, since we have these promises, beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from every defilement of the flesh and spirit, bringing holiness to completion in the fear of God.
Make room for us in your hearts. We have wronged no one, we have corrupted no one, we have taken advantage of no one.
I do not say this to condemn you, for I have said before that you are in our hearts so that we die together with you and live together with you.
Great is my boldness toward you; great is my boasting on your behalf. I am filled with comfort; I am overflowing with joy in all our affliction.
For even when we came to Macedonia, our bodies had no rest, but we were afflicted at every turn, with conflicts on the outside and fears within.
But God, who comforts the downcast, comforted us by the arrival of Titus,
and not only by his arrival, but also by the comfort you had given him. He told us about your longing, your contrition, and your deep concern for me, so that I rejoiced all the more.
For even if I caused you sorrow by my letter, I do not regret it (though I did regret it, for I see that my letter caused you sorrow, though only for an hour).
But now I rejoice, not that you were made sorrowful, but that you were made sorrowful to the point of repentance. For you felt a godly sorrow, so that you suffered no loss through us.
For godly sorrow produces a repentance that leads to salvation, leaving no regret, but worldly sorrow produces death.
Consider what earnestness this godly sorrow of yours has produced in you, what eagerness to clear yourselves, what indignation, what alarm, what longing, what zeal, what righting of wrong! In everything you have shown yourselves to be clear in the matter.
So although I wrote to you, it was not on account of the one who did the wrong, nor on account of the one who was wronged, but so that your earnestness for us might be revealed to you in the sight of God.
In this we find comfort. And in addition to the comfort we received from you, we rejoiced all the more at the joy of Titus, because his spirit has been refreshed by you all.
For if I made any boast to him about you, I was not put to shame. But just as everything we said to you was true, so our boasting to Titus has also proven to be true.
And his affection for you is even greater when he remembers the obedience of you all, how you received him with fear and trembling.
I rejoice, because I have complete confidence in you.
Now we make known to you, brothers, the grace of God that has been given among the churches of Macedonia.
During a severe trial of affliction, their abundant joy and their deep poverty abounded in a wealth of generosity on their part.
For I testify that according to their ability, and even beyond their ability, they gave of their own accord,
urgently begging us for the privilege of contributing to the gift for the saints in Jerusalem.
And they did not do this in the way we expected, but they gave themselves first to the Lord and then to us by the will of God.
So we have urged Titus, who previously encouraged you to begin gathering money, to return and help you complete this gracious gift.
But just as you abound in everything—in faith, in speech, in knowledge, in complete earnestness, and in your love for us—make sure you abound in this gracious gift as well.
I am not saying this as a command, but I want to test the sincerity of your love by comparing it with the earnestness of others.
For you know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, so that by his poverty you could become rich.
So I am giving my advice about what is best for you in this matter. Last year you were not only the first who wanted to give, but you were also the first to begin doing so.
Now finish doing it, so that your eager willingness to give may be matched by your completion of the gift, according to what you have.
For if the eager willingness is there, it is acceptable according to what one has, not according to what one does not have.
I do not mean there should be relief for others and hardship for you, but it is a matter of equality. At the present time your abundance should provide for their need,
so that in turn their abundance may provide for your need, and thus there may be equality.
As it is written, “He who gathered much had nothing left over, and he who gathered little had no lack.”
But thanks be to God, who has put into the heart of Titus the same earnest care for you that I have.
For Titus not only accepted our appeal, but with great enthusiasm he is coming to you of his own accord.
With him we are sending the brother who is praised by all the churches for his preaching of the gospel.
And not only that, but he has also been appointed by the churches to travel with us as we administer this gracious gift for the glory of the Lord himself and to show our eager willingness to help.
We are taking this precaution so that no one will discredit us with respect to this large sum that we are administering.
For we are giving careful thought to do what is right, not only in the sight of the Lord but also in the sight of men.
We are also sending with them our brother whom we have often tested and found to be earnest in many matters, and now he is even more earnest because of his great confidence in you.
If there is any question about Titus, he is my partner and fellow worker in your service. If there is any question about our brothers, they are delegates of the churches, the glory of Christ.
Therefore show them in front of all the churches the proof of your love and the reason for our boasting about you.
There is no need for me to write to you about this ministry of giving to the saints in Jerusalem.
For I know how eager you are to help, and I keep boasting about you to the Macedonians, saying that Achaia has been prepared to give since last year; and your zeal has stirred up most of them.
But I have sent the brothers so that our boasting about you in this matter may not prove to be empty, but that you may be prepared, just as I said you would be.
Otherwise, if any of the Macedonians were to come with me and find you unprepared, we (not to mention you) would be ashamed of this confident boasting.
So I thought it necessary to urge the brothers to go on ahead to you and arrange in advance your previously announced blessing, so that this gift of yours may be ready as a blessing and not as something you feel forced to do.
My point is this: Whoever sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and whoever sows bountifully will also reap bountifully.
Each person should give as he decides in his heart, not with sadness or under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver.
And God is able to provide you with every blessing in abundance so that you will always have everything you need to abound in every good work.
As it is written, “He has distributed freely, he has given to the poor; his righteousness endures forever.”
Now may he who provides seed to the sower, and bread for food, also multiply your seed for sowing and increase the harvest of your righteousness!
May you be enriched in every way to be generous on every occasion, and through us may your generosity produce thanksgiving to God!
For this ministry of giving is not only providing for the needs of the saints in Jerusalem but is also abounding through many thanksgivings to God.
By their approval of this ministry, the saints in Jerusalem will glorify God because of your submission to the gospel of Christ that you confess, and also because of your generous contribution to them and to all.
They will pray for you with deep affection because of the surpassing grace of God that is upon you.
Thanks be to God for his indescribable gift!
Now I, Paul, myself appeal to you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ—I who am humble when with you face to face, but bold toward you when absent!
I ask that when I am present I need not show boldness by daring to oppose those who think that we walk according to the flesh.
For though we walk in the flesh, we do not wage war according to the flesh.
For the weapons of our warfare are not of the flesh, but are powerful in God for tearing down strongholds.
We tear down arguments and every high thing that exalts itself against the knowledge of God, and we take every thought captive to the obedience of Christ.
We are ready to punish any disobedience, once your obedience is complete.
Are you looking only at outward appearances? If anyone is confident that he belongs to Christ, he should remind himself that just as he belongs to Christ, so we also belong to Christ.
For even if I boast somewhat further about our authority (which the Lord has given us for building you up and not for tearing you down), I will not be ashamed.
For I do not want to seem as though I am trying to frighten you by my letters.
For, “His letters,” they say, “are weighty and strong, but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech amounts to nothing.”
The people who say such things should realize that what we say in our letters when we are absent, we will demonstrate by our actions when we are present.
For we do not dare to classify or compare ourselves with some who commend themselves. When they measure themselves with one another and compare themselves to one another, they do not show good sense.
We, however, will not boast beyond certain limits, but will confine our boasting to the area of ministry that God has assigned to us, which reaches even as far as you.
For we are not overextending ourselves, as though we did not reach you; we were the first to come all the way to you with the gospel of Christ.
We do not go beyond our limits by boasting in the labors of others. On the contrary, our hope is that, as your faith increases, our area of ministry among you will be greatly expanded,
so that we can preach the gospel in the regions beyond you, without boasting about work already done in someone else's area of ministry.
But, “Let him who boasts, boast in the Lord.”
For it is not the one who commends himself who is approved, but the one whom the Lord commends.
If only you would bear with me for a bit in my foolishness! Yes, do bear with me!
I am jealous for you with a godly jealousy, because I promised you in marriage to one husband, to present you as a pure virgin to Christ.
But I am afraid that just as the serpent deceived Eve by his craftiness, so your minds will be led astray from simple devotion to Christ.
For if someone comes to you and preaches a different message about Jesus than the one we preached, or if you receive a different spirit than the one you received, or a different gospel than the one you accepted, you bear with it well enough.
For I consider myself to be in no way inferior to these “super-apostles.”
I may be untrained in speech, but I do not lack knowledge; indeed, in every way we have been made known to you in everything.
Did I commit a sin by humbling myself so that you might be exalted, because I preached the gospel of God to you free of charge?
I “robbed” other churches by receiving support from them in order to serve you!
When I was with you and in need, I did not burden anyone, for the brothers who came from Macedonia supplied what I needed. I kept myself from being a burden to you in any way, and I will continue to do so.
As surely as the truth of Christ is in me, this boasting of mine will not be silenced in the regions of Achaia.
Why? Because I do not love you? God knows I do!
But what I am doing I will continue to do, so that I may deny any opportunity to those who want to be regarded as our equals in what they boast about.
For such men are false apostles and deceitful workers, disguising themselves as apostles of Christ.
And no wonder, for even Satan disguises himself as an angel of light.
Therefore it is no great surprise if his servants also disguise themselves as servants of righteousness. Their end will be according to their works.
I repeat: Let no one consider me to be a fool. But if you do, receive me just as you would a fool, so that I too may boast a little.
What I say in this confidence of boasting, I am not saying in accordance with the Lord, but as a fool.
Since many boast according to the flesh, I too will boast.
For you gladly bear with fools since you are so wise!
You bear with it if anyone enslaves you, devours you, takes advantage of you, exalts himself, or hits you in the face.
To my shame I admit that we were too weak for that! But whatever anyone else dares to boast about—I am speaking like a fool—I also dare to boast about.
Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they Israelites? So am I. Are they the offspring of Abraham? So am I.
Are they servants of Christ? (I am speaking like I am out of my mind!) I am even more so, with far more labors, with beatings beyond measure, with far more imprisonments, and often facing death.
Five times I received from the Jews the forty lashes minus one.
Three times I was beaten with rods. Once I was stoned. Three times I was shipwrecked; a night and a day I spent in the open sea.
I have often been on journeys, exposed to dangers from rivers, dangers from robbers, dangers from my own people, dangers from the Gentiles, dangers in the city, dangers in the wilderness, dangers at sea, and dangers among false brothers.
I have endured labor and hardship, many sleepless nights, and hunger and thirst. I have often gone without food and have been cold due to a lack of sufficient clothing.
Apart from these external things, there is my daily burden: my concern for all the churches.
Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is made to stumble, and I do not burn with indignation?
If I must boast, I will boast about the things that show my weakness.
The God and Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, who is blessed forever, knows that I am not lying.
In Damascus the governor under King Aretas was guarding the city of the Damascenes, wanting to arrest me,
but I was let down in a basket through a window in the city wall and escaped from his hands.
Surely it is not beneficial for me to boast, yet I will go on to visions and revelations from the Lord.
I know a man in Christ who fourteen years ago was caught up to the third heaven. (Whether it was in the body or out of the body I do not know; God knows.)
And I know that this man (whether in the body or out of the body I do not know; God knows)
was caught up to Paradise and heard words too sacred to be spoken, which man is not permitted to utter.
I will boast on behalf of that man, but on my own behalf I will not boast, except about my weaknesses.
But even if I wanted to boast, I would not be a fool, for I would be speaking the truth. Nevertheless, I refrain so that no one will think more of me than what he sees in me or hears from me.
And to keep me from becoming conceited because of the surpassing greatness of the revelations I received, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to harass me so that I would not become conceited.
Three times I pleaded with the Lord to take it away from me.
But he said to me, “My grace is sufficient for yoʋ, for my power is made perfect in weakness.” Therefore I will boast all the more gladly about my weaknesses, so that the power of Christ may rest upon me.
So I delight in weaknesses, in insults, in hardships, in persecutions, and in distresses for the sake of Christ. For when I am weak, then I am strong.
I have become a fool by boasting; you compelled me to do it. I ought to have been commended by you, for in no way have I been inferior to these “super-apostles,” even though I am nothing.
The signs of a true apostle were performed among you with great perseverance, with signs, wonders, and miracles.
In what way were you treated as inferior to the rest of the churches, except that I myself did not burden you? Forgive me this injustice!
Behold, I am ready to come to you a third time, and I will not burden you, for I do not seek what belongs to you, but you yourselves. For children are not obligated to save up for their parents, but parents for their children.
So I will most gladly spend and be entirely spent for the sake of your souls, even if the more I love you, the less I am loved.
Be that as it may, I did not burden you. But crafty fellow that I am, I apparently took you in by deceit!
Did I take advantage of you through any of the men I sent to you?
I urged Titus to visit you and sent our brother with him. Did Titus take advantage of you? Did we not walk in the same spirit and in the same footsteps?
Do you still think that we are defending ourselves to you? In the sight of God we are speaking in Christ, and everything we do, beloved, is for your edification.
For I fear that when I come I may not find you as I wish, and that you may not find me as you wish. I fear that there may be quarrels, jealousies, fits of anger, selfish ambitions, insults, words of gossip, puffed up behaviors, and disorderly actions.
I fear that when I come again my God will humble me before you, and I may have to mourn over many who have previously sinned and not repented of the impurity, fornication, and sensuality they have practiced.
This is the third time I am coming to you. Every matter must be established by the mouth of two or three witnesses.
I gave a warning when I was present the second time, and now I am giving this written warning while absent: If I come again I will not spare those who sinned previously or any of the others,
since you seek proof that Christ is speaking in me. He is not weak in dealing with you, but is powerful among you.
For though he was crucified in weakness, he lives by the power of God. Now we also are weak in him, but in dealing with you we will live with him by the power of God.
Examine yourselves to see if you are in the faith; test yourselves. Or do you not realize that Jesus Christ is in you?—unless, of course, you fail to meet the test.
But I hope you will recognize that we have not failed the test.
I pray to God that you will not do anything wrong—not so that we may appear to have met the test, but so that you may do what is right, even though we may appear to have failed.
For we cannot do anything against the truth, but only for the truth.
We rejoice when we are weak and you are strong, and we pray for your restoration.
The reason I am writing these things to you while I am absent is so that, when I am present, I will not need to be harsh in my use of authority, which the Lord has given me for building up and not for tearing down.
Finally, brothers, rejoice. Be restored, be comforted, be of the same mind, and live in peace, and the God of love and peace will be with you.
Greet one another with a holy kiss.
All the saints greet you.
Paul, an apostle—appointed not by men nor through man, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father, who raised him from the dead—
and all the brothers with me, to the churches of Galatia:
Grace to you and peace from God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ,
who gave himself for our sins to deliver us from the present evil age, according to the will of our God and Father.
To him be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
I am astonished that you are so quickly turning away from him who called you by the grace of Christ and turning to a different gospel,
not that there is another gospel, but there are some who are troubling you and wish to pervert the gospel of Christ.
But even if we or an angel from heaven should preach to you a gospel contrary to the one we preached to you, let him be accursed!
As we have said before, so now I say again: If anyone preaches to you a gospel contrary to what you received, let him be accursed!
Am I now seeking the approval of men, or of God? Or am I trying to please men? If I were still trying to please men, I would not be a servant of Christ.
But I make known to you, brothers, that the gospel I preached did not originate with man.
For I did not receive it from man, nor was I taught it, but I received it by a revelation of Jesus Christ.
For you have heard of my former way of life in Judaism, how I persecuted the church of God beyond measure and tried to destroy it.
I was advancing in Judaism beyond many of my own age among my people, being far more zealous for the traditions of my fathers.
But when God, who set me apart before I was born and called me by his grace, was pleased
to reveal his Son in me so that I could preach good news about him among the Gentiles, I did not immediately confer with flesh and blood,
nor did I go up to Jerusalem to those who were apostles before me, but I went away to Arabia and returned again to Damascus.
Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to become acquainted with Peter, and I stayed with him for fifteen days.
But I saw none of the other apostles except James, the brother of the Lord.
(Now in what I am writing to you, I assure you before God that I am not lying.)
Then I went into the regions of Syria and Cilicia.
But I was personally unknown to the churches of Judea that are in Christ.
They were only hearing people say, “The man who once persecuted us is now preaching the good news of the faith he once tried to destroy.”
So they were glorifying God because of me.
Then after fourteen years I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, taking Titus along also.
I went up in response to a revelation and presented to them the gospel that I preach among the Gentiles, but privately to those who were held in high esteem, to make sure that I was not running or had not run in vain.
But not even Titus, who was with me, was compelled to be circumcised, even though he is a Greek.
Now this matter arose because of the false brothers who were secretly brought in, who slipped in to spy on the freedom we have in Christ Jesus, so that they might enslave us.
But we did not yield to them in submission for even an hour, so that the truth of the gospel might be preserved for you.
Now from those who were esteemed to be something (what sort of men they once were makes no difference to me; God does not show partiality)—those, I say, who were held in high esteem added nothing to me.
On the contrary, they saw that I had been entrusted with the gospel to the uncircumcised, just as Peter had been entrusted with the gospel to the circumcised.
For he who worked through Peter in his apostleship to the circumcised also worked through me in my apostleship to the Gentiles.
When James, Cephas, and John, who were esteemed as pillars of the church, recognized the grace given to me, they gave the right hand of fellowship to Barnabas and me, agreeing that we should go to the Gentiles and that they should go to the circumcised.
They only asked us to remember the poor, the very thing I was eager to do.
But when Peter came to Antioch, I opposed him to his face, because he was blameworthy.
For he regularly ate with the Gentiles until certain men came from James. But when they came, he drew back and separated himself because he was afraid of the circumcision faction.
And the rest of the Jews acted hypocritically along with him, so that even Barnabas was led astray by their hypocrisy.
But when I saw that they were not walking uprightly in accordance with the truth of the gospel, I said to Peter in front of them all, “If yoʋ, though a Jew, live like a Gentile and not like a Jew, why do yoʋ compel the Gentiles to live like Jews?”
We who are Jews by nature and not Gentile sinners
know that a person is not justified by works of the law but through faith in Jesus Christ. So we too have put our faith in Christ Jesus so that we may be justified by faith in Christ and not by works of the law, because no flesh will be justified by works of the law.
But if we ourselves have also been found to be sinners while seeking to be justified in Christ, is Christ then an agent of sin? Certainly not!
For if I build up again the very things that I tore down, I show myself to be a transgressor.
For through the law I died to the law so that I might live for God.
I have been crucified with Christ, and it is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me. The life that I now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself up for me.
I do not nullify the grace of God, for if righteousness comes through the law, then Christ died for nothing.
O foolish Galatians! Who has bewitched you to keep you from obeying the truth? In your presence, before your very eyes, Jesus Christ was publicly portrayed as crucified.
Let me ask you this one question: Did you receive the Spirit by works of the law or by hearing with faith?
Are you so foolish? Having begun by the Spirit, are you now trying to be perfected by the flesh?
Did you suffer so much in vain?—if indeed it was in vain.
Does God supply you with the Spirit and work miracles among you because you perform the works of the law or because you hear with faith?
Remember, “Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him as righteousness.”
Therefore you must understand that those who have faith are the sons of Abraham.
Now the Scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, preached the gospel beforehand to Abraham, saying, “All the nations will be blessed in yoʋ.”
So then, those who have faith are blessed along with Abraham, the man of faith.
For all who rely on the works of the law are under a curse, because it is written, “Cursed is everyone who does not continue to do everything written in the Book of the Law.”
Now it is evident that no one is justified before God by the law, because “the righteous will live by faith.”
But the law is not based on faith; on the contrary, “The person who does these things will live by them.”
Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us, for it is written, “Cursed is everyone who hangs on a tree.”
He redeemed us so that the blessing of Abraham would come to the Gentiles in Christ Jesus, so that we could receive the promise of the Spirit through faith.
Brothers, let me give an example from everyday life: When a man-made covenant is ratified, no one annuls it or adds to it.
Now the promises were spoken to Abraham and to his descendant. Scripture does not say, “And to his descendants,” referring to many, but referring to one man it says, “And to yoʋr descendant,” who is Christ.
My point is this: The law, which came four hundred and thirty years later, cannot annul a covenant previously ratified by God to Christ, so as to invalidate the promise.
For if the inheritance comes by the law, it no longer comes by the promise; but God granted it to Abraham by a promise.
Why then was the law given? It was added because of transgressions, until the descendant should come to whom the promise had been made. It was ordained through angels by the hand of a mediator.
Now a mediator does not represent just one party, but God is one.
Is the law then opposed to the promises of God? Certainly not! For if a law had been given that was able to give life, truly righteousness would have come through the law.
But the Scripture has confined all under sin, so that the promise might be given on the basis of faith in Jesus Christ to those who believe.
Now before faith came, we were kept in custody under the law, confined until the faith that was to come would be revealed.
The law, then, was our guardian until Christ came, so that we could be justified by faith.
But now that faith has come, we are no longer under a guardian,
for you are all sons of God through faith in Christ Jesus.
For all of you who were baptized into Christ have put on Christ.
There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is neither male nor female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus.
And if you belong to Christ, then you are Abraham's descendants and heirs according to the promise.
Now I say that as long as the heir is a child, he differs in no way from a slave, though he is the master of all.
But he is under guardians and stewards until the time appointed by his father.
In the same way also, when we were children, we were enslaved to the elements of the world.
But when the fullness of time came, God sent his Son, born of a woman, born under the law,
to redeem those who were under the law, so that we might receive adoption as sons.
And because you are sons, God has sent the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying out, “Abba! Father!”
So yoʋ are no longer a slave, but a son. And if yoʋ are a son, yoʋ are also an heir of God through Christ.
At that time, however, when you did not know God, you were enslaved to beings that by nature are not gods.
But now that you have come to know God, or rather to be known by God, how is it that you are turning back again to the weak and worthless elements? Do you wish to be enslaved to them once more?
You observe days, months, seasons, and years!
I am afraid for you, lest somehow I have labored for you in vain.
I plead with you, brothers: Become as I am, because I also have become as you are. You did me no wrong.
But you know that it was because of a physical infirmity that I preached the gospel to you the first time.
And you did not despise or reject me even though my physical condition was a trial for me. On the contrary, you received me as an angel of God, as Christ Jesus.
What then has become of that sense of blessing you had? For I testify to you that, if possible, you would have plucked out your own eyes and given them to me.
Have I now become your enemy by telling you the truth?
Those false teachers are not zealous for you in a good way, but rather they wish to shut you out so that you will be zealous for them.
Now it is good to be zealous for a good purpose, and to be so at all times and not just when I am with you.
My little children, for whom I am again suffering labor pains until Christ is formed in you,
how I wish that I could be with you now and change my tone, for I am perplexed about you!
Tell me, you who wish to be under the law, do you not listen to the law?
For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by the slave woman and one by the free woman.
But the son of the slave woman was born according to the flesh, while the son of the free woman was born through the promise.
This can be explained allegorically, for these women are two covenants. One is from Mount Sinai, bearing children for slavery; this is Hagar.
For Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia and corresponds to the present Jerusalem; she is in slavery with her children.
But the Jerusalem that is above is the free woman; she is the mother of us all.
For it is written, “Rejoice, O barren woman, who has never given birth; break forth and shout, yoʋ who have never been in labor! For many are the children of the desolate woman, more than those of the woman who has a husband.”
Now we, brothers, like Isaac, are children of the promise.
But just as at that time the child who was born according to the flesh persecuted the child who was born according to the Spirit, so it is now also.
But what does the Scripture say? “Cast out the slave woman and her son, for the son of the slave woman shall not inherit with the son of the free woman.”
So, brothers, we are not children of the slave woman, but of the free woman.
Stand fast therefore in the freedom for which Christ has set us free, and do not submit again to a yoke of slavery.
Behold, I, Paul, say to you that if you let yourselves be circumcised, Christ will be of no benefit to you.
I testify again to every man who lets himself be circumcised that he is obligated to keep the entire law.
You who are seeking to be justified by the law are alienated from Christ; you have fallen away from grace.
For through the Spirit, by faith, we eagerly await the hope of righteousness.
For in Christ Jesus neither does circumcision have any significance, nor uncircumcision, but what matters is faith working through love.
You were running well. Who hindered you from obeying the truth?
This persuasion does not come from him who calls you.
A little leaven leavens the whole lump.
I have confidence in you in the Lord that you will adopt no other mindset. But the one who is troubling you will bear his judgment, whoever he may be.
Now, brothers, if I am still preaching circumcision, why am I still being persecuted? In that case the offense of the cross has been done away with.
Oh that those who are unsettling you would cut themselves off!
You were called to freedom, brothers. Only do not use your freedom as an opportunity for the flesh, but serve one another in love.
For the entire law is fulfilled in this one commandment: “Yoʋ shall love yoʋr neighbor as yoʋrself.”
But if you bite and devour one another, watch out, or you will be consumed by one another.
I say then, walk by the Spirit and you will certainly not gratify the desires of the flesh.
For the flesh desires what is contrary to the Spirit, and the Spirit desires what is contrary to the flesh. These are opposed to each other, to keep you from doing the very things you want to do.
But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the law.
Now the works of the flesh are obvious: adultery, fornication, impurity, sensuality,
idolatry, sorcery, hostilities, quarrels, jealousies, fits of rage, selfish ambitions, dissensions, factions,
envy, murder, drunkenness, revelries, and the like. I warn you, just as I warned you before, that those who practice such things will not inherit the kingdom of God.
But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness,
gentleness, and self-control; against such things there is no law.
Now those who belong to Christ have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires.
Since we live by the Spirit, let us also keep in step with the Spirit.
Let us not become conceited, provoking one another and envying one another.
Brothers, if anyone is caught in any transgression, you who are spiritual should restore him in a spirit of gentleness, paying attention to yoʋrself so that yoʋ too are not tempted.
Bear one another's burdens, and in this way fulfill the law of Christ.
For if anyone thinks that he is something, when he is nothing, he deceives himself.
But each person should test his own work, and then he will have reason for boasting in regard to himself alone, and not in regard to another.
For each person will bear his own load.
Now the one who is instructed in the word must share all good things with the one who instructs him.
Do not be misled: God is not mocked. A person reaps what he sows.
For he who sows to his own flesh will reap corruption from the flesh, but he who sows to the Spirit will reap eternal life from the Spirit.
So let us not grow weary in doing good, for in due time we will reap, if we do not give up.
Therefore, as we have opportunity, let us do good to all, and especially to those of the household of faith.
See what large letters I am using as I write to you with my own hand!
It is those who want to make a good appearance in the flesh who compel you to be circumcised, but only so that they may not be persecuted for the cross of Christ.
For not even those who are circumcised keep the law, but they want you to be circumcised so that they can boast about your flesh.
But as for me, may I never boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world.
For in Christ Jesus neither does circumcision have any significance, nor uncircumcision, but what matters is whether we become a new creation.
As for all who follow this standard, peace and mercy be upon them and upon the Israel of God.
From now on let no one cause me trouble, for I bear the marks of the Lord Jesus on my body.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brothers. Amen.
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, to the saints who are in Ephesus, the faithful in Christ Jesus:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in Christ,
just as he chose us in Christ before the foundation of the world to be holy and unblemished before him in love.
He foreordained us for adoption as his sons through Jesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of his will,
to the praise of the glory of his grace, by which he bestowed favor upon us in the Beloved.
In him we have redemption through his blood, the remission of our trespasses, according to the riches of God's grace,
which he lavished upon us, along with all wisdom and understanding.
He made known to us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure, which he purposed in Christ
as a plan for the fullness of times, to bring everything together in Christ, things in heaven and things on earth.
In Christ we have obtained an inheritance, having been foreordained according to the purpose of him who accomplishes all things according to the counsel of his own will,
so that we who were the first to hope in Christ, might live for the praise of his glory.
And when you heard the word of the truth, the gospel of your salvation, and believed in Christ, you were also sealed with the promised Holy Spirit,
who is the guarantee of our inheritance until the redemption of God's own possession, to the praise of his glory.
For this reason, ever since I heard about your faith in the Lord Jesus and your love for all the saints,
I have not ceased giving thanks for you as I remember you in my prayers.
I pray that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give you a spirit of wisdom and revelation as you come to know him.
I pray that the eyes of your heart may be enlightened, so that you may know what is the hope of his calling, what are the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints,
and what is the surpassing greatness of his power toward us who believe, according to the working of his great power.
He exercised this power in Christ by raising him from the dead and seating him at his right hand in the heavenly places,
far above every ruler and authority, power and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this age but also in the age to come.
God put all things in subjection under Christ's feet and appointed him as head over all things for the church,
which is his body, the fullness of him who fills everything in every way.
You were dead in the trespasses and sins
in which you once walked when you followed the ways of this world and the ruler of the realm of the air, the spirit that is now at work in the sons of disobedience.
Among them we all once lived in the lusts of our flesh, carrying out the desires of our flesh and our impulses, and we were by nature children of wrath, like the rest of mankind.
Yet God, who is rich in mercy, because of the great love with which he loved us,
made us alive together with Christ even when we were dead in our trespasses—by grace you have been saved.
And God raised us up with Christ and seated us with him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus,
so that in the ages to come he might show the surpassing riches of his grace through his kindness toward us in Christ Jesus.
For by grace you have been saved through faith. And this is not of yourselves; it is the gift of God,
not by works, so that no one may boast.
For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared beforehand so that we would walk in them.
Therefore remember that you, once Gentiles in the flesh, who are called “the uncircumcision” by those who call themselves “the circumcision,” which is made in the flesh by hands—
remember that you were apart from Christ at that time, excluded from the citizenship of Israel and strangers to the covenants of the promise, having no hope and without God in the world.
But now in Christ Jesus you who were once far away have been brought near by the blood of Christ.
For he is our peace, who has united both the Jews and Gentiles into one people and has broken down the wall of hostility that divided us.
He did this by abolishing the law with its commandments and ordinances in order to make peace between the two groups and create in himself one new people.
He reconciled both groups to God in one body through the cross, by which he put the hostility to death.
He came and preached the good news of peace to you who were far away and to those who were near.
For through him we both have access in one Spirit to the Father.
So then you are no longer strangers and foreigners, but fellow citizens with the saints and members of the household of God,
built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, with Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone.
In him the whole building is joined together and rises to become a holy temple in the Lord.
And in him you also are being built together into a dwelling place for God in the Spirit.
For this reason I, Paul, a prisoner for Christ Jesus for the sake of you Gentiles, bow my knees in prayer.
Surely you have heard of the stewardship of God's grace that was given to me for you,
how God made the mystery known to me by revelation, just as I have written above in a few words.
When you read what I have written, you can understand my insight into the mystery of Christ,
which in previous generations was not made known to the sons of men as it has now been revealed by the Spirit to his holy apostles and prophets.
This mystery is that the Gentiles are fellow heirs, fellow members of the body, and fellow partakers of God's promise in Christ through the gospel.
I became a servant of this gospel according to the gift of God's grace that was given to me by the working of his power.
This grace was given to me, the very least of all the saints, to preach among the Gentiles the good news of the boundless riches of Christ,
and to bring to light for everyone the plan of the mystery that has been hidden for ages in God, who created all things through Jesus Christ.
The purpose of bringing this to light is that, through the church, the manifold wisdom of God might now be made known to the rulers and the authorities in the heavenly realms,
according to the eternal purpose that God has carried out in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Because of Christ and our faith in him, we have boldness and confident access to God.
Therefore I ask you not to lose heart at my tribulations on your behalf, which will bring you glory.
For this reason I bow my knees in prayer before the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
from whom every family in heaven and on earth is named.
I pray that, according to the riches of his glory, he would grant you to be strengthened with power through his Spirit in your inner being,
so that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith,
as you are being rooted and grounded in love. I pray that you may be able to fully comprehend, together with all the saints, how wide and long and deep and high
is the love of Christ, and to know this love that surpasses knowledge, so that you may be filled with all the fullness of God.
Now to him who is able to do immeasurably more than all we could ask or imagine, according to the power at work within us—
to him be glory in the church in Christ Jesus throughout all generations, forever and ever. Amen.
Therefore I, a prisoner for the Lord, urge you to walk in a manner worthy of the calling you have received,
with all humility and gentleness, and with patience, bearing with one another in love,
and being diligent to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
There is one body and one Spirit (just as you were called to one hope at your calling),
one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
one God and Father of all, who is over all and through all and in us all.
Now each one of us was given grace according to the measure of Christ's gift.
Therefore it says, “When he ascended on high, he led captivity captive and gave gifts to men.”
(Now what does “he ascended” mean except that he first also descended into the lower parts of the earth?
He who descended is the very one who ascended far above all the heavens, so that he might fill all things.)
It was he who appointed some to be apostles, some to be prophets, some to be evangelists, and some to be pastors and teachers,
to equip the saints for the work of ministry and to build up the body of Christ,
until we all reach unity in the faith and in the knowledge of the Son of God, growing into maturity with a stature measured by Christ's fullness.
So we must no longer be infants, tossed back and forth by waves and carried about by every wind of doctrine, by the trickery of men and their craftiness in deceitful scheming.
Rather, speaking the truth in love, we must grow up in every way into him who is the head, that is, Christ.
From him the whole body, joined and held together by every supporting joint, grows and builds itself up in love as each individual part does its work.
Therefore, I solemnly declare in the Lord that you should no longer walk as the rest of the Gentiles do, in the futility of their minds.
They are darkened in their understanding, being excluded from the life of God because of the ignorance that is in them due to the hardness of their hearts.
They became callous and gave themselves up to lewd behavior, greedy to engage in every kind of impurity.
But you did not learn Christ in that way!
Surely you have heard about him and were taught in him, just as the truth is in Jesus,
to put off your old self, which belongs to your former way of life and is being corrupted by its deceitful desires,
to be renewed in the spirit of your minds,
and to put on the new self, created according to the image of God in true righteousness and holiness.
Therefore, having laid aside falsehood, each of you must speak the truth with his neighbor, because we are members of one another.
Do not sin in your anger. Do not let the sun go down while you are still angry,
and do not give any opportunity to the devil.
He who steals must no longer steal; rather he must labor, doing honest work with his hands, so that he may have something to contribute to anyone in need.
Let no foul word come out of your mouth, but only what is good for edification, as fits the occasion, that it may give grace to those who hear.
And do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, by whom you were sealed for the day of redemption.
Put away all bitterness, wrath, anger, outbursts, and slander, together with all malice.
Be kind and compassionate to one another, forgiving one another, just as God in Christ has forgiven us.
Therefore, be imitators of God, as beloved children,
and walk in love, just as Christ loved us and gave himself up for us as a fragrant offering and sacrifice to God.
But fornication, impurity of any kind, and covetousness must not even be mentioned among you, because such things are improper for saints.
Nor should there be any obscenity, foolish talk, or coarse joking, which are not fitting, but there should be thanksgiving instead.
For you know that no one who is a fornicator, impure, or covetous (that is, an idolater) has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.
Let no one deceive you with empty words, for because of these things the wrath of God is coming upon the sons of disobedience.
Therefore do not be partners with them.
For you were once darkness, but now you are light in the Lord. Walk as children of light
(for the fruit of the Spirit is found in all goodness, righteousness, and truth).
Carefully determine what is pleasing to the Lord.
Do not participate in the unfruitful works of darkness, but expose them instead.
For it is shameful even to mention what such people do in secret.
But everything exposed by the light becomes illuminated, and everything that is illuminated becomes a light.
Therefore it says, “Awake, O sleeper, and arise from the dead, and Christ will shine upon yoʋ.”
See then that you walk carefully, not as unwise people but as wise,
making the best use of the time, because the days are evil.
Therefore do not be foolish, but understand what the will of the Lord is.
Do not be drunk with wine, which leads to debauchery, but be filled with the Spirit,
speaking to one another in psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and making melody with your hearts to the Lord,
always giving thanks for everything to our God and Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and submitting to one another in the fear of Christ.
Wives, submit to your husbands, as to the Lord.
For the husband is the head of the wife, just as Christ is the head and Savior of the church, which is his body.
Just as the church submits to Christ, so wives should submit to their husbands in everything.
Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for her
to sanctify her by cleansing her with the washing of water by the word,
so that he might present her to himself as a glorious church, without spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but holy and unblemished.
In the same way husbands ought to love their wives as their own bodies. He who loves his wife loves himself.
For no one has ever hated his own flesh, but he nourishes and cares for it, just as the Lord does for the church,
because we are members of his body, of his flesh and of his bones.
“For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife, and the two will become one flesh.”
This is a profound mystery, but I am talking about Christ and the church.
Nevertheless, each man among you must love his own wife as he loves himself, and the wife must respect her husband.
Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right.
“Honor yoʋr father and mother” (which is the first commandment with a promise),
“that it may be well with yoʋ and yoʋ may live long on the earth.”
Fathers, do not provoke your children to anger, but bring them up in the training and admonition of the Lord.
Slaves, obey your earthly masters with fear and trembling, and with sincerity of heart, just as you would obey Christ.
Do not try to please them only when they are watching you, but act like slaves of Christ, doing the will of God from your heart.
Serve with a good attitude, as serving the Lord and not men,
knowing that whatever good anyone does he will receive back from the Lord, whether he is a slave or free.
Masters, do the same for your slaves and stop threatening them, because you know that your own Master is in heaven, and there is no partiality with him.
Finally, my brothers, be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might.
Put on the full armor of God so that you may be able to stand against the schemes of the devil.
For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the cosmic powers of the darkness of this age, and against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly places.
Therefore take up the full armor of God so that you may be able to resist the enemy on the day of evil, and after you have done everything, to stand firm.
Stand firm therefore by fastening the belt of truth around your waist, putting on the breastplate of righteousness,
and shodding your feet with the readiness of the gospel of peace.
Above all, take up the shield of faith, with which you will be able to extinguish all the flaming arrows of the evil one.
Take the helmet of salvation and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.
Pray in the Spirit at all times, with every prayer and supplication, and to this end, stay alert and be persistent in praying for all the saints.
Pray also for me, so that when I open my mouth to speak, a message may be given to me to make known with boldness the mystery of the gospel,
for which I am an ambassador in chains. Pray that I may declare it boldly, as I should.
Tychicus, the beloved brother and faithful servant in the Lord, will give you a full report about how I am doing so that you may be informed.
I have sent him to you for this very purpose, that you may know how we are doing and that he may encourage your hearts.
Peace be with the brothers, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Grace be with all who love our Lord Jesus Christ with an undying love. Amen.
Paul and Timothy, servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus who are in Philippi, together with the overseers and deacons:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I give thanks to my God every time I remember you,
always praying with joy in every one of my prayers for you all
because of your partnership with me in the gospel from the first day until now.
I am confident that he who began a good work in you will carry it on to completion until the day of Christ Jesus.
It is right for me to think this way about you all, since I have you in my heart. For you all share with me in God's grace, both in my imprisonment and in my defense and confirmation of the gospel.
For God is my witness that I long for you all with the affection of Jesus Christ.
And I pray that your love may abound more and more in knowledge and all discernment,
so that you may approve what is excellent in order to be pure and blameless in the day of Christ,
filled with the fruits of righteousness that come through Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God.
Now I want you to know, brothers, that what has happened to me has actually helped advance the gospel,
so that it has become known among the entire imperial guard and to everyone else that my imprisonment is for Christ.
And the greater part of the brothers in the Lord have gained confidence through my imprisonment and are far more bold to speak the word without fear.
Some preach Christ out of envy and rivalry, but others do it out of good will.
The former preach Christ out of selfish ambition, not sincerely but intending to add affliction to me in my imprisonment.
The latter do it out of love, knowing that I am appointed for the defense of the gospel.
But what does it matter? Only that in every way, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is proclaimed, and in that I rejoice. Yes, and I will continue to rejoice.
For I know that this will result in my deliverance through your prayers and the provision of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.
My eager expectation and hope is that I will not be put to shame in anything, but will speak with complete boldness so that now, as always, Christ will be magnified in my body, whether I live or die.
For to me, to live is Christ and to die is gain.
But if I am to live in the flesh, it will mean fruit from my labor. Yet I do not know which I prefer.
I am hard pressed between the two. I long to depart and be with Christ, which is far better.
But to remain in the flesh is more necessary for your sake.
Convinced of this, I know that I will remain and continue with you all for the sake of your progress and joy in the faith,
so that your boasting may abound in Christ Jesus because of me when I come to you again.
Only live as citizens in a manner worthy of the gospel of Christ, so that whether I come and see you or am absent, I may hear that you are standing firm in one spirit, striving together with one mind for the faith of the gospel,
and not being intimidated in any way by those who oppose you. For them this is an indication of destruction, but for you it is an indication of salvation, and that from God.
For it has been granted to you on behalf of Christ not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for him,
since you are experiencing the same conflict that you saw I had and now hear that I still have.
So if there is any encouragement in Christ, if there is any comfort from love, if there is any fellowship in the Spirit, if there is any compassion or mercy,
make my joy complete by adopting the same mindset, having the same love, being united in spirit, and having one purpose.
Do nothing from selfish ambition or vain conceit, but in humility regard others as more important than yourselves.
None of you should look out for your own interests, but for the interests of others.
Let the same mind be in you that was in Christ Jesus,
who, though he was in the form of God, did not consider equality with God as something to be exploited,
but emptied himself by taking the form of a servant and being born in the likeness of men.
And being found in appearance as a man, he humbled himself by becoming obedient to the point of death, even death on a cross.
Therefore God highly exalted him and gave him the name that is above every other name,
so that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on earth and under the earth,
and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.
Therefore, my beloved friends, just as you have always obeyed, not only in my presence, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling,
for God is the one at work in you, granting you the will and power to do so, according to his good pleasure.
Do everything without grumbling or arguing,
so that you may be blameless and pure, children of God without blemish in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, among whom you shine as lights in the world
as you hold firmly to the word of life. Then I will have a reason to boast in the day of Christ that I did not run or labor in vain.
But even if I am being poured out as a drink offering upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I am glad and rejoice with you all.
In the same way you also should be glad and rejoice with me.
I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you soon so that I too may be encouraged when I receive news about you.
I have no one else like-minded who will be genuinely concerned about your welfare.
For they all seek their own interests, not those of Christ Jesus.
But you know Timothy's proven character, how as a son with a father he has served with me in the work of the gospel.
Therefore I hope to send him to you at once, as soon as I find out what is going to happen to me.
And I am confident in the Lord that I myself will also come soon.
But for now I thought it necessary to send back to you Epaphroditus—my brother, fellow worker, and fellow soldier, who is also your messenger and minister to my need.
For he has been longing for you all and was distressed because you heard that he was sick.
Indeed he was sick, almost to the point of death. But God had mercy on him, and not only on him but also on me, so that I would not have one sorrow after another.
Therefore I am all the more eager to send him, so that when you see him again you can rejoice and I can be less anxious.
So receive him in the Lord with all joy, and honor men like him,
because he drew near to death for the work of Christ, disregarding his own life to complete what was lacking in your service to me.
Finally, my brothers, rejoice in the Lord! To write this to you again is no trouble for me, and it is safe for you.
Watch out for the dogs, watch out for the evil workers, watch out for those who mutilate the flesh.
For we are the circumcision, we who worship by the Spirit of God, who boast in Christ Jesus, and who put no confidence in the flesh,
even though I myself might put confidence in the flesh. If anyone else presumes to have confidence in the flesh, I have more:
circumcised on the eighth day, of the people of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews; as to the law, a Pharisee;
as to zeal, a persecutor of the church; as to righteousness under the law, blameless.
But whatever was gain to me I have counted as loss for the sake of Christ.
More than that, I count all things as loss because of the surpassing value of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord. For his sake I have suffered the loss of all things and count them as rubbish so that I may gain Christ
and be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own that comes from the law, but the righteousness that is through faith in Christ, which comes from God on the basis of faith.
I want to know Christ and the power of his resurrection and the fellowship of his sufferings, becoming like him in his death,
in the hope of attaining the resurrection from the dead.
Not that I have already obtained it or have already been made perfect, but I press on to take hold of that for which Christ Jesus has taken hold of me.
Brothers, I do not consider myself to have taken hold of it. But one thing I do: Forgetting what is behind and reaching forward to what is ahead,
I press on toward the goal to win the prize of the upward call of God in Christ Jesus.
Therefore all of us who are mature should adopt this mindset, and if you adopt a different mindset about anything, God will reveal that to you as well.
Nevertheless, let us live up to the same standard that we have already attained; let us adopt the same mindset.
Join together in imitating me, brothers, and pay close attention to those who walk according to the example you have in us.
For I have often told you, and tell you now with tears, that many walk as enemies of the cross of Christ.
Their end is destruction, their god is their belly, and their glory is in their shame. Their minds are set on earthly things.
But our citizenship is in heaven, and we eagerly await from there a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ,
who will transform our lowly bodies to be like his glorious body, by the power that enables him to subject all things to himself.
Therefore, my brothers, whom I love and long for, my joy and crown, stand firm in the Lord in this way, my beloved friends.
I urge Euodia and Syntyche to be of the same mind in the Lord.
Yes, I ask yoʋ also, my true companion, to assist these women, who have contended for the gospel at my side, along with Clement and the rest of my fellow workers, whose names are in the book of life.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say, rejoice!
Let your gentleness be known to everyone. The Lord is near.
Be anxious about nothing, but in everything, by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, make your requests known to God.
And the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.
Finally, brothers, whatever is true, whatever is honorable, whatever is right, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is commendable, if anything is virtuous or praiseworthy, think about such things.
Practice what you have learned and received from me, and what you have heard and seen in me. And the God of peace will be with you.
I have great joy in the Lord that now at last you have revived your concern for me. Indeed, you were concerned but had no opportunity to show it.
Not that I am speaking about being in need, for I have learned to be content in whatever circumstances I find myself.
I know how to be brought low, and I know how to abound. I have learned the secret of being content in any and every situation, whether well fed or hungry, whether having plenty or being in need.
I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me.
Nevertheless, you did well by sharing with me in my affliction.
As you Philippians know, in the early days of the gospel, when I set out from Macedonia, no church partnered with me in the matter of giving and receiving except you alone.
Even when I was in Thessalonica, you sent me help for my needs more than once.
Not that I seek the gift, but I seek the fruit that abounds to your account.
I have received everything in full and have an abundance. I am amply supplied, now that I have received from Epaphroditus the gifts you sent. They are an aroma of a sweet fragrance, an acceptable sacrifice, pleasing to God.
And my God will fully supply your every need through Christ Jesus according to his riches in glory.
Glory be to our God and Father forever and ever! Amen.
Greet every saint in Christ Jesus. The brothers who are with me greet you.
All the saints greet you, especially those of Caesar's household.
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, and Timothy our brother,
to the saints and faithful brothers in Christ who are in Colossae: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
We always give thanks to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ when we pray for you,
because we have heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and your love for all the saints,
the faith and love that spring from the hope that is laid up for you in heaven. You have already heard about this hope in the message of the truth of the gospel
that has come to you. This gospel has gone out into all the world, where it is bearing fruit and increasing, just as it has been doing among you since the day you heard it and understood the grace of God in truth.
You learned it from Epaphras, our beloved fellow servant, who is a faithful minister of Christ on your behalf
and who also told us about your love in the Spirit.
For this reason, from the day we heard this, we have not ceased praying for you and asking that you may be filled with the knowledge of God's will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding,
so that you may walk in a manner worthy of the Lord with every desire to please him: bearing fruit in every good work and increasing in the knowledge of God;
being strengthened with all power, according to his glorious might, so that you may have great endurance and patience with joy;
giving thanks to the Father, who has enabled us to share in the inheritance of the saints in light.
He has rescued us from the dominion of darkness and transferred us into the kingdom of his beloved Son,
in whom we have redemption, the remission of sins.
He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation.
For by him all things were created, in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions, rulers or authorities—all things were created through him and for him.
He is before all things, and in him all things hold together.
He is the head of the body, the church. He is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, so that in everything he may be preeminent.
For in him all the fullness of God was pleased to dwell,
and through him to reconcile all things to himself, whether on earth or in heaven, making peace through the blood of his cross.
At one time you were alienated from God and hostile in your minds because of your evil works. But now God has reconciled you to himself
through the death of Christ in his physical body, in order to bring you into his own presence as holy, unblemished, and above reproach,
if indeed you continue in the faith, grounded and steadfast, without shifting away from the hope of the gospel that you heard. This gospel has been preached in all creation under heaven, and of this gospel I, Paul, have become a servant.
I rejoice now in my sufferings for you, and in my flesh I am filling up what is lacking in Christ's afflictions for the sake of his body, that is, the church.
I became a servant of the church according to the stewardship from God that was given to me for you, to make the word of God fully known,
the mystery that has been hidden for ages and generations but has now been revealed to his saints.
To them God resolved to make known how great among the Gentiles are the glorious riches of this mystery, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory.
He is the one we proclaim, admonishing everyone and teaching everyone with all wisdom, so that we may present everyone mature in Christ Jesus.
To this end I labor, striving according to his energy that is powerfully at work within me.
For I want you to know how great a struggle I have for you, for those in Laodicea, and for all who have not seen me face to face.
I want their hearts to be comforted and knit together in love, so that they may have all the riches of being fully assured in their understanding, and so that they may know the mystery of our God and Father and of Christ,
in whom all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hidden.
I say this so that no one will deceive you with persuasive speech.
For though I am absent in body, I am with you in spirit, rejoicing to see your good order and the firmness of your faith in Christ.
Therefore, just as you received Christ Jesus the Lord, continue to walk in him,
being rooted and built up in him and established in the faith, just as you were taught, abounding in it with thanksgiving.
Be careful that no one takes you captive through philosophy and empty deceit, according to the tradition of men and the elements of the world, and not according to Christ.
For all the fullness of God's nature dwells bodily in Christ,
and you have been filled by him, who is the head over every ruler and authority.
In him you were also circumcised with a circumcision not done by hands, by putting off the body of the sins of the flesh in the circumcision of Christ.
Having been buried with him in baptism, you have also been raised with him through faith in the powerful working of God, who raised him from the dead.
And although you were dead in your trespasses and the uncircumcision of your flesh, God made you alive together with Christ. He forgave us all our trespasses
by blotting out the certificate of debt that stood against us with its legal demands; he took it away by nailing it to the cross.
He stripped the rulers and authorities of their power and made a public display of them, leading a triumphal procession over them by the cross.
Therefore let no one judge you in regard to food or drink, or in the matter of a feast, a New Moon celebration, or a Sabbath day.
These are a shadow of the things to come, but the substance is Christ.
Let no one who delights in false humility and angelic religion disqualify you. Such a person takes his stand on things he has not seen, being puffed up without reason by the mind of his flesh,
while not holding fast to the head, from whom the entire body, being supported and knit together by its joints and tendons, grows with a growth that is from God.
If you have died with Christ to the elements of the world, why, as though you were living in the world, do you submit to regulations such as,
“Do not handle, do not taste, do not touch”?
Such regulations are based on the commandments and doctrines of men, and apply to things that will all decay with use.
Although these regulations have a semblance of wisdom in self-imposed piety, false humility, and severe treatment of the body, they are of no value in restraining fleshly indulgence.
If then you have been raised with Christ, seek the things above, where Christ is, seated at the right hand of God.
Set your minds on the things above, not the things on earth.
For you have died, and your life is hidden with Christ in God.
When Christ, who is our life, is revealed, then you also will be revealed with him in glory.
Put to death therefore whatever belongs to your earthly nature: fornication, impurity, lust, evil desire, and covetousness, which is idolatry.
On account of these things the wrath of God is coming upon the sons of disobedience.
You too once walked in these ways when you lived among them.
But now you must put them all aside: wrath, anger, malice, slander, and filthy language from your mouth.
Do not lie to one another, since you have put off the old self with its practices
and have put on the new self, which is being renewed in knowledge according to the image of its Creator.
Here there is no distinction between Greek and Jew, circumcised and uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave and free, but Christ is all and in all.
Therefore, as God's chosen people, holy and beloved, put on tenderhearted mercy, kindness, humility, gentleness, and patience,
bearing with one another and forgiving one other if any one of you has a complaint against another; just as Christ forgave you, so you also must forgive.
Above all, put on love, which is the bond of perfection.
Let the peace of God rule in your hearts, since as members of one body you were called to peace. And be thankful.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, teaching and admonishing one another with all wisdom as you sing psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs to the Lord with gratitude in your hearts.
And whatever you do, in word or in deed, do it all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to our God and Father through him.
Wives, submit to your husbands, as is fitting in the Lord.
Husbands, love your wives, and do not be embittered against them.
Children, obey your parents in everything, for this pleases the Lord.
Fathers, do not provoke your children, lest they become discouraged.
Slaves, obey your earthly masters in everything. Do not try to please them only when they are watching you, but obey with sincerity of heart, fearing God.
Whatever you do, work at it with all your heart, as working for the Lord and not for men,
knowing that you will receive an inheritance from the Lord as your reward; for you serve the Lord Christ.
But he who does wrong will be paid back the wrong that he has done, and there is no partiality.
Masters, treat your slaves with justice and equity, knowing that you also have a Master in heaven.
Devote yourselves to prayer, being watchful in it with thanksgiving.
At the same time pray for us as well, that God may open a door to us for the word so that we may speak the mystery of Christ, for which I am in chains.
Pray that I may make it known in the way that I ought to speak.
Walk in wisdom toward outsiders, making the best use of the time.
Let your speech always be with grace, seasoned with salt, so that you may know how to answer each person.
Tychicus will tell you all the news about me. He is our beloved brother, a faithful minister and fellow servant in the Lord.
I have sent him to you for this very purpose, that he may know how you are doing and encourage your hearts.
With him I have sent Onesimus, our faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you. They will tell you everything that is happening here.
Aristarchus, my fellow prisoner, greets you, and so does Mark the cousin of Barnabas (about whom you have received instructions: if he comes to you, welcome him).
Jesus who is called Justus also greets you. These men are my only fellow workers for the kingdom of God who are of the circumcision, and they have been a comfort to me.
Epaphras, who is one of you and a servant of Christ, greets you, always striving for you in his prayers, so that you may stand mature and complete in all the will of God.
For I testify about him that he has much zeal for you and for those in Laodicea and Hierapolis.
Luke, the beloved physician, greets you, and so does Demas.
Give my greetings to the brothers in Laodicea, and to Nymphas and the church that meets in his house.
After this letter has been read among you, have it read in the church of the Laodiceans as well, and make sure you also read the letter from Laodicea.
Tell Archippus, “Be sure to complete the ministry yoʋ have received in the Lord.”
I, Paul, write this greeting with my own hand. Remember my chains. Grace be with you. Amen.
Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy, to the church of the Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
We always give thanks to God for you all, making mention of you in our prayers,
remembering without ceasing, in the presence of our God and Father, your work of faith, your labor of love, and your endurance of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ.
For we know, brothers beloved by God, that you have been chosen,
because our gospel did not come to you in word only, but also in power and in the Holy Spirit and with much conviction. You know what sort of men we proved to be among you for your sake.
And you became imitators of us and of the Lord when you received the word in much affliction with the joy of the Holy Spirit.
As a result you have become examples to all the believers in Macedonia and Achaia.
For not only has the word of the Lord sounded forth from you in Macedonia and Achaia, but reports of your faith in God have gone out everywhere, so that we have no need to say anything about it.
For the people themselves report what kind of reception we had among you, and how you turned away from idols to serve the living and true God,
as you wait for his Son Jesus to return from heaven, whom God raised from the dead, and who rescues us from the coming wrath.
For you yourselves know, brothers, that our visit to you was not in vain.
On the contrary, even though we had previously suffered and been mistreated in Philippi, as you know, we had boldness in our God to declare to you the gospel of God in the face of strong opposition.
For our exhortation does not come from error or impurity or with deceit,
but just as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the gospel, so we speak, not as pleasing men, but God, who examines our hearts.
God is our witness that we never came with words of flattery or with a pretext for greed, as you well know.
Nor did we seek glory from men (neither from you nor from others), though as Christ's apostles we could have asserted our authority.
Instead, we were gentle among you, like a nursing mother caring for her children.
We had such strong affection for you that we were pleased to share with you not only the gospel of God but also our own selves, because you had become dear to us.
For you remember, brothers, our labor and hardship. Working night and day so as not to be a burden on any of you, we preached to you the gospel of God.
You are witnesses, and so is God, of how devoutly, righteously, and blamelessly we conducted ourselves among you who believe.
As you know, we dealt with each one of you like a father deals with his own children, exhorting you, encouraging you,
and testifying that you should walk in a manner worthy of God, who calls you into his own kingdom and glory.
We also give thanks to God without ceasing because, when you received the word of God that you heard from us, you accepted it not as the word of men, but as it truly is, the word of God, which is at work in you who believe.
For you, brothers, became imitators of the churches of God in Christ Jesus that are in Judea, because you suffered the same things from your own countrymen that they did from the Jews,
who killed the Lord Jesus and their own prophets, and who also drove us out. They displease God and are hostile to all men
by hindering us from telling the Gentiles how they can be saved. In this way they are always filling up the measure of their sins, but wrath has come upon them at last.
As for us, brothers, when we were bereaved of you for a brief hour (being physically absent, but with you in our hearts), we longed with great eagerness to see you face to face.
Therefore we wanted to come to you—certainly I, Paul, tried to do so again and again—but Satan hindered us.
For what is our hope or joy or crown of boasting in the presence of our Lord Jesus at his coming? Is it not you?
Yes, you are our glory and joy!
Therefore, when we could bear it no longer, we thought it best to stay in Athens alone,
and we sent Timothy, our brother, who is a servant of God and our fellow worker in the gospel of Christ, to establish you and encourage you in your faith,
so that no one would be shaken by these afflictions. For you yourselves know that we have been appointed to afflictions such as these.
In fact, when we were with you, we told you in advance that we were going to suffer affliction, and as you well know, it has now happened.
For this reason, when I could bear it no longer, I sent Timothy to find out about your faith, lest somehow the tempter had tempted you and our labor had been in vain.
But Timothy has now come back to us from you and has brought us good news of your faith and love. He reports that you always think of us with affection, longing to see us, just as we also long to see you.
Therefore, brothers, in all our affliction and distress, we were encouraged about you because of your faith.
For now we really live, since you are standing firm in the Lord.
How can we thank God enough for you in return for all the joy we have in the presence of our God because of you?
Night and day we pray earnestly that we may see you face to face and supply what is lacking in your faith.
Now may our God and Father himself and our Lord Jesus Christ direct our way to you.
May the Lord cause you to increase and abound in your love for one another and for all, just as we abound in our love for you.
And may he strengthen your hearts to be blameless in holiness in the presence of our God and Father when our Lord Jesus Christ comes with all his saints.
Finally, brothers, we ask and urge you in the Lord Jesus that, just as you learned from us how you ought to walk and to please God, you do so more and more.
For you know the commands we gave you by the authority of the Lord Jesus.
It is God's will that you be sanctified, that you abstain from fornication,
and that each of you know how to control your own body in holiness and honor,
not in lustful passion like the Gentiles who do not know God.
In this matter no one should wrong or take advantage of his brother, because the Lord is an avenger in all these things, as we told you before and solemnly warned you.
For God did not call us to be impure, but to live in holiness.
Therefore whoever rejects this command does not reject man but God, who has given his Holy Spirit to you.
Now concerning brotherly love, you have no need for anyone to write to you, for you yourselves have been taught by God to love one another.
And indeed you do love all the brothers throughout Macedonia. But we urge you, brothers, to do so more and more.
We urge you to aspire to lead a quiet life, to attend to your own affairs, and to work with your own hands, just as we commanded you,
so that you may walk properly toward outsiders and not be in need of anything.
But we do not want you to be uninformed, brothers, about those who have fallen asleep, so that you may not be grieved like others who do not have hope.
For since we believe that Jesus died and rose again, we also believe that God will bring with Jesus those who have fallen asleep in him.
According to the word of the Lord, we declare to you that we who are alive, who are left behind until the coming of the Lord, will certainly not precede those who have fallen asleep.
For the Lord himself will descend from heaven with a commanding shout, with the voice of an archangel, and with the trumpet call of God, and the dead in Christ will rise first.
Then we who are alive, who are left behind, will be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air. And so we will always be with the Lord.
Therefore encourage one another with these words.
Now concerning the times and seasons, brothers, you have no need for anything to be written to you.
For you yourselves know very well that the day of the Lord will come like a thief in the night.
When people are saying, “Peace and safety,” destruction will come upon them suddenly, like labor pains upon a woman with child, and they will certainly not escape.
But you, brothers, are not in darkness so that this day should catch you like a thief.
You are all sons of light and sons of the day; we are not of the night or of the darkness.
So then let us not sleep, as others do, but let us be watchful and sober.
For those who sleep, sleep at night; and those who get drunk, get drunk at night.
But since we are of the day, let us be sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love, and the hope of salvation as a helmet.
For God has not appointed us to suffer wrath, but to obtain salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ,
who died for us so that whether we are awake or asleep we may live together with him.
Therefore encourage one another and build each other up, even as you are doing.
Now we ask you, brothers, to recognize those who labor among you, who lead you in the Lord and admonish you,
and to regard them very highly in love because of their work. Be at peace with one another.
And we urge you, brothers, to admonish those who are idle, encourage the fainthearted, support the weak, and be patient toward all.
Make sure no one repays anyone evil for evil, but always strive to do good to each other and to everyone else.
Rejoice always,
pray without ceasing,
and in everything give thanks; for this is God's will for you in Christ Jesus.
Do not quench the Spirit.
Do not despise prophecies,
but test everything; hold fast to what is good.
Avoid every form of evil.
Now may the God of peace himself sanctify you completely, and may your entire spirit, soul, and body be kept blameless at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
He who calls you is faithful; he will surely do it.
Brothers, pray for us.
Greet all the brothers with a holy kiss.
I charge you by the Lord to have this letter read to all the holy brothers.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.
Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy, to the church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
We ought always to give thanks to God for you, brothers, as is only fitting, because your faith is greatly increasing and the love that each of you has for one another is abounding.
As a result we ourselves boast about you in the churches of God for your perseverance and faithfulness in all the persecutions and tribulations that you are enduring.
This is evidence of the righteous judgment of God, and it is happening so that you may be considered worthy of the kingdom of God, for which you are suffering.
It is indeed right for God to repay with affliction those who afflict you,
and to give to you who are being afflicted relief along with us at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven with his mighty angels.
With flaming fire he will inflict vengeance on those who do not know God and who do not obey the gospel of our Lord Jesus.
They will suffer the punishment of eternal destruction, separated from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his might,
on that day when he comes to be glorified by his saints and to be marveled at by all who have believed, including you, because you have believed our testimony.
With this in mind, we always pray for you that our God will make you worthy of his calling and by his power bring to fulfillment every good intention and work of faith,
so that the name of our Lord Jesus will be glorified in you, and you in him, according to the grace of our God and Lord, Jesus Christ.
Now concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered to him, we ask you, brothers,
not to be quickly shaken from your understanding or alarmed by any spirit or message or by any letter supposedly from us alleging that the day of Christ has already come.
Let no one deceive you in any manner, for that day cannot come unless the apostasy comes first and the man of sin is revealed, the son of destruction.
He will oppose and exalt himself above every so-called god and object of worship, so that he sits as God in the temple of God, proclaiming himself to be God.
Do you not remember that I told you these things when I was still with you?
And you know what is now restraining him so that he will be revealed in his own time.
For the mystery of lawlessness is already at work, but the one who now restrains will do so until he is taken out of the way.
And then the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord will destroy with the breath of his mouth and annihilate by the appearance of his coming.
The coming of the lawless one will be in accordance with the working of Satan, with all kinds of counterfeit miracles, signs, and wonders,
and with every kind of wicked deception among those who are perishing, because they refused to love the truth and so be saved.
For this reason God will send them a powerful delusion, leading them to believe what is false,
so that all who have not believed the truth but have taken pleasure in unrighteousness will be condemned.
But we must always give thanks to God for you, brothers beloved by the Lord, because God chose you from the beginning for salvation through sanctification by the Spirit and belief in the truth.
He called you to this through our gospel, so that you might obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
So then, brothers, stand firm and hold fast to the teachings that were passed on to you, whether by word of mouth or by a letter from us.
Now may our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God our Father, who has loved us and given us eternal comfort and good hope by his grace,
comfort your hearts and establish you in every good word and work.
Finally, brothers, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may spread rapidly and be glorified, just as it was with you.
And pray that we may be rescued from deviant and evil men, for not all have faith.
But the Lord is faithful; he will establish you and guard you from the evil one.
We have confidence in the Lord about you, that you are doing and will continue to do what we command you.
May the Lord direct your hearts to the love of God and the steadfastness of Christ.
Now we command you, brothers, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to keep away from every brother who walks in idleness and does not live according to the teaching we passed on to them.
For you yourselves know how you ought to imitate us, because we were not idle when we were with you,
nor did we eat bread from anyone free of charge. On the contrary, with labor and hardship we worked day and night so as not to be a burden to any of you.
We did this, not because we do not have the right to be supported, but to present ourselves as an example for you to imitate.
For even when we were with you, we gave you this command: “If anyone is not willing to work, neither should he eat.”
For we hear that some among you are walking in idleness, not working at all, but being busybodies.
Now we command and exhort such people by our Lord Jesus Christ to work quietly and eat their own bread.
But as for you, brothers, do not grow weary in doing good.
If anyone does not obey what we say in this letter, take note of him and do not associate with him, so that he will feel ashamed.
Yet do not regard him as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.
Now may the Lord of peace himself give you peace at all times and in every way. The Lord be with you all.
I, Paul, write this greeting with my own hand. This is the distinguishing mark in all my letters; it is the way I write.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ according to the command of God our Savior and the Lord Jesus Christ our hope,
to Timothy, my true child in the faith: Grace, mercy, and peace from God our Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
Just as I urged yoʋ when I was going to Macedonia, remain in Ephesus so that yoʋ may charge certain people not to teach different doctrines
or to occupy themselves with myths and endless genealogies, which promote disputes rather than the plan of God that operates by faith.
The goal of our instruction is love from a pure heart, from a good conscience, and from sincere faith.
Some have strayed from these and have turned aside to meaningless talk,
desiring to be teachers of the law, although they do not understand what they are talking about or what they so confidently affirm.
Now we know that the law is good, if one uses it lawfully.
We know that the law is not laid down for the righteous, but for the lawless and rebellious, for the ungodly and sinners, for the unholy and profane, for those who kill their father or mother, for murderers,
fornicators, homosexuals, slave traders, liars, perjurers, and whatever else is opposed to the sound teaching
that conforms to the gospel of the glory of the blessed God, which has been entrusted to me.
I give thanks to Christ Jesus our Lord, who has given me strength, because he considered me to be faithful and appointed me to serve him,
even though I was formerly a blasphemer, a persecutor, and an insolent man. But I received mercy because I had ignorantly acted in unbelief,
and the grace of our Lord abounded to me greatly with the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus.
This saying is trustworthy and deserving of full acceptance: Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the foremost.
But I received mercy for this reason, that in me, as the foremost sinner, Jesus Christ might show complete patience, making me an example for those who would come to believe in him for eternal life.
Now to the King of the ages, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory forever and ever. Amen.
This charge I entrust to yoʋ, Timothy, my child, according to the prophecies once made about yoʋ, so that by them yoʋ may fight the good fight,
having faith and a good conscience. By rejecting this, some have shipwrecked their faith.
Among them are Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I have handed over to Satan so that they may learn not to blaspheme.
I urge then, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and thanksgivings be made for all people,
for kings and all who are in authority, so that we may lead quiet and peaceful lives in all godliness and dignity.
For this is good and acceptable before God our Savior,
who wants all people to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth.
For there is one God and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus,
who gave himself as a ransom for all, which is the testimony given at the proper time.
For this testimony I was appointed to be a preacher, an apostle, and a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and truth. (I am speaking the truth in Christ; I am not lying.)
Therefore I want the men in every place to pray, lifting up holy hands without anger or argument.
Likewise, I want the women to adorn themselves in respectable apparel, with modesty and discretion, not with elaborately braided hair, gold, pearls, or expensive clothing,
but with good works, which is proper for women who profess godly reverence.
A woman should learn quietly with full submission.
I do not permit a woman to teach or to have authority over a man; rather, she is to remain quiet.
For Adam was formed first, then Eve.
And Adam was not the one who was deceived; it was the woman who was deceived and fell into transgression.
Nevertheless, women will be saved through childbearing, if they continue in faith, love, and holiness, with self-control.
This saying is trustworthy: If anyone aspires to the office of overseer, he desires a good work.
Therefore the overseer must be above reproach, the husband of one wife, sober-minded, sensible, respectable, hospitable, able to teach,
not given to wine, not violent, not greedy for sordid gain, but gentle, not contentious, and not a lover of money.
He must lead his own household well, keeping his children in submission with all dignity.
(For if a man does not know how to lead his own household, how will he take care of God's church?)
He must not be a new convert, or he might become puffed up and fall into the condemnation of the devil.
He must also have a good reputation among outsiders, so that he does not fall into the reproach and snare of the devil.
Deacons likewise must be dignified, not double-tongued, not given to much wine, and not greedy for sordid gain.
They must hold the mystery of the faith with a clear conscience.
They must first be tested; if they are above reproach, let them serve as deacons.
Their wives likewise must be dignified, not slanderers, but sober-minded and faithful in all things.
A deacon must be the husband of one wife and must lead his children and his own household well.
For those who have served well as deacons obtain a good standing for themselves along with great boldness in the faith that is in Christ Jesus.
I am writing these things to yoʋ, hoping to come to yoʋ soon.
But if I delay, I am writing so that yoʋ may know how one ought to conduct himself in the household of God, which is the church of the living God, a pillar and foundation of the truth.
Beyond all question, great is the mystery of godliness: God was revealed in the flesh, vindicated by the Spirit, seen by angels, preached among nations, believed on in the world, and taken up in glory.
Now the Spirit expressly says that in latter times some will fall away from the faith and occupy themselves with deceitful spirits and the teachings of demons,
being influenced by the hypocrisy of liars who are seared in their own consciences.
They forbid marriage and demand abstinence from foods that God created to be received with thanksgiving by those who believe and know the truth.
For everything created by God is good, and nothing is to be rejected when it is received with thanksgiving,
since it is sanctified through the word of God and prayer.
If yoʋ point these things out to the brothers, yoʋ will be a good servant of Jesus Christ, nourished by the words of the faith and the sound doctrine that yoʋ have closely followed.
Have nothing to do with profane myths and old wives' tales. Rather train yoʋrself for godliness.
For bodily training is beneficial to a certain extent, but godliness is beneficial in every way, since it holds promise for both the present life and the life to come.
This saying is trustworthy and deserving of full acceptance.
For this is why we labor and suffer reproach, because we have put our hope in the living God, who is the Savior of all people, and especially of those who believe.
Command and teach these things.
Let no one despise yoʋ because yoʋ are young, but set an example for the believers in yoʋr speech, conduct, love, spirit, faith, and purity.
Until I come, give attention to the public reading of Scripture, to exhortation, and to teaching.
Do not neglect the gift that is in yoʋ, which was given to yoʋ through prophecy when the council of elders laid their hands on yoʋ.
Attend to these things and immerse yourself in them, so that yoʋr progress may be evident to all.
Watch yoʋr life and doctrine closely. Persevere in these things, for as yoʋ do this, yoʋ will save both yoʋrself and those who listen to yoʋ.
Do not rebuke an older man, but appeal to him as you would to a father. Speak to younger men as brothers,
older women as mothers, and younger women as sisters, in all purity.
Honor widows who are truly widows.
But if any widow has children or grandchildren, they should first learn to show godliness toward their own household and to make some repayment to their parents, for this is acceptable in the sight of God.
Now a woman who is truly a widow and left all alone has put her hope in God and continues night and day in her supplications and prayers.
But she who lives in self-indulgence is dead even while she lives.
Give these commands as well, so that no one will be open to blame.
But if anyone does not provide for his own relatives, and especially for those of his own household, he has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever.
A widow may be put on the list to receive support if she is at least sixty years old, has been the wife of one husband,
and has a reputation for good works, that is, if she has brought up children, shown hospitality, washed the feet of the saints, helped the afflicted, and devoted herself to every good work.
But reject younger widows, for when their sensual desires draw them away from Christ, they wish to marry,
thus bringing judgment on themselves because they have broken their previous pledge.
At the same time, they learn to be idle, wandering about from house to house. And they are not only idle, but also gossips and busybodies, saying things they should not say.
So I advise the younger widows to marry, bear children, and manage their households, so as to give the adversary no opportunity to revile us.
For some have already turned away to follow Satan.
If any believing man or woman has relatives who are widows, they must help them; the church should not be burdened, so that it may help those who are truly widows.
Elders who lead well should be considered worthy of double honor, especially those who labor in preaching and teaching.
For the Scripture says, “Yoʋ shall not muzzle an ox while it is threshing,” and, “The worker is worthy of his wages.”
Do not accept an accusation against an elder unless it is confirmed by two or three witnesses.
As for those who sin, reprove them in the presence of all, so that others will be afraid to follow their example.
I solemnly charge yoʋ before God and the Lord Jesus Christ and the chosen angels to observe these things without partiality, doing nothing out of favoritism.
Do not lay hands on anyone hastily, and do not take part in the sins of others; keep yoʋrself pure.
(No longer drink only water, but use a little wine for the sake of yoʋr stomach and yoʋr frequent illnesses.)
The sins of some are obvious, going before them to judgment, but the sins of others trail along behind.
In the same way, good works are obvious, and even those that are not obvious cannot remain hidden.
All who are under the yoke of slavery must regard their own masters as worthy of all honor, so that no one will revile God's name or his doctrine.
Slaves who have believing masters must not despise them, for they are brothers; rather they must serve them, because those who benefit from their good service are faithful and beloved. Teach and encourage these things.
If anyone teaches a different doctrine and does not agree with the sound words of our Lord Jesus Christ and the teaching that is in accordance with godliness,
he is puffed up and understands nothing. Moreover, he has an unhealthy desire for controversies and quarrels about words, from which come envy, strife, slanderous words, evil suspicions,
and constant disagreement among people who are depraved in mind and deprived of the truth, supposing that godliness is a means of gain. Keep away from such people.
But godliness with contentment is great gain.
For we brought nothing into the world, and it is clear that we cannot bring anything out either,
but if we have food and clothing, we will be content with that.
But those who wish to be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many senseless and harmful desires that sink people into ruin and destruction.
For the love of money is the root of all kinds of evil, and in their eagerness to become rich some have wandered away from the faith, piercing themselves with many sorrows.
But as for yoʋ, O man of God, flee from these things, and pursue righteousness, godliness, faithfulness, love, endurance, and gentleness.
Fight the good fight of faith. Take hold of the eternal life to which yoʋ were called and concerning which yoʋ made the good confession in the presence of many witnesses.
I charge yoʋ before God, who gives life to all things, and before Christ Jesus, who made the good confession in his testimony before Pontius Pilate,
that yoʋ obey what has been commanded without fault or reproach until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which God will reveal in his own time. He is the blessed and only Sovereign, the King of kings and Lord of lords,
who alone has immortality, dwelling in unapproachable light, whom no man has ever seen or is able to see. To him be honor and eternal power. Amen.
Command those who are rich in this present age not to be haughty or to put their hope in the uncertainty of riches, but in the living God, who richly provides us with everything for our enjoyment.
Command them to do good, to be rich in good works, and to be generous and willing to share,
treasuring up for themselves a good foundation for the time to come, so that they may take hold of eternal life.
O Timothy, guard what has been entrusted to yoʋ and avoid the profane chatter and counterarguments of what is falsely called “knowledge.”
By professing it, some have strayed from the faith. Grace be with yoʋ. Amen.
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God according to the promise of life that is in Christ Jesus,
to Timothy, my beloved child: Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
I thank God, whom I serve with a clear conscience as my forefathers did, as night and day I constantly remember yoʋ in my prayers.
Recalling yoʋr tears, I long to see yoʋ so that I may be filled with joy.
I am reminded of the sincere faith that is in yoʋ, which dwelt first in yoʋr grandmother Lois and in yoʋr mother Eunice, and now, I am sure, dwells in yoʋ also.
Therefore I remind yoʋ to rekindle the gift of God that is in yoʋ through the laying on of my hands.
For God did not give us a spirit of timidity, but a spirit of power, love, and sound judgment.
Therefore do not be ashamed of the testimony of our Lord or of me his prisoner. Rather, join with me in suffering for the gospel as you rely on the power of God.
He saved us and called us with a holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace. This grace was given to us in Christ Jesus before time began,
but has now been revealed through the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who abolished death and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel.
For this gospel I was appointed to be a preacher, an apostle, and a teacher of the Gentiles.
That is why I am suffering these things. But I am not ashamed, for I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to guard what has been entrusted to me until that day.
Hold to the pattern of sound teaching that yoʋ have heard from me, in the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus.
By the Holy Spirit who dwells within us, guard the good deposit that has been entrusted to yoʋ.
Yoʋ know that everyone in Asia has turned away from me, including Phygelus and Hermogenes.
May the Lord give mercy to the household of Onesiphorus, because he often refreshed me and was not ashamed of my chains.
On the contrary, when he arrived in Rome, he sought me out very diligently and found me.
May the Lord grant him to find mercy from the Lord on that day! Yoʋ know very well all the ways he helped me in Ephesus.
Yoʋ then, my child, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.
Entrust what yoʋ have heard from me in the presence of many witnesses to faithful men who will be competent to teach others also.
Endure hardship as a good soldier of Jesus Christ.
No one serving as a soldier entangles himself in the affairs of civilian life, since he seeks to please the one who enlisted him.
Similarly, an athlete is not crowned unless he competes according to the rules.
The hardworking farmer ought to receive the first share of the crops.
Think about what I am saying. May the Lord give yoʋ understanding in everything.
Remember Jesus Christ, the offspring of David, who was raised from the dead according to my gospel.
For this gospel I suffer to the point of being chained like a criminal, but the word of God is not chained.
Therefore I endure everything for the sake of the chosen, so that they too may obtain the salvation that is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory.
This saying is trustworthy: If we died with him, we will also live with him;
if we endure, we will also reign with him; if we deny him, he will also deny us;
if we are unfaithful, he remains faithful; he cannot deny himself.
Remind the people of these things, solemnly charging them before the Lord not to quarrel about words, which does no good but only leads to the ruin of those who are listening.
Be diligent to present yoʋrself to God as a proven worker who does not need to be ashamed and who correctly teaches the word of truth.
Avoid profane chatter, for those who engage in such talk will stray further and further into ungodliness,
and their message will spread like gangrene. Among them are Hymenaeus and Philetus,
who have strayed from the truth, saying that the resurrection has already happened. They are undermining the faith of some.
Nevertheless, the foundation of God stands firm, having this seal: “The Lord knows those who are his,” and, “Everyone who calls upon the name of the Lord must depart from unrighteousness.”
Now in a large house there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood and clay; some are for honorable use and some for dishonorable use.
Therefore, if anyone cleanses himself from what is dishonorable, he will be a vessel for honorable use, set apart as holy, useful to the master, and prepared for every good work.
Flee youthful lusts and pursue righteousness, faithfulness, love, and peace, along with those who call upon the Lord from a pure heart.
Have nothing to do with foolish and ignorant controversies, knowing that they breed quarrels.
A servant of the Lord ought not to quarrel, but to be kind to everyone, able to teach, and patient,
instructing his opponents with gentleness. Perhaps God will grant them repentance leading to the knowledge of the truth.
Then they will come to their senses and escape from the snare of the devil, who has taken them captive to do his will.
But know this: Hard times will come in the last days.
For people will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boasters, proud, blasphemous, disobedient to parents, ungrateful, unholy,
without natural affection, irreconcilable, slanderous, without self-control, brutal, having no love for what is good,
traitors, reckless, puffed up, and lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God,
having a form of godliness but denying its power. Avoid such people.
Among them are those who worm their way into houses and captivate vulnerable women who are overwhelmed with sins and swayed by various evil desires.
Such women are always learning yet never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.
Just as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so these false teachers also oppose the truth. They are corrupted in mind and have proven themselves to be unqualified with respect to the faith.
But they will not make any further progress, for their folly will become obvious to everyone, just like the folly of Jannes and Jambres.
Yoʋ, however, have closely followed my teaching, conduct, purpose, faith, patience, love, and endurance.
Yoʋ know how much persecution and suffering I endured in Antioch, Iconium, and Lystra. Yet the Lord rescued me from it all.
Indeed, everyone who wants to live a godly life in Christ Jesus will be persecuted.
But evil people and imposters will become worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.
But as for yoʋ, continue in what yoʋ have learned and firmly believed, knowing from whom yoʋ have learned it,
and how from childhood yoʋ have known the sacred writings, which are able to give yoʋ wisdom for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus.
All Scripture is inspired by God and is beneficial for teaching, reproof, correction, and instruction in righteousness,
so that the man of God may be complete, fully equipped for every good work.
I solemnly charge yoʋ therefore in the presence of God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who will judge the living and the dead when he appears with his kingdom:
Preach the word, be prepared whether the time is favorable or not, reprove, rebuke, and encourage, with complete patience and careful instruction.
For a time is coming when people will not tolerate sound doctrine, but having itching ears they will surround themselves with teachers to suit their own desires.
They will turn their ears away from the truth and be turned aside to myths.
But as for yoʋ, be sober-minded in all things, endure hardship, do the work of an evangelist, and fulfill yoʋr ministry.
For I am already being poured out like a drink offering, and the time of my departure is at hand.
I have fought the good fight, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith.
There is now laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will give to me on that day, and not only to me, but also to all who have longed for his appearing.
Make every effort to come to me soon.
For Demas, who is in love with this present world, has deserted me and gone to Thessalonica. Crescens has gone to Galatia, and Titus to Dalmatia.
Luke alone is with me. Get Mark and bring him with yoʋ, for he is useful to me for ministry.
Tychicus I have sent to Ephesus.
When yoʋ come, bring the cloak that I left with Carpus in Troas, as well as my scrolls, especially the parchments.
Alexander the coppersmith did me great harm. May the Lord repay him according to his works.
Yoʋ yoʋrself should be on guard against him, for he has vehemently opposed our message.
At my first defense no one came to stand by me; instead, they all deserted me. May it not be counted against them.
But the Lord stood by me and strengthened me, so that through me the proclamation might be fully made and all the Gentiles might hear. And I was rescued from the lion's mouth.
And the Lord will rescue me from every evil deed and preserve me for his heavenly kingdom. To him be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
Greet Prisca and Aquila and the household of Onesiphorus.
Erastus stayed in Corinth, and Trophimus, who was sick, I left in Miletus.
Make every effort to come before winter. Eubulus greets yoʋ, and so do Pudens, Linus, Claudia, and all the brothers.
The Lord Jesus Christ be with yoʋr spirit. Grace be with you. Amen.
Paul, a servant of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ, appointed to further the faith of God's chosen ones and the knowledge of the truth that is in accordance with godliness,
in the hope of eternal life, which God, who does not lie, promised before time began;
in his own time he revealed his word through the preaching with which I was entrusted by the command of God our Savior;
to Titus, my true child in our common faith: Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior.
The reason I left yoʋ in Crete was for yoʋ to put in order what remained to be done and to appoint elders in every town, as I directed yoʋ.
An elder must be above reproach, the husband of one wife, with faithful children who are not rebellious and cannot be accused of debauchery.
For an overseer, as God's steward, must be above reproach, not self-willed, not quick-tempered, not given to wine, not violent, not greedy for sordid gain,
but hospitable, a lover of goodness, sensible, just, holy, and self-controlled,
holding firmly to the trustworthy message as it has been taught, so that he can encourage others with sound doctrine and refute those who contradict it.
For there are many rebellious people, full of meaningless talk and deception, especially those of the circumcision faction.
They must be silenced, because they are ruining entire households by teaching what they ought not to teach, for the sake of sordid gain.
One of their very own prophets said, “Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, and lazy gluttons.”
This testimony is true. Therefore rebuke them sharply, so that they may become sound in the faith,
not paying any attention to Jewish myths or the commandments of men who turn away from the truth.
To the pure, all things are pure; but to those who are defiled and do not believe, nothing is pure. In fact, both their minds and their consciences are defiled.
They profess to know God, but by their works they deny him. They are detestable, disobedient, and have proven themselves to be unqualified for any good work.
But as for yoʋ, teach what is consistent with sound doctrine.
Elderly men are to be sober-minded, dignified, sensible, and sound in faith, love, and endurance.
Elderly women likewise are to be reverent in behavior, not slanderous or enslaved to much wine, but teaching what is good,
so that they can admonish the young women to be loving to their husbands, loving to their children,
sensible, pure, homemakers, kind, and submissive to their own husbands, so that the word of God may not be discredited.
In the same way, urge the younger men to be of sound mind.
Show yoʋrself to be a model of good works in every way, and in yoʋr teaching show integrity, dignity, incorruptibility,
and sound speech that is above reproach, so that any opponent may be put to shame because he has nothing bad to say about us.
Slaves are to be submissive to their own masters and well-pleasing in everything, not talking back,
not pilfering, but showing all good faith, so that in every way they may adorn the teaching of God our Savior.
For the saving grace of God has appeared to all people,
instructing us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts and to live in a sensible, righteous, and godly manner in the present age,
as we wait for the blessed hope—the appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior, Jesus Christ.
He gave himself for us to redeem us from all lawlessness and to purify for himself a people for his own possession, zealous for good works.
Declare these things; encourage and rebuke with all authority. Let no one despise yoʋ.
Remind the people to be subject to rulers and authorities, to be obedient, to be ready for every good work,
to slander no one, and to be peaceable and considerate, always showing gentleness toward everyone.
For we ourselves were once foolish, disobedient, led astray, and enslaved to various lusts and pleasures. Living in wickedness and envy, we were loathsome and hated one another.
But when the kindness of God our Savior and his love for mankind appeared,
he saved us, not because of any righteous works we had done, but according to his mercy, through the washing of regeneration and the renewal of the Holy Spirit.
He richly poured out his Spirit upon us through Jesus Christ our Savior,
so that, having been justified by his grace, we might become heirs according to the hope of eternal life.
This saying is trustworthy. I want yoʋ to insist on these things, so that those who have put their trust in God may be careful to devote themselves to good works. These things are good and beneficial for people.
But avoid foolish controversies, genealogies, quarrels, and disputes about the law, for they are unprofitable and futile.
Reject a divisive person after a first and second warning.
For yoʋ know that such a person is corrupted and sinful; he is self-condemned.
When I send Artemas to yoʋ, or Tychicus, make every effort to come to me at Nicopolis, for I have decided to spend the winter there.
Do everything yoʋ can to help Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their way, and make sure they lack nothing.
Our people must learn to devote themselves to good works in order to meet pressing needs, so that they will not be unfruitful.
All who are with me greet yoʋ. Greet those who love us in the faith. Grace be with you all. Amen.
Paul, a prisoner for Christ Jesus, and Timothy our brother, to Philemon, our beloved friend and fellow worker,
and also to the beloved Apphia, to Archippus our fellow soldier, and to the church that meets in yoʋr house:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I give thanks to my God, always making mention of yoʋ in my prayers,
because I hear of yoʋr love for all the saints and the faith that yoʋ have toward the Lord Jesus.
I pray that yoʋr fellowship with us in the faith may be effective in deepening yoʋr understanding of every blessing that we have in Christ Jesus.
We are very thankful for the comfort we have received from yoʋr love, because the hearts of the saints have been refreshed through yoʋ, brother.
Therefore, although I am bold enough in Christ to command yoʋ to do what is right,
I would rather appeal to yoʋ on the basis of love. I, Paul, an old man and now a prisoner for Jesus Christ,
appeal to yoʋ on behalf of my child, Onesimus, whose father I have become during my imprisonment.
Once he was useless to yoʋ, but now he is useful both to yoʋ and to me. I am sending him back,
and I ask yoʋ to receive him, that is, my very own heart.
I wanted to keep him with me so that he could serve me in yoʋr place during my imprisonment for the gospel.
But I did not want to do anything without yoʋr consent, so that yoʋr good deed would not be done out of compulsion, but of yoʋr own free will.
Perhaps the reason he was separated from yoʋ for an hour was so that yoʋ might have him back forever,
no longer as a slave, but more than a slave, as a beloved brother, especially to me, but even more so to yoʋ, both in the flesh and in the Lord.
So if yoʋ consider me to be a partner, receive him as yoʋ would receive me.
If he has wronged yoʋ in any way or owes yoʋ anything, charge it to me.
I, Paul, write this with my own hand: I will repay it (not to mention that yoʋ owe me yoʋr very own life).
Yes, brother, let me have some benefit from yoʋ in the Lord. Refresh my heart in the Lord.
Trusting in yoʋr obedience, I write to yoʋ, knowing that yoʋ will do even more than I ask.
At the same time, I want yoʋ to prepare a guest room for me, for I hope that through your prayers I will be restored to you soon.
Epaphras, my fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus,
and Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke, my fellow workers, greet yoʋ.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen.
God spoke to our fathers long ago at many times and in many ways through the prophets, but in these last days he has spoken to us through his Son,
whom he appointed heir of all things, and through whom he made the universe.
He is the radiance of God's glory and the exact representation of his nature, sustaining all things by his powerful word. When he had made purification for our sins by giving his own life, he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty in high places,
having become as much superior to the angels as the name he has inherited is more excellent than theirs.
For to which of the angels did God ever say, “Yoʋ are my Son; today I have begotten yoʋ”? Or again, “I will be his Father, and he will be my Son”?
And again, when he brings his firstborn into the world, he says, “Let all the angels of God worship him.”
Of the angels he says, “He makes his angels winds, and his servants a flame of fire,”
but of the Son he says, “Yoʋr throne, O God, endures forever and ever; the scepter of yoʋr kingdom is a scepter of uprightness.
Yoʋ have loved righteousness and hated lawlessness; therefore God, yoʋr God, has anointed yoʋ with the oil of gladness beyond yoʋr companions.”
And, “In the beginning yoʋ, O Lord, laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the works of yoʋr hands.
They will perish, but yoʋ remain; they will all wear out like a garment.
Yoʋ will roll them up like a robe, and they will be changed. But yoʋ remain the same, and yoʋr years will never come to an end.”
To which of the angels did God ever say, “Sit at my right hand until I make yoʋr enemies a footstool for yoʋr feet”?
Are they not all ministering spirits sent out to serve those who will inherit salvation?
Therefore we must pay greater attention to what we have heard, so that we do not drift away.
For if the message spoken through angels was valid and every transgression and disobedience received a just retribution,
how will we escape if we neglect so great a salvation? This salvation was first announced by the Lord, and it was confirmed to us by those who heard him.
God also bore further witness with signs, wonders, various miracles, and gifts of the Holy Spirit distributed according to his will.
For it was not to angels that God subjected the world to come, about which we are speaking.
But in one place someone has testified: “What is man that yoʋ are mindful of him, or the son of man that yoʋ care for him?
Yoʋ made him a little lower than the angels and crowned him with glory and honor;
yoʋ put everything in subjection under his feet.” In subjecting everything to him, God left nothing that is not subjected to him. But now we do not yet see everything subjected to him.
But we do see Jesus, who for a little while was made lower than the angels, now crowned with glory and honor because he suffered death, so that by the grace of God he might taste death for everyone.
For in bringing many sons to glory, it was fitting that God, for whom and through whom all things exist, should make the author of their salvation perfect through suffering.
For he who sanctifies and those who are being sanctified all have one Father. That is why Jesus is not ashamed to call them brothers,
saying, “I will declare yoʋr name to my brothers; in the midst of the congregation I will sing yoʋr praise.”
And again, “I will put my trust in him.” And again, “Here I am, with the children God has given me.”
Therefore, since the children all have flesh and blood, Jesus himself took on flesh and blood as well, so that through death he might destroy the one who has the power of death, that is, the devil,
and free those who all their lives were held in slavery by the fear of death.
For surely it is not angels that he helps, but the descendants of Abraham.
Therefore he had to become like his brothers in every way, so that he could be a merciful and faithful high priest in service to God, in order to make atonement for the sins of the people.
Because he himself suffered when he was tempted, he is able to help those who are being tempted.
Therefore, holy brothers, you who share in a heavenly calling, consider Jesus Christ, the apostle and high priest of our confession,
who was faithful to the one who appointed him, just as Moses was faithful in all God's house.
Yet Jesus is considered worthy of more glory than Moses, just as the builder of a house has more honor than the house itself.
For every house is built by someone, but the builder of all things is God.
Now Moses was faithful in all God's house as a servant, which provided testimony to what would be spoken later.
But Christ is faithful over God's house as a Son. And we are his house if indeed we hold our confidence firm to the end along with the hope in which we boast.
Therefore, as the Holy Spirit says, “Today, if you hear his voice,
do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion, on the day of testing in the wilderness,
where your fathers tried me, tested me, and saw my works for forty years.
Therefore I was angry with that generation and said, ‘They always go astray in their hearts; they have not known my ways.’
As I swore in my wrath, ‘They will not enter my rest!’ ”
Brothers, make sure that none of you has an evil heart of unbelief that turns away from the living God.
But encourage one another each day, as long as it is called “Today,” so that none of you will be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin.
For we have become sharers in Christ, if indeed we hold our original confidence firm to the end.
As it is said, “Today, if you hear his voice, do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion.”
For some did rebel when they heard God's voice, but not all whom Moses led out of Egypt.
Now with whom was God angry for forty years? Was it not with those who sinned, whose bodies fell in the wilderness?
And to whom did God swear that they would not enter his rest, if not to those who were disobedient?
So we see that it was because of their unbelief that they were not able to enter.
Therefore, while the promise of entering his rest remains open, let us proceed with fear so that none of you may be found to have fallen short of it.
For we also have received good news just as they did. But the message they heard did not benefit them, since they were not united by faith with those who listened.
For we who have believed enter that rest. As for the others, God has said, “As I swore in my wrath, ‘They will not enter my rest!’ ” Now God's works have been finished from the foundation of the world.
For in one place it speaks about the seventh day as follows: “On the seventh day God rested from all his works.”
But again, God says in the passage above: “They will not enter my rest!”
Therefore, since God's rest remains open for some to enter, and those who formerly received good news did not enter because of their disobedience,
he again designates a certain day, calling it “Today,” as he says through David much later, in the passage already quoted, “Today, if you hear his voice, do not harden your hearts.”
For if Joshua had given them rest, God would not have spoken later about another day.
So then, there remains a Sabbath rest for the people of God.
For anyone who has entered God's rest has rested from his own works, just as God rested from his.
Therefore let us make every effort to enter that rest, so that no one will fall into the same pattern of disobedience.
For the word of God is living and active, sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing to the point of dividing soul from spirit, and joints from marrow, and discerning the thoughts and intentions of the heart.
No creature is hidden from his sight, but all are naked and exposed to the eyes of him to whom we must give an account.
Therefore, since we have a great high priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast to our confession.
For we do not have a high priest who is unable to sympathize with our weaknesses, but one who has been tempted in every way, just as we are, yet was without sin.
Therefore let us draw near to the throne of grace with confidence, so that we may receive mercy and find grace to help us in our time of need.
For every high priest taken from among the people is appointed to represent the people in matters related to God, to offer gifts and sacrifices for sins.
He is able to deal gently with those who are ignorant and going astray, since he himself is subject to weakness.
That is why he is obligated to offer sacrifices for his own sins, as well as for the sins of the people.
No one takes this honor for himself, but receives it when he is called by God, just as Aaron was.
In the same way, Christ did not glorify himself in becoming a high priest, but was appointed by the one who said to him, “Yoʋ are my Son; today I have begotten yoʋ.”
And in another passage he says, “Yoʋ are a priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek.”
In the days of his flesh, Jesus offered up prayers and supplications, with loud cries and tears, to the one who was able to save him from death, and he was heard because of his reverence.
Even though he was the Son, he learned obedience from what he suffered.
And having been made perfect, he became the source of eternal salvation to all who obey him
and was designated by God as a high priest according to the order of Melchizedek.
On this topic we have much to say, and it is hard to explain, since you have become sluggish in hearing.
For though you ought to be teachers by this time, you need someone to teach you again the basic principles of the oracles of God. You need milk, not solid food.
Anyone who lives on milk is unacquainted with the teaching about righteousness, for he is an infant.
But solid food is for the mature, whose faculties have been trained by practice to distinguish between good and evil.
Therefore, let us leave behind the elementary teaching about Christ and go on to maturity, not laying again a foundation of repentance from dead works and of faith in God,
and of instruction about baptisms, the laying on of hands, the resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment.
And this we will do, if God permits.
For it is impossible to renew to repentance those who have once been enlightened, who have tasted the heavenly gift, who have shared in the Holy Spirit,
who have tasted the good word of God and the powers of the coming age,
and yet have fallen away, since, to their own harm, they are crucifying the Son of God all over again and exposing him to public shame.
For land that has drunk the rain that often falls upon it, and produces a crop useful to those for whom it is cultivated, receives a blessing from God.
But land that bears thorns and thistles is worthless and on the verge of being cursed; its end is to be burned.
Even though we speak in this way, beloved, we are confident of better things in your case, things that pertain to salvation.
For God is not unjust; he will not forget your work and the labor of love that you have shown toward his name by serving the saints, as you still do.
We want each one of you to show the same earnestness to have the full assurance of hope to the very end,
so that you will not be sluggish, but imitators of those who inherit the promises through faith and patience.
When God made his promise to Abraham, since he had no one greater to swear by, he swore by himself,
saying, “I will surely bless yoʋ and multiply yoʋ.”
And so Abraham, having patiently endured, obtained the promise.
People swear by someone greater than themselves, and in all their disputes an oath is final for confirmation.
So when God wanted to show the unchangeable nature of his purpose even more clearly to the heirs of the promise, he guaranteed it with an oath,
so that by two unchangeable things, in which it is impossible for God to lie, we who have fled for refuge would have strong encouragement to take hold of the hope set before us.
We have this hope as a sure and steadfast anchor for the soul. It enters into the inner sanctuary behind the veil,
where Jesus has entered as a forerunner for us, because he has become a high priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek.
Now this Melchizedek was king of Salem and priest of God Most High. When Abraham was returning from the slaughter of the kings, Melchizedek met him and blessed him,
and Abraham gave him a tenth of all the spoils. His name means “king of righteousness,” but he is also “king of Salem,” which means, “king of peace.”
He is without father, without mother, and without genealogy; there is no beginning to his days or end to his life. But resembling the Son of God, he remains a priest forever.
Consider how great this man must be, that even Abraham the patriarch gave him a tenth of the spoils.
Now the law commands the sons of Levi who receive the priestly office to collect tithes from the people, that is, their brothers, even though their brothers are also descended from Abraham.
But Melchizedek, who was not among the descendants of Levi, received a tithe from Abraham. He also blessed Abraham, who had received the promises.
It is beyond all dispute that the inferior is blessed by the superior.
In the one case, tithes are received by mortal men, but in the other case, they are received by one who is attested to be living.
One might even say that Levi himself, who receives tithes, paid tithes through Abraham.
For Levi was still in the loins of his ancestor Abraham when Melchizedek met him.
Now if perfection had been attainable through the Levitical priesthood (for under this priesthood the people received the law), what further need would there have been for another priest to arise according to the order of Melchizedek rather than the order of Aaron?
For when the priesthood is changed, the law must also be changed.
Now he of whom these things are spoken belongs to a different tribe, from which no one has ever served at the altar.
For it is clear that our Lord arose from Judah, and in connection with that tribe Moses said nothing about priesthood.
Now this point becomes even more clear when there arises another priest like Melchizedek,
one who has become a priest, not through a legal requirement concerning physical descent, but through the power of an endless life.
For God testifies, “Yoʋ are a priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek.”
The former commandment is set aside because of its weakness and ineffectiveness
(for the law made nothing perfect), and a better hope is introduced, by which we draw near to God.
And none of this happened without an oath. Aaron's descendants become priests without an oath,
but Jesus was made a priest with an oath by the one who said to him, “The Lord has sworn and will not change his mind, ‘Yoʋ are a priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek.’ ”
Accordingly, Jesus has become the guarantor of a better covenant.
Now the former priests were many in number, because they were prevented by death from continuing in office;
but because Jesus continues forever, he has a permanent priesthood.
Therefore he is able to save to the uttermost those who come to God through him, because he always lives to intercede for them.
It was fitting for us to have such a high priest, one who is holy, innocent, undefiled, separated from sinners, and exalted above the heavens.
He has no need, like the other high priests, to offer up daily sacrifices, first for his own sins, and then for the sins of the people. For he did this once for all when he offered up himself.
For the law appoints as high priests men who have weakness, but the word of the oath, which came after the law, appoints the Son, who has been made perfect forever.
Now the main point of what we are saying is this: We have such a high priest, who sat down at the right hand of the Majesty's throne in heaven,
where he serves as a minister of the holy places and the true tabernacle, which was set up by the Lord, not by man.
For every high priest is appointed to offer gifts and sacrifices; therefore, it was necessary for this priest also to have something to offer.
For if he were on earth, he would not even be a priest, since there are already priests who offer gifts according to the law.
They serve a copy and shadow of the heavenly things. For when Moses was about to build the tabernacle, he was warned by God, “Be sure to make everything according to the pattern that was shown to yoʋ on the mountain.”
But as it is, the ministry Jesus has received is as superior to the old priesthood as the covenant he mediates is superior to the old covenant, since it has been enacted on better promises.
For if that first covenant had been faultless, there would have been no need to look for a second one.
But finding fault with it, God says to the people, “Behold, the days are coming, says the Lord, when I will establish a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah,
not like the covenant I made with their fathers on the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt. For they did not continue in my covenant, so I had no regard for them, says the Lord.
For this is the covenant I will make with the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord: I will put my laws into their minds and write them on their hearts. I will be their God, and they will be my people.
No longer will a man teach his fellow citizen or his brother, saying, ‘Know the Lord,’ for they will all know me, from the least of them to the greatest.
For I will be merciful toward their iniquities; their sins and their lawless deeds I will remember no more.”
In speaking of “a new covenant,” he has made the first one obsolete. And what is becoming obsolete and growing old will soon disappear.
Now even the first covenant had regulations for worship and an earthly sanctuary.
For a tabernacle was prepared. In the first room were the lampstand, the table, and the bread of the Presence; this is called the Holy Place.
Behind the second veil was a room called the Holy of Holies.
It had a golden censer and the ark of the covenant, which was overlaid on all sides with gold. In the ark were the golden jar containing the manna, the rod of Aaron that had budded, and the tablets of the covenant.
Above the ark were the cherubim of glory, overshadowing the mercy seat. But we cannot discuss these things in detail now.
When these things were all in place, the priests regularly entered the first room of the tabernacle, performing their sacred duties.
But into the second room, the high priest alone entered only once a year, and never without blood, which he offered for himself and for the unintentional sins of the people.
By this arrangement the Holy Spirit was showing that the way into the holy places had not yet been disclosed as long as the first tabernacle was still standing.
This is a symbol for the present time, during which gifts and sacrifices are offered that cannot perfect the conscience of the worshiper,
but deal only with food and drink, and various washings and regulations for the flesh, imposed until the time of reformation.
But when Christ came as high priest of the good things to come, through the greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands (that is, not of this creation),
he entered once for all into the holy places, not by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood, thus obtaining eternal redemption.
For if the blood of bulls and goats, and the ashes of a heifer sprinkled on those who are defiled, sanctify for the purification of the flesh,
how much more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish to God, purify your consciences from dead works to serve the living God?
That is why he is the mediator of a new covenant, so that those who are called may receive the promised eternal inheritance, since a death has occurred that redeems them from the transgressions committed under the first covenant.
For in the case of a will, it is necessary to establish the death of the one who made it,
because a will takes effect only after the person's death; it is never in force while the person who made it is alive.
That is why even the first covenant was not inaugurated without blood.
For when Moses had proclaimed every commandment of the law to all the people, he took the blood of calves and goats, along with water, scarlet wool, and hyssop, and sprinkled the scroll itself and all the people,
saying, “This is the blood of the covenant that God has ordained for you.”
In the same way, he sprinkled with blood the tabernacle and all the vessels used in worship.
Indeed, according to the law nearly everything is purified with blood, and without the shedding of blood there is no remission.
So it was necessary for the copies of the things in heaven to be purified with these sacrifices, but for the heavenly things themselves to be purified with better sacrifices than these.
For Christ did not enter holy places made with hands, which are copies of the true ones; he entered heaven itself, so that he might now appear before God on our behalf.
Nor did he enter heaven to offer himself many times, as the high priest enters the holy places year after year with blood that is not his own,
for then he would have had to suffer again and again since the foundation of the world. But as it is, he has appeared once for all at the end of the ages to remove sin by the sacrifice of himself.
And just as it is appointed for men to die once and then face judgment,
so also Christ, having been offered once to bear the sins of many, will appear a second time, not to bear sin, but to bring salvation to those who are eagerly waiting for him.
Since the law has only a shadow of the good things to come and not the true form of those things, the same sacrifices offered year after year can never perfect those who draw near to worship.
Otherwise, would they not have ceased to be offered, since the worshipers would have been purified once and for all, and would no longer have any consciousness of their sins?
But year after year they are reminded of their sins by these sacrifices.
For it is impossible for the blood of bulls and goats to take away sins.
Therefore, when Christ came into the world, he said, “Sacrifice and offering yoʋ did not desire, but a body yoʋ prepared for me;
in whole burnt offerings and sin offerings yoʋ took no pleasure.
Then I said, ‘Behold, I have come to do yoʋr will, O God, as it is written about me in the scroll of the book.’ ”
In the passage above he says, “Sacrifice and offering, and whole burnt offerings and sin offerings you did not desire, nor did you take pleasure in them” (although they are offered according to the law),
Then he adds, “Behold, I have come to do yoʋr will, O God.” He takes away the first in order to establish the second.
By God's will, we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.
Now every priest stands daily at service, offering again and again the same sacrifices that can never take away sins.
But when Christ had offered for all time one sacrifice for sins, he sat down at the right hand of God,
where he is now waiting until his enemies are made a footstool for his feet.
For by one offering he has perfected for all time those who are being sanctified.
The Holy Spirit also testifies to us about this. First he says,
“This is the covenant I will make with them after those days, says the Lord: I will put my laws on their hearts and write them on their minds.”
Then he adds, “Their sins and their lawless deeds I will remember no more.”
Now where there is remission of these, an offering for sin is no longer needed.
Therefore, brothers, since we have confidence to enter the holy places by the blood of Jesus,
by the new and living way he opened for us through the veil (that is, through his flesh),
and since we have a great priest over the house of God,
let us draw near with true hearts, in full assurance of faith, with our hearts sprinkled clean from an evil conscience and our bodies washed with pure water.
Let us hold fast to the confession of our hope without wavering, for he who promised is faithful.
And let us consider how to spur one another on to love and good works,
not neglecting to meet together, as is the habit of some, but encouraging one another, and all the more as you see the Day drawing near.
For if we continue sinning deliberately after receiving the knowledge of the truth, there no longer remains a sacrifice for sins,
but only a fearful expectation of judgment, and a fury of fire that will consume God's adversaries.
Anyone who has rejected the law of Moses dies without mercy on the testimony of two or three witnesses.
How much worse punishment do you think will be deserved by someone who has trampled the Son of God underfoot, who has profaned the blood of the covenant by which he was sanctified, and who has insulted the Spirit of grace?
For we know him who said, “Vengeance is mine; I will repay, says the Lord.” And again, “The Lord will judge his people.”
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
But remember the earlier days when, after you were enlightened, you endured a hard struggle in the face of suffering.
At times you were publicly exposed to reproach and affliction, and at other times you were partners with those who were treated that way.
For you sympathized with me when I was in prison, and you accepted the plundering of your possessions with joy, knowing that you have for yourselves a better and lasting possession in heaven.
Therefore do not throw away your confidence, which has a great reward.
For you have need of endurance, so that when you have done the will of God, you will receive what was promised.
“For in just a little while, he who is coming will come and not delay.
But the righteous one will live by faith; and if he shrinks back, my soul will take no pleasure in him.”
But we are not among those who shrink back and are destroyed, but among those who have faith and preserve their souls.
Now faith is the assurance of what we hope for and the conviction of what we do not see.
Because of their faith, the people of old were commended.
By faith we understand that the universe was formed by the word of God. Consequently, we know that what can be seen did not come from anything visible.
By faith Abel offered to God a better sacrifice than Cain, through which he was commended as righteous when God gave approval to his gifts. And by faith he still speaks, even though he is dead.
By faith Enoch was taken up so that he would not see death, and he was not to be found, because God had taken him. Now before he was taken, he was commended as one who pleased God.
And without faith it is impossible to please God, for anyone who comes to him must believe that God exists and that he rewards those who earnestly seek him.
By faith Noah, when he was warned about things not yet seen, was moved with reverent fear and built an ark to save his household. By faith he condemned the world and became an heir of the righteousness that comes by faith.
By faith Abraham obeyed when he was called to go out to the place that he was to receive as an inheritance. And he went out, not knowing where he was going.
By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a foreign land, dwelling in tents with Isaac and Jacob, fellow heirs of the same promise.
For he was looking forward to the city that has foundations, whose designer and builder is God.
By faith Sarah herself received the ability to conceive, and she bore a child when she was beyond the proper age, because she considered him faithful who had made the promise.
And so from one man, and he as good as dead, came descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and as countless as the sand on the seashore.
All these people died in faith without receiving the things that were promised. But they saw them from a distance and welcomed them. And they acknowledged that they were strangers and sojourners on the earth.
For people who say such things make it clear that they are seeking a homeland.
If they had been thinking of the land they left behind, they would have had an opportunity to return.
Instead, they were longing for a better land, that is, a heavenly one. Therefore God is not ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared a city for them.
By faith Abraham, when he was tested, offered up Isaac. He who had received the promises was ready to offer up his one and only son,
even though God had said to him, “Through Isaac yoʋr descendants will be counted.”
He reasoned that God could even raise him from the dead. And figuratively speaking, he did receive Isaac back from death.
By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come.
By faith Jacob, when he was dying, blessed each of the sons of Joseph, and worshiped as he leaned on the top of his staff.
By faith Joseph, when his end was near, mentioned the exodus of the sons of Israel and gave instructions concerning his bones.
By faith Moses, when he was born, was hidden for three months by his parents, because they saw that he was a beautiful child, and they did not fear the decree of the king.
By faith Moses, when he had grown up, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter,
choosing to be mistreated with the people of God rather than to enjoy the fleeting pleasure of sin.
He considered the reproach of Christ to be greater wealth than the treasures of Egypt, for he was focused on the reward.
By faith he left Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king, for he endured as though he could see him who is invisible.
By faith he celebrated the Passover and the sprinkling of the blood, so that the destroyer of the firstborn would not touch the Israelites.
By faith they passed through the Red Sea as on dry land, but when the Egyptians tried to do so, they were drowned.
By faith the walls of Jericho fell after they had been encircled for seven days.
By faith Rahab the prostitute did not perish with those who were disobedient, because she had welcomed the spies in peace.
And what more shall I say? For time will fail me if I tell of Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, David, Samuel, and the prophets,
who by faith conquered kingdoms, carried out justice, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions,
quenched the power of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, were made strong from weakness, became mighty in battle, and routed the armies of foreigners.
Women received back their dead by resurrection. Other people were tortured, refusing to accept release, so that they might obtain a better resurrection.
Others endured mocking and flogging, as well as chains and imprisonment.
They were stoned, they were sawn in two, they were tempted, and they were killed with the sword. They went around in sheepskins and goatskins; they were destitute, afflicted, and mistreated.
The world was not worthy of them. They wandered in deserts and mountains, hiding in caves and holes in the ground.
All these people were commended for their faith, but they did not receive what was promised.
For God had planned something better for us, so that they would not be made perfect without us.
Therefore, since we have such a great cloud of witnesses surrounding us, let us lay aside every weight and the sin that so easily entangles us, and let us run with endurance the race that lies before us,
fixing our eyes upon Jesus, the author and perfecter of our faith. For the joy set before him he endured the cross, disregarding its shame, and sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.
Consider him who endured such opposition from sinners against himself, so that you will not grow weary or lose heart.
In your struggle against sin, you have not yet resisted to the point of shedding your blood.
And you have completely forgotten the exhortation that addresses you as sons: “My son, do not think lightly of the discipline of the Lord, and do not lose heart when he rebukes you.
For the Lord disciplines the one he loves, and he punishes every son he receives.”
For the sake of discipline you must endure. God is treating you as sons. For what son is not disciplined by his father?
If you do not experience discipline, which is something everyone receives, then you are illegitimate children and not sons.
Furthermore, we have all had earthly fathers who disciplined us, and we respected them. Should we not submit even more to the Father of spirits and live?
For our fathers disciplined us for a short time as seemed best to them, but God disciplines us for our good, so that we may share in his holiness.
Now no discipline seems pleasant at the time, but painful. Later on, however, it produces the peaceful fruit of righteousness for those trained by it.
Therefore, lift up your drooping hands and strengthen your weak knees.
Make straight paths for your feet, so that what is lame may not be put out of joint but healed instead.
Pursue peace with everyone, and holiness, for without it no one will see the Lord.
Make sure no one falls short of the grace of God and that no root of bitterness springs up and causes trouble, which would result in many becoming defiled.
And make sure there is no fornicator or profane person like Esau, who sold his birthright in exchange for a single meal.
You know that afterward, when he desired to inherit the blessing, he was rejected, for he found no opportunity for repentance, even though he sought the blessing with tears.
For you have not come to a mountain that can be touched, to a blazing fire, darkness, gloom, and a whirlwind.
You have not come to a trumpet blast and a voice whose words made the hearers beg that no further word be spoken to them.
For they could not bear the order that was given: “If even a beast touches the mountain, it shall be stoned.”
Indeed, the sight was so terrifying that Moses said, “I am trembling with fear.”
But you have come to Mount Zion, to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem. You have come to myriads of angels,
to the festive gathering and assembly of the firstborn, whose names are enrolled in heaven. You have come to God, the judge of all, and to the spirits of righteous people who have been made perfect.
And you have come to Jesus, the mediator of a new covenant, and to the sprinkled blood that speaks a better word than the blood of Abel.
Be careful not to refuse him who is speaking. For if the people did not escape when they refused him who warned them on earth, how much less will we escape if we turn away from him who warns us from heaven?
At that time his voice shook the earth, but now he has promised, “Yet once more I will shake not only the earth, but also the heavens.”
Now the phrase, “Yet once more,” indicates the removal of what can be shaken—that is, created things—so that what cannot be shaken may remain.
Therefore, since we are receiving a kingdom that cannot be shaken, let us be thankful. It is by our thankfulness that we offer God acceptable worship, with reverence and godly fear.
For our God is a consuming fire.
Continue in brotherly love.
Do not neglect to show hospitality to strangers, for by showing hospitality some have hosted angels without knowing it.
Remember those in prison, as though you were in prison with them. Also remember those who are mistreated, as though you yourselves were suffering with them.
Marriage must be held in honor by all, and the marriage bed must be kept pure, but God will judge fornicators and adulterers.
Keep your lives free from the love of money, and be content with what you have, for God has said, “I will never leave yoʋ or forsake yoʋ.”
So we can say with confidence, “The Lord is my helper, so I will not fear anything that man might do to me.”
Remember your leaders, who spoke to you the word of God. Consider the outcome of their conduct, and imitate their faith.
Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, today, and forever.
Do not be carried away by various kinds of strange teachings, for it is good for the heart to be strengthened by grace, not by regulations about food, which have not benefited those who follow them.
We have an altar from which those who serve in the tabernacle have no right to eat.
For the bodies of those beasts whose blood is brought into the holy places by the high priest as an offering for sin are burned outside the camp.
So Jesus also suffered outside the city gate in order to sanctify the people by his own blood.
Therefore let us go to him outside the camp and bear the reproach he endured.
For here we do not have a lasting city, but we seek the city that is to come.
Through Jesus, therefore, let us continually offer up a sacrifice of praise to God, that is, the fruit of lips that confess his name.
Do not neglect to do good and to share with others, for such sacrifices are pleasing to God.
Obey your leaders and submit to them, for they keep watch over your souls as those who must give an account. Let them do this with joy and not with groaning, for that would be of no benefit to you.
Pray for us, for we are convinced that we have a clear conscience, desiring to live honorably in every way.
I urge you all the more to do this, so that I may be restored to you more quickly.
Now may the God of peace, who by the blood of the eternal covenant brought back from the dead our Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of the sheep,
equip you in every good work so that you may do his will. May he accomplish in you what is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
Now I urge you, brothers, to bear with this brief word of exhortation that I have written to you.
You should know that our brother Timothy has been released. If he comes soon, he will be with me when I see you.
Greet all your leaders and all the saints. Those who are from Italy greet you.
Grace be with you all. Amen.
James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes who are scattered abroad: Greetings.
Count it all joy, my brothers, when you experience various trials,
because you know that the testing of your faith produces endurance.
And let endurance have its full effect, so that you may be perfect and complete, lacking in nothing.
If any of you lacks wisdom, he should ask God, who gives generously to all without reproach, and it will be given to him.
But he must ask in faith without doubting, for he who doubts is like a wave of the sea, driven by the wind and tossed about.
That person should not expect to receive anything from the Lord.
A double-minded man is unstable in all his ways.
The lowly brother should rejoice in being exalted,
and the rich man should rejoice in being made low, because he will pass away like a flower of grass.
For the sun rises with its scorching heat and withers the grass, and its flower falls, and the beauty of its appearance perishes. So also will the rich man fade away in his pursuits.
Blessed is the man who endures temptation, for when he has been approved, he will receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to those who love him.
No one should say when he is tempted, “I am being tempted by God,” for God is not tempted by evil, and he himself tempts no one.
But each person is tempted when he is drawn away and enticed by his own evil desires.
And when desire has conceived, it gives birth to sin. And when sin is fully grown, it brings forth death.
Do not be deceived, my beloved brothers.
Every good and perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights, with whom there is no variation or shadow of turning.
Of his own will he gave us birth by the word of truth so that we would be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures.
So then, my beloved brothers, everyone should be swift to hear, slow to speak, and slow to anger.
For the anger of man does not produce the righteousness of God.
Therefore, putting aside all filthiness and rampant wickedness, humbly receive the implanted word, which is able to save your souls.
But be doers of the word and not hearers only. Otherwise, you are deceiving yourselves.
For if anyone is a hearer of the word and not a doer, he is like a man who looks at his face in a mirror.
For he looks at himself and goes away, and then immediately forgets what he looks like.
But he who looks into the perfect law, the law of liberty, and abides by it, is not a forgetful hearer but a doer who acts. He will be blessed in what he does.
If anyone among you considers himself to be religious but does not bridle his tongue, he deceives himself and his religion is worthless.
Pure and undefiled religion before God our Father is this: to look after orphans and widows in their affliction and to keep oneself unstained by the world.
My brothers, practice your faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, without showing partiality.
Suppose a man in fine clothing comes into your assembly wearing a gold ring, and a poor man in filthy clothing also comes in.
If you pay attention to the man who is wearing fine clothing and say to him, “Yoʋ sit here in a good place,” but you say to the poor man, “Yoʋ stand there, or sit here under my footstool,”
have you not made distinctions among yourselves and become judges with evil thoughts?
Listen, my beloved brothers, has not God chosen the poor of the world to be rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom that he has promised to those who love him?
But you have dishonored the poor man. Is it not the rich who oppress you? Are they not the ones who drag you into court?
Do they not blaspheme the good name by which you are called?
If you really fulfill the royal law according to the Scripture, “Yoʋ shall love yoʋr neighbor as yoʋrself,” you do well.
But if you show partiality, you commit sin and are convicted by the law as transgressors.
For whoever keeps the entire law but stumbles in one point has become guilty of it all.
For he who said, “Yoʋ shall not commit adultery,” also said, “Yoʋ shall not murder.” Now if yoʋ do not commit adultery but do commit murder, yoʋ have become a transgressor of the law.
Speak and act as those who will be judged by the law of liberty.
For judgment is without mercy to anyone who has not shown mercy; mercy triumphs over judgment.
What is the benefit, my brothers, if someone says he has faith but does not have works? Can that faith save him?
If a brother or sister is poorly clothed and lacks daily food,
and one of you says to them, “Go in peace, be warmed and filled,” without giving them anything to address their physical needs, what is the benefit?
In the same way faith by itself, if it does not have works, is dead.
But someone will say, “Yoʋ have faith, and I have works.” Show me yoʋr faith by yoʋr works, and I, by my works, will show yoʋ my faith.
Yoʋ believe that God is one; yoʋ do well. Even the demons believe—and shudder!
Do yoʋ want to be shown, O foolish man, that faith without works is dead?
Was not our father Abraham justified by works when he offered his son Isaac on the altar?
Do yoʋ see how faith was active along with his works, and by works his faith was brought to completion?
And the Scripture was fulfilled that says, “Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him as righteousness,” and he was called a friend of God.
You see then that a person is justified by works, and not by faith alone.
In the same way, was not Rahab the prostitute also justified by works when she received the messengers and sent them out by another way?
For just as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is also dead.
Not many of you should become teachers, my brothers, because you know that we who teach will be judged more strictly.
For we all stumble in many ways. If anyone does not stumble in what he says, he is a perfect man, able to bridle his entire body as well.
Behold, we put bits into the mouths of horses so that they will obey us, and we guide their entire bodies.
Or take ships for example, though they are so large and driven by fierce winds, they are guided by a very small rudder wherever the inclination of the pilot directs.
In the same way, the tongue is a small member, yet it makes great boasts. Consider how great a forest a little fire kindles.
And the tongue is a fire. The tongue is placed among our members as a world of unrighteousness, staining the entire body, setting the course of life on fire, and itself being set on fire by hell.
Every species of beast, bird, reptile, and sea creature can be tamed and has been tamed by man,
but no man can tame the tongue. It is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison.
With it we bless God our Father, and with it we curse men, who are made in God's likeness.
Out of the same mouth come blessing and cursing. My brothers, this ought not to be so.
Does a spring pour out fresh water and bitter water from the same opening?
Can a fig tree, my brothers, produce olives, or a grapevine figs? In the same way, no spring can produce both salt water and fresh water.
Who is wise and understanding among you? By his good conduct he should show that his works are done with the gentleness that comes from wisdom.
But if you have bitter jealousy and selfish ambition in your hearts, do not boast or deny the truth.
This is not the wisdom that comes down from above; rather, it is earthly, unspiritual, and demonic.
For where there is jealousy and selfish ambition, there is disorder and every evil practice.
But the wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easily entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, impartial, and unhypocritical.
And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace by those who make peace.
Where do wars and fights among you come from? Do they not come from your passions that wage war among your members?
You desire but do not have. You murder and are jealous but cannot obtain what you want. You fight and war. You do not have, because you do not ask.
You ask and do not receive because you ask wrongly, so that you may spend what you get on your pleasures.
Adulterers and adulteresses! Do you not know that friendship with the world is enmity with God? Therefore whoever wishes to be a friend of the world makes himself an enemy of God.
Or do you think that the Scripture speaks in vain? The spirit that dwells in us desires to the point of envy,
but God gives greater grace. Therefore it says, “God opposes the proud but gives grace to the humble.”
Submit yourselves therefore to God, but resist the devil, and he will flee from you.
Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners; and purify your hearts, you double-minded.
Grieve, mourn, and weep. Turn your laughter into mourning, and your joy into gloom.
Humble yourselves before the Lord, and he will exalt you.
Do not speak evil against one another, brothers. He who speaks evil against a brother and judges his brother, speaks evil against the law and judges the law. Now if yoʋ judge the law, yoʋ are not a doer of the law but a judge.
There is only one lawgiver—he who is able to save and destroy. But who are yoʋ to judge another?
Come now, you who say, “Today and tomorrow let us go to such and such a city, spend a year there, trade, and make a profit.”
You do not know what will happen tomorrow. What is your life? It is a vapor that appears for a little while and then vanishes away.
Instead you ought to say, “If the Lord wills, let us live and do this or that.”
But as it is, you boast in your arrogance; all such boasting is evil.
So whoever knows the right thing to do and does not do it, for him it is sin.
Come now, you who are rich, weep and howl over the miseries that are coming upon you.
Your riches have rotted, and your garments are moth-eaten.
Your gold and silver have rusted, and their rust will be a testimony against you and will eat your flesh like fire. You have laid up treasure in the last days.
Behold, the wages of the workers who harvested your fields, which you kept back by fraud, cry out, and the cries of the reapers have reached the ears of the Lord of hosts.
You have lived on the earth in luxury and self-indulgence. You have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter.
You have condemned and murdered the righteous man; he does not resist you.
Therefore be patient, brothers, until the coming of the Lord. Behold, the farmer waits for the precious fruit of the earth, being patient for it until it receives the early and latter rain.
You also must be patient. Establish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord has drawn near.
Do not complain against one another, brothers, so that you will not be judged. Behold, the Judge is standing at the door.
As an example of suffering and patience, my brothers, take the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord.
Behold, we regard as blessed those who endure. You have heard of the endurance of Job. Now consider the purpose of the Lord, how he is full of compassion and mercy.
Above all, my brothers, do not swear, neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by any other oath. But let your “Yes” be “Yes” and your “No” be “No,” so that you will not fall into hypocrisy.
Is anyone among you suffering? He should pray. Is anyone of good cheer? He should sing praise.
Is anyone among you sick? He should call for the elders of the church, and they should pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord.
The prayer of faith will save the one who is sick, and the Lord will raise him up. And if he has committed sins, he will be forgiven.
Confess your trespasses to one another and pray for one another so that you may be healed. The prayer of a righteous person is very powerful and effective.
Elijah was a man with a nature like ours, and he prayed earnestly that it would not rain, and for three years and six months it did not rain on the land.
Then he prayed again, and the sky gave rain, and the land produced its fruit.
Brothers, if anyone among you wanders from the truth and someone turns him back,
be assured that whoever turns a sinner back from the error of his way will save a soul from death and cover a multitude of sins.
Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the sojourners scattered abroad in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, chosen
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father and sanctified by the Spirit to be obedient to Jesus Christ and to be sprinkled with his blood: Grace and peace be multiplied to you.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! In his great mercy he caused us to be born again to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
to an inheritance that is imperishable, undefiled, and unfading, reserved in heaven for you,
who by the power of God are being guarded through faith for a salvation ready to be revealed in the last time.
In this you rejoice, even if now for a little while you have had to suffer various trials
so that the proven character of your faith—far more precious than gold that perishes even though it is tested by fire—may result in praise, honor, and glory when Jesus Christ is revealed.
Although you once did not know him, you love him; although you do not now see him, you believe in him and rejoice with an unspeakable and glorious joy,
because you are receiving the end result of your faith—the salvation of your souls.
Concerning this salvation, the prophets who prophesied about the grace that would come to you searched and carefully investigated,
inquiring about the time and circumstances that the Spirit of Christ within them was indicating when he testified in advance to the sufferings of Christ and the glories that would follow.
It was revealed to them that they were not serving themselves, but you, in regard to the things that have now been announced to you through those who preached the gospel to you by the Holy Spirit sent from heaven. Even angels long to catch a glimpse of these things.
Therefore, with minds that are alert and fully sober, set your hope completely on the grace that will be brought to you when Jesus Christ is revealed.
As children of obedience, do not conform yourselves to the evil desires you had when you lived in ignorance.
But just as he who called you is holy, you also must be holy in all your conduct,
for it is written, “Be holy, because I am holy.”
If you call on the Father who judges without partiality according to each person's work, pass the time of your sojourn in reverent fear.
For you know that you were redeemed from the empty way of life handed down to you from your fathers, not with perishable things like silver or gold,
but with the precious blood of Christ, a lamb without blemish or spot.
He was foreknown before the foundation of the world, but was revealed in the last times for your sake.
Through him you believe in God, who raised him from the dead and gave him glory, so that your faith and hope might be in God.
Since you have purified your souls by your obedience to the truth through the Spirit, resulting in genuine brotherly love, love one another deeply, from a pure heart.
For you have been born again, not of perishable seed but of imperishable, through the word of God that lives and abides forever.
For, “All flesh is like grass, and all the glory of man is like a flower of grass. The grass withers, and its flower falls,
but the word of the Lord endures forever.” This word is the good news that was preached to you.
So put aside all wickedness, all deceit, hypocrisy, envy, and all slander.
Like newborn babies, long for pure spiritual milk, so that by it you may grow,
if indeed you have tasted that the Lord is good.
As you come to him, a living stone rejected by men but chosen and precious in the sight of God,
you yourselves, like living stones, are being built up as a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
For it says in Scripture, “Behold, I lay in Zion a stone, a chosen and precious cornerstone, and no one who believes in him will ever be put to shame.”
This precious value is for you who believe, but to those who are disobedient, “The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone,”
and, “A stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense.” By disobeying the word they stumble, which is what they were appointed to do.
But you are a chosen lineage, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for God's own possession, so that you may proclaim the excellencies of him who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light.
Once you were not a people, but now you are the people of God. Once you had not received mercy, but now you have received mercy.
Beloved, I urge you as strangers and sojourners to abstain from the desires of the flesh that wage war against the soul,
keeping your conduct honorable among the Gentiles, so that when they speak against you as evildoers, they may see your good works and glorify God on the day of his visitation.
Therefore, be subject to every human institution for the sake of the Lord, whether to the king as supreme,
or to governors as those who are sent by him to punish evildoers and to praise those who do good.
For it is God's will that you silence the ignorance of foolish people by doing good.
Live as free people, but do not use your freedom as an excuse to do evil; live as servants of God.
Give honor to all, love the brotherhood, fear God, and honor the king.
Servants, submit to your masters with complete respect, not only to those who are good and gentle, but also to those who are cruel.
For there is favor upon anyone who endures pain while suffering unjustly for the sake of conscience toward God.
What credit do you get if you endure when you sin and are beaten for it? But if you endure when you do good and suffer for it, this finds favor with God.
For to this you have been called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving an example so that you could follow in his footsteps.
He committed no sin, nor was deceit found in his mouth.
When he was reviled, he did not revile in return; when he suffered, he did not threaten but entrusted himself to him who judges justly.
He himself bore our sins in his body on the cross, so that we might die to our sins and live for righteousness. By his wounds you have been healed.
For you were like sheep going astray, but now you have returned to the Shepherd and Overseer of your souls.
In the same way, wives, submit to your own husbands, so that, even if some are disobedient to the word, they will be won without a word by the way you live
when they observe your pure and reverent conduct.
Do not adorn yourselves outwardly with elaborately braided hair, gold jewelry, or fancy clothes.
Rather, let your adornment be the hidden person of the heart with the imperishable quality of a gentle and quiet spirit, which is very precious in God's sight.
For this is how the holy women who hoped in God adorned themselves in the past, by submitting to their own husbands,
just as Sarah obeyed Abraham and called him her lord. You have become her children if you do good and do not give way to fear.
Husbands, in the same way, live with your wives in an understanding way, showing honor to the woman as the weaker partner, since they are heirs with you of the grace of life, so that your prayers may not be hindered.
Finally, you must all be of one mind, sympathetic, loving as brothers, tenderhearted, and kind.
Do not repay evil for evil or reviling for reviling, but, on the contrary, bless, knowing that to this you were called, so that you may inherit a blessing.
For, “Whoever wants to love life and see good days must keep his tongue from evil, and his lips from speaking deceit;
he must turn aside from evil and do good; he must seek peace and pursue it.
For the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to their prayers. But the face of the Lord is against those who do evil.”
Now who will harm you if you become imitators of what is good?
But even if you do suffer because of righteousness, you are blessed. Do not fear people's threats or be troubled,
but sanctify the Lord God in your hearts. Always be ready to make a defense to anyone who asks you for an explanation of the hope you have within you, with gentleness and respect,
keeping a clear conscience, so that, when those who revile your good conduct in Christ speak against you as evildoers, they may be put to shame.
For it is better to suffer for doing good, if that is God's will, than to suffer for doing evil.
For Christ also suffered for sins once for all, the righteous for the unrighteous, so that he might bring you to God. He was put to death in the flesh, but made alive in the spirit,
in which he went and preached to the spirits in prison,
who disobeyed long ago when God waited patiently in the days of Noah, while the ark was being prepared, in which a few, that is, eight people, were saved through water.
Baptism, which corresponds to this, now saves us—not by removing dirt from the body, but as an appeal to God for a clear conscience—through the resurrection of Jesus Christ,
who has gone into heaven and is at the right hand of God, with angels, authorities, and powers subject to him.
Therefore, since Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm yourselves with the same mentality, because whoever has suffered in the flesh has ceased from sin,
so as to live his remaining time in the flesh no longer for the evil desires of men, but for the will of God.
For we have spent enough of our lives doing what the Gentiles like to do, walking in sensual indulgences, evil desires, excesses of wine, revelries, drinking bouts, and illicit idolatries.
They are surprised when you do not run with them into the same flood of debauchery, so they revile you.
But they will give an account to him who is ready to judge the living and the dead.
For this is the reason the gospel was preached even to the dead, so that, though they have been judged in the flesh as men are, they might live in the spirit as God does.
The end of all things has drawn near. Therefore be alert and sober-minded for the sake of your prayers.
Above all, maintain a deep love for one another, because love will cover a multitude of sins.
Be hospitable to one another without grumbling.
As each of you has received a gift, use it to serve one another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God.
If anyone speaks, he should do so as one who speaks the oracles of God; if anyone serves, he should do so as one who serves from strength as God supplies it, so that in all things God may be glorified through Jesus Christ. To him be the glory and the power forever and ever. Amen.
Beloved, do not be surprised at the fiery trial that has come upon you to test you, as though a strange thing were happening to you.
But insofar as you share in the sufferings of Christ, rejoice, so that you may also rejoice and be glad when his glory is revealed.
If you are reproached for the name of Christ, you are blessed, because the Spirit of glory and of God rests upon you. On their part he is blasphemed, but on your part he is glorified.
None of you should suffer as a murderer, thief, evildoer, or meddler,
but if anyone suffers as a Christian, he should not be ashamed, but should glorify God in this matter.
For it is time for judgment to begin with the household of God, and if it begins first with us, what will be the outcome for those who are disobedient to the gospel of God?
And, “If the righteous man is scarcely saved, what will become of the ungodly man and sinner?”
Therefore, those who suffer according to the will of God should entrust their souls to him as their faithful Creator while doing what is good.
I exhort the elders among you, I who am a fellow elder, a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and a partaker of the glory that will be revealed:
Shepherd the flock of God that is among you, exercising oversight, not under compulsion, but willingly; not for sordid gain, but eagerly.
Do not lord it over those entrusted to you, but be examples to the flock.
And when the chief Shepherd appears, you will receive the unfading crown of glory.
In the same way, you who are younger must submit to your elders. And all of you must clothe yourselves with humility as you submit to one another, for “God opposes the proud but gives grace to the humble.”
Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, so that he may exalt you in due time,
casting all your anxiety on him, because he cares for you.
Be sober-minded and watchful; your adversary the devil walks around like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour.
Resist him, standing firm in the faith, because you know that your brothers throughout the world are enduring the same kinds of suffering.
And after you have suffered for a little while, may the God of all grace, who called you to his eternal glory in Christ Jesus, himself perfect you; he will establish, strengthen, and settle you.
To him be the glory and the power forever and ever. Amen.
Through Silvanus, whom I regard as a faithful brother, I have written to you briefly, encouraging you and testifying that this is the true grace of God in which you stand.
She who is in Babylon, who is chosen together with you, greets you, and so does my son Mark.
Greet one another with a kiss of love. Peace be with all of you who are in Christ Jesus. Amen.
Simeon Peter, a servant and apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who have obtained a faith as precious as ours through the righteousness of our God and Savior Jesus Christ:
Grace and peace be multiplied to you in the knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord.
His divine power has given us everything we need for life and godliness, through the knowledge of him who called us by glory and virtue.
Through these he has given us his precious and magnificent promises, so that through them you may become partakers of the divine nature, having escaped from the corruption that is in the world because of evil desires.
For this very reason, make every effort to supplement your faith with virtue, your virtue with knowledge,
your knowledge with self-control, your self-control with endurance, your endurance with godliness,
your godliness with brotherly affection, and your brotherly affection with love.
For if you possess these qualities and continue to grow in them, they will keep you from being ineffective and unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
For whoever lacks these qualities is so nearsighted that he is blind, having forgotten the cleansing of his former sins.
Therefore, brothers, be all the more diligent to confirm that you are among those whom God has called and chosen, because if you do these things, you will never stumble.
For in this way, entry into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ will be richly provided for you.
Therefore, I will not neglect to keep reminding you about these things, though you know them and are established in the truth you now have.
I think it is right, as long as I am in this bodily tent, to stir you up by way of reminder,
because I know that this tent will soon be laid aside, as our Lord Jesus Christ made clear to me.
And I will make every effort to ensure that after my departure you will be able to recall these things at any time.
For we did not follow cleverly devised myths when we made known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but we were eyewitnesses of his majesty.
For he received honor and glory from God the Father when that voice came to him from the Majestic Glory: “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.”
We ourselves heard this voice come from heaven when we were with him on the holy mountain.
So we have the prophetic word more fully confirmed. You will do well to pay attention to it, as to a lamp shining in a dark place, until the day dawns and the morning star rises in your hearts.
First of all, you must understand that no prophecy of Scripture is a matter of one's own interpretation.
For no prophecy ever came by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit.
But there were also false prophets among the people, just as there will be false teachers among you, who will secretly bring in destructive heresies. They will even deny the Master who bought them, bringing upon themselves swift destruction.
Many will follow their sensual ways, and because of them the way of the truth will be maligned.
In their greed they will exploit you with deceptive words. Their condemnation from of old is not idle, and their destruction will not slumber.
For if God did not spare angels when they sinned, but cast them down to Tartarus and committed them to chains of darkness to be kept for judgment;
and if he did not spare the ancient world, but preserved Noah, a preacher of righteousness, along with seven others, when he brought a flood upon the world of the ungodly;
and if he condemned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah to destruction by reducing them to ashes and made them an example to those who would live in an ungodly way;
and if he rescued righteous Lot, who was distressed by the sensual conduct of the lawless
(for as that righteous man dwelt among them, his righteous soul was tormented day after day over their lawless deeds that he saw and heard);
then the Lord knows how to rescue the godly from trials and how to keep the unrighteous under punishment until the day of judgment,
especially those who indulge the corrupt desires of the flesh and who despise authority. Bold and self-willed, they do not tremble when they blaspheme glorious beings,
whereas angels, who are greater in strength and power, do not bring a blasphemous judgment against them before the Lord.
But these men blaspheme in matters they do not understand. They are like irrational beasts, creatures of instinct born for capture and destruction, and in the destruction of those beasts they will be destroyed,
receiving the wages of unrighteousness. Counting indulgence in the daytime as pleasure, they are stains and blemishes, openly indulging in their deceptions as they feast with you.
They have eyes full of adultery, insatiable for sin. They entice unstable souls. They are accursed children with hearts trained in greed.
They have abandoned the straight path and gone astray, following the way of Balaam, the son of Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness.
But he received a rebuke for his own transgression; a speechless donkey spoke with a human voice and prevented the prophet's madness.
These men are springs without water, clouds driven by a storm, for whom the thick gloom of darkness has been reserved forever.
For they speak bombastic words of nonsense, and with sensual desires of the flesh they entice people who have truly escaped from others who live in error.
They promise them freedom while they themselves are slaves of corruption. For a man is a slave to whatever masters him.
For if after they have escaped from the defilements of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled in these defilements and overcome, the last state is worse for them than the first.
It would have been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness than, after knowing it, to turn back from the holy commandment that was passed on to them.
What the true proverb says has happened to them: “A dog returns to its own vomit,” and, “A sow, after washing herself, returns to wallowing in the mire.”
Beloved, this is now the second letter that I am writing to you. In both of them I have tried to stir up your sincere mind by way of reminder,
so that you remember the words spoken in the past by the holy prophets and the commandment of our Lord and Savior given through your apostles.
First of all, you must understand that scoffers will come in the last days, walking according to their own lusts.
They will say, “Where is the promise of his coming? For ever since the fathers fell asleep, everything continues as it has since the beginning of creation.”
They deliberately overlook the fact that by the word of God the heavens came into being long ago and the earth emerged through the water and was separated from the water.
And by the water and the word, the world of that time was deluged and destroyed.
Furthermore, by his word the heavens and the earth that now exist have been reserved for fire, being kept until the day of judgment and the destruction of the ungodly.
But do not overlook this one fact, beloved, that with the Lord one day is like a thousand years, and a thousand years are like one day.
The Lord is not slow in keeping his promise, as some understand slowness, but is patient toward us, not wishing that any should perish but that all should come to repentance.
But the day of the Lord will come like a thief in the night. On that day the heavens will pass away with a roar, the elements will be destroyed with intense heat, and the earth and its works will be burned up.
Therefore, since all these things will be destroyed, what sort of people ought you to be? You ought to conduct yourselves in holiness and godliness,
waiting for and hastening the coming of the day of God. On that day the heavens will be set on fire and destroyed, and the elements will melt in the intense heat.
But, according to his promise, we wait for new heavens and a new earth, where righteousness dwells.
Therefore, beloved, as you wait for these things, be diligent to be found at peace, spotless and blameless in his sight.
And count the patience of our Lord as salvation, just as our beloved brother Paul has written to you according to the wisdom given to him.
He speaks about these things in all his letters. Some of the things he says are hard to understand, which ignorant and unstable people twist to their own destruction, just as they do with the other Scriptures.
Therefore, beloved, since you have been forewarned, be on your guard so that you will not be led astray by the error of these lawless men and fall from your own secure position.
But grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him be the glory both now and to the day of eternity. Amen.
We declare to you what was from the beginning, what we have heard, what we have seen with our eyes, what we have looked at and touched with our hands, concerning the word of life.
This life was revealed; we have seen it, and we testify and declare to you the eternal life that was with the Father and that was revealed to us.
What we have seen and heard we declare to you, so that you also may have fellowship with us, and indeed our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ.
We are writing these things to you so that our joy may be full.
This is the message that we have heard from him and proclaim to you, that God is light, and in him there is no darkness at all.
If we say that we have fellowship with him and yet walk in the darkness, we lie and do not live by the truth.
But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin.
If we say that we do not have sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.
My little children, I am writing these things to you so that you will not sin. But if anyone does sin, we have an advocate with the Father—Jesus Christ, the righteous one.
He is the atoning sacrifice for our sins, and not only for ours, but also for the sins of the whole world.
By this we can be sure that we know him: if we keep his commandments.
Whoever says, “I know him” but does not keep his commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in him.
But whoever keeps his word, truly in him the love of God has been perfected. By this we know that we are in him:
Whoever says he abides in him ought to walk just as he walked.
Brothers, I am not writing you a new commandment, but an old commandment, which you have had from the beginning. The old commandment is the message you have heard from the beginning.
Yet I am writing you a new commandment, which is true in him and in you, because the darkness is passing away, and the true light is already shining.
Whoever says he is in the light but hates his brother is still in the darkness.
Whoever loves his brother abides in the light, and there is no cause for stumbling in him.
But whoever hates his brother is in the darkness and walks in the darkness; he does not know where he is going, because the darkness has blinded his eyes.
I am writing to you, little children, because your sins have been forgiven you on account of his name.
I am writing to you, fathers, because you know him who is from the beginning. I am writing to you, young men, because you have overcome the evil one. I am writing to you, children, because you know the Father.
I have written to you, fathers, because you know him who is from the beginning. I have written to you, young men, because you are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and you have overcome the evil one.
Do not love the world or the things in the world. If anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him.
For all that is in the world—the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life—is not from the Father, but from the world.
And the world is passing away along with its lusts, but whoever does the will of God abides forever.
Children, it is the last hour, and just as you have heard that the antichrist is coming, even now many antichrists have come, by which we know that it is the last hour.
They went out from us, but they did not belong to us; for if they had belonged to us, they would have remained with us. But they went out so that it might be revealed that they do not belong to us.
But you have an anointing from the Holy One, and you know all things.
I have not written to you because you do not know the truth, but because you know it, and because no lie is of the truth.
Who is a liar but he who denies that Jesus is the Christ? Anyone who denies the Father and the Son is an antichrist.
No one who denies the Son has the Father.
Therefore let what you have heard from the beginning abide in you. If what you have heard from the beginning abides in you, then you will abide in the Son and in the Father.
And this is what he has promised us—eternal life.
I have written these things to you concerning those who are trying to deceive you.
But the anointing you received from him abides in you, and you have no need for anyone to teach you. But the same anointing teaches you about all things; it is true, not a lie. So, just as it has taught you, you must abide in him.
And now, little children, abide in him, so that when he is revealed we may have confidence and not shrink away from him in shame when he comes back.
If you know that he is righteous, you know that everyone who practices righteousness has been born of him.
See what great love the Father has lavished upon us, that we should be called children of God! The reason the world does not know you is that it did not know him.
Beloved, now we are children of God, and what we will be has not yet been revealed. But we know that when he appears, we will be like him, because we will see him as he is.
Everyone who places this hope in him purifies himself, just as he is pure.
Everyone who practices sin also practices lawlessness; sin is lawlessness.
But you know that he appeared in order to take away our sins, and in him there is no sin.
No one who abides in him continues in sin; no one who continues in sin has either seen him or known him.
Little children, let no one deceive you. Whoever practices righteousness is righteous, just as he is righteous.
Whoever practices sin is of the devil, for the devil has been sinning from the beginning. The reason the Son of God appeared was to destroy the works of the devil.
No one who has been born of God continues in sin, because God's seed abides in him; he cannot continue in sin, because he has been born of God.
By this the children of God and the children of the devil are revealed: Anyone who does not practice righteousness is not of God, nor is anyone who does not love his brother.
For this is the message you have heard from the beginning, that we should love one another.
We should not be like Cain, who was of the evil one and murdered his brother. And why did he murder him? Because his own deeds were evil, but the deeds of his brother were righteous.
Do not be surprised, my brothers, if the world hates you.
We know that we have passed from death to life because we love our brothers. Whoever does not love his brother abides in death.
Anyone who hates his brother is a murderer, and you know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him.
By this we know love, that he laid down his life for us. And we ought to lay down our lives for our brothers.
If anyone has the world's goods and sees his brother in need but closes his heart against him, how does the love of God abide in him?
My little children, let us not love in word or speech, but in deed and truth.
By this we know that we are of the truth and can reassure our hearts before him:
If our hearts condemn us, God is greater than our hearts and knows all things.
Beloved, if our hearts do not condemn us, we have confidence before God
and receive from him whatever we ask, because we keep his commandments and do what is pleasing in his sight.
And this is his commandment, that we believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ and love one another, just as he commanded.
Whoever keeps his commandments abides in God, and God abides in him. And we know that he abides in us because of the Spirit he has given us.
Beloved, do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits to see if they are from God, because many false prophets have gone out into the world.
By this the Spirit of God is known: Every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is from God,
but every spirit that does not confess that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is not from God. This is the spirit of the antichrist, which you have heard is coming and is now in the world already.
You are from God, little children, and you have overcome them, because greater is he who is in you than he who is in the world.
They are from the world; therefore what they say is from the world, and the world listens to them.
We are from God. Whoever knows God listens to us; whoever is not from God does not listen to us. By this we know the Spirit of truth and the spirit of error.
Beloved, let us love one another, because love is from God, and everyone who loves has been born of God and knows God.
Whoever does not love does not know God, because God is love.
In this the love of God was revealed among us, that God sent his one and only Son into the world so that we might live through him.
In this is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us and sent his Son to be the atoning sacrifice for our sins.
Beloved, if God loved us in this way, we also ought to love one another.
No one has ever seen God. If we love one another, God abides in us, and his love is perfected in us.
We know that we abide in him and he in us because he has given us his Spirit.
And we have seen and we testify that the Father has sent the Son to be the Savior of the world.
If anyone confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, God abides in him, and he in God.
And we have come to know and to trust in the love that God has for us. God is love, and whoever abides in love abides in God, and God abides in him.
In this way, love is perfected among us, so that we may have confidence on the day of judgment, because as he is, so also are we in this world.
There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear, because fear has to do with punishment. Whoever fears has not been perfected in love.
We love him because he first loved us.
Whoever says, “I love God,” and yet hates his brother is a liar. For if anyone does not love his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen?
And this is the commandment we have from him: Whoever loves God must also love his brother.
Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ has been born of God, and everyone who loves him who has begotten also loves the one begotten of him.
By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God and keep his commandments.
For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments. And his commandments are not burdensome.
For everyone who has been born of God overcomes the world. This is the victory that has overcome the world—our faith.
Who is it that overcomes the world but he who believes that Jesus is the Son of God?
This is he who came by water and blood—Jesus Christ. He did not come by water only, but by water and blood. It is the Spirit who testifies, because the Spirit is the truth.
For there are three that testify:
the Spirit, the water, and the blood; and these three are in agreement.
If we receive the testimony of men, we should know that the testimony of God is greater, because it is the testimony that God has given about his Son.
Whoever believes in the Son of God has the testimony in himself. Whoever does not believe God has made him a liar, because he has not believed the testimony that God has given about his Son.
And this is the testimony, that God has given us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.
Whoever has the Son has life; whoever does not have the Son of God does not have life.
I have written these things to you who believe in the name of the Son of God so that you may know that you have eternal life, and so that you may continue believing in the name of the Son of God.
This is the confidence that we have toward him, that if we ask anything according to his will, he hears us.
And if we know that he hears us in whatever we ask, we know that we have what we have asked of him.
If anyone sees his brother committing a sin that does not lead to death, he should pray for him, and God will give him life. I refer to those who commit sins that do not lead to death. There is sin that leads to death; I do not say that he should pray about that.
All unrighteousness is sin, but there is sin that does not lead to death.
We know that no one who has been born of God continues in sin, but he who is born of God guards himself, and the evil one does not touch him.
We know that we are from God, and that the whole world lies in the power of the evil one.
And we know that the Son of God has come and given us understanding so that we may know him who is true. And we are in him who is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life.
Little children, guard yourselves from idols. Amen.
The elder to the chosen lady and her children, whom I love in truth—and not only I, but also all who know the truth—
because of the truth that abides in us and will be with us forever:
Grace, mercy, and peace will be with us from God the Father and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and love.
I was overjoyed to find some of yoʋr children walking in the truth, just as we have been commanded by the Father.
And now I ask yoʋ, dear lady—not as writing yoʋ a new commandment, but one we have had from the beginning—that we love one another.
Now this is love, that we walk according to his commandments. This is the commandment, just as you have heard it from the beginning, that you should walk in it.
For many deceivers have come into the world, who do not confess that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh. This is the deceiver and the antichrist.
Watch yourselves, so that we do not lose what we have worked for, but may receive a full reward.
Everyone who transgresses and does not abide in the teaching of Christ does not have God. Whoever abides in the teaching of Christ has both the Father and the Son.
If anyone comes to you and does not bring this teaching, do not receive him into your house, and do not greet him;
for whoever greets him takes part in his evil works.
Although I have much to write to you, I would rather not use paper and ink. Instead, I hope to come to you and speak face to face, so that our joy may be full.
The children of yoʋr chosen sister greet yoʋ. Amen.
The elder to the beloved Gaius, whom I love in the truth.
Beloved, I pray that in all respects yoʋ may prosper and be in good health, even as yoʋr soul prospers.
For I was overjoyed when the brothers came and testified about yoʋr faithfulness to the truth and how yoʋ walk in the truth.
I have no greater joy than to hear that my children are walking in the truth.
Beloved, yoʋ are acting faithfully in whatever yoʋ do for the brothers and for those who are strangers to you.
They have testified of yoʋr love before the church, and yoʋ will do well to send them on their way in a manner worthy of God.
For they went out for the sake of the Name, receiving nothing from the Gentiles.
Therefore we ought to receive men like them, so that we may be fellow workers for the truth.
I wrote to the church, but Diotrephes, who loves to put himself first, does not acknowledge us.
So if I come, I will call attention to what he is doing and the evil accusations of nonsense that he is making against us. And he is not satisfied with that! He not only refuses to receive the brothers, but also stops those who want to do so and throws them out of the church.
Beloved, do not imitate what is evil, but what is good. Whoever does good is of God; whoever does evil has not seen God.
Demetrius is well spoken of by everyone—and even by the truth itself. We also speak well of him, and you know that our testimony is true.
I have much to write, but I do not want to write to yoʋ with pen and ink.
I hope to see yoʋ soon, and we will speak face to face. Peace be with yoʋ. The friends greet yoʋ. Greet the friends by name.

Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ and a brother of James, to those who are called and sanctified by God the Father, and kept for Jesus Christ:
Mercy, peace, and love be multiplied to you.
Beloved, although I was quite eager to write to you about our common salvation, I found it necessary to write to you and urge you to contend for the faith that was once for all delivered to the saints.
For certain men whose condemnation was written about long ago have crept in unnoticed. They are ungodly men who pervert the grace of our God, turning it into a license for sensuality. By doing so, they deny God, who is our only Master, and also the Lord Jesus Christ.
Now I want to remind you, although you already know this, that after the Lord saved a people out of the land of Egypt, he subsequently destroyed those who did not believe.
And the angels who did not keep within their proper domain, but left their own dwelling, he has kept under darkness in everlasting chains for the judgment of the great day.
Likewise, Sodom and Gomorrah and the cities around them, who indulged in fornication and went after strange flesh in a manner similar to those angels, serve as an example by undergoing the punishment of eternal fire.
In the same way these ungodly men, relying on their dreams, defile the flesh, reject authority, and revile glorious beings.
But when Michael the archangel was contending with the devil and disputing about the body of Moses, he did not dare to bring a reviling judgment against him, but said, “May the Lord rebuke yoʋ!”
Yet these men slander whatever they do not understand, and they are corrupted by what they, like irrational beasts, instinctively comprehend.
Woe to them! For they went in the way of Cain, they rushed for reward to the error of Balaam, and they perished in the rebellion of Korah.
These men are hidden reefs at your love feasts, feeding themselves as they feast among you without fear. They are clouds without water, carried along by winds; fruitless trees in late autumn, twice dead, pulled up by the roots.
They are wild waves of the sea, foaming out their own shameful deeds; wayward stars, for whom the thick gloom of darkness has been reserved forever.
Enoch, in the seventh generation from Adam, prophesied about these men, saying, “Behold, the Lord is coming with thousands upon thousands of his holy ones
to execute judgment against all and to convict all the ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds that they have done in an ungodly way, and to convict ungodly sinners of all the harsh words they have spoken against him.”
These men are grumblers and complainers, walking according to their own lusts. They speak bombastic words with their mouths, admiring people for their own advantage.
But you, beloved, must remember what the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ foretold,
how they said to you, “In the end times there will be scoffers who walk according to their own ungodly lusts.”
These people cause divisions; they are worldly and do not have the Spirit.
But you, beloved, by building yourselves up in your most holy faith and praying in the Holy Spirit,
must keep yourselves in the love of God as you wait for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ that leads to eternal life.
Have mercy on some, using discernment;
and others save with fear by snatching them out of the fire, hating even the garment that is stained by the flesh.
Now to him who is able to keep them from falling and to make them stand unblemished in the presence of his glory with great joy,
to the only wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, power and authority, both now and forevermore. Amen.
The revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave him to show his servants what must soon take place. He made it known by sending his angel to his servant John,
who testified to the word of God and the testimony of Jesus Christ, even to all that he saw.
Blessed is he who reads and those who hear the words of this prophecy and keep what is written in it, for the time is near.
John to the seven churches in Asia: Grace to you and peace from God, who is and who was and who is to come, and from the seven Spirits who are before his throne,
and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the firstborn from the dead, and the ruler of the kings of the earth. To him who loves us and washed us from our sins with his blood
and made us to be a kingdom, priests to his God and Father—to him be the glory and the power forever and ever. Amen.
Behold, he is coming with the clouds, and every eye will see him, even those who pierced him, and all the tribes of the earth will wail on account of him. So shall it be! Amen.
“I am the Alpha and the Omega,” says the Lord God, “who is and who was and who is to come, the Almighty.”
I, John, your brother and partner in the tribulation, kingdom, and endurance that are in Christ Jesus, was on the island called Patmos because of the word of God and the testimony of Jesus Christ.
I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and I heard behind me a loud voice like that of a trumpet,
saying, “Write what yoʋ see in a book and send it to the seven churches: to Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea.”
Then I turned in that direction to see the voice that was speaking to me. And when I turned, I saw seven golden lampstands,
and in the midst of the seven lampstands I saw one like a son of man, clothed with a robe reaching down to his feet and with a golden sash wrapped around his chest.
His head and his hair were white like wool, as white as snow. His eyes were like a flame of fire,
his feet were like burnished bronze refined in a furnace, and his voice was like the roar of many waters.
In his right hand he held seven stars, and out of his mouth came a sharp two-edged sword. His face was like the sun shining in its strength.
When I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead. But he placed his right hand on me and said, “Do not be afraid. I am the first and the last,
the living one. I was dead, but behold, I am alive forevermore. Amen. I have the keys of Death and Hades.
Therefore write what yoʋ have seen, what is now and what will take place after this.
This is the mystery of the seven stars that yoʋ saw in my right hand and the seven golden lampstands: The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches, and the seven lampstands are the seven churches.
“To the angel of the church in Ephesus write: ‘These are the words of him who holds the seven stars in his right hand and who walks among the seven golden lampstands:
I know yoʋr works, yoʋr labor, and yoʋr endurance. I know that yoʋ cannot tolerate those who are evil, and that yoʋ have tested those who declare themselves to be apostles but are not, and have found them to be false.
Yoʋ have persevered and endured hardships for the sake of my name, and have not grown weary.
But I have this against yoʋ: Yoʋ have left yoʋr first love.
Therefore, remember where yoʋ have fallen from; repent and do the works yoʋ did at first. If yoʋ do not repent, I will come to yoʋ quickly and remove yoʋr lampstand from its place.
Yet yoʋ do have this: Yoʋ hate the works of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches. To him who overcomes I will give the right to eat of the tree of life, which is in the paradise of my God.’
“To the angel of the church in Smyrna write: ‘These are the words of the first and the last, who was dead and came to life:
I know yoʋr works, yoʋr tribulation, and yoʋr poverty—yet yoʋ are rich! I know the slander of those who declare themselves to be Jews and are not, but are a synagogue of Satan.
Do not be afraid of what yoʋ are about to suffer. Behold, the devil is about to throw some of you into prison so that you may be tested, and you will have tribulation for ten days. Be faithful, even to the point of death, and I will give yoʋ the crown of life.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches. He who overcomes will certainly not be harmed by the second death.’
“To the angel of the church in Pergamum write: ‘These are the words of him who has the sharp two-edged sword:
I know yoʋr works and where yoʋ dwell, where Satan's throne is. Yet yoʋ hold fast to my name, and yoʋ did not deny my faith in the days when Antipas was my faithful witness, who was killed among you, where Satan dwells.
But I have a few things against yoʋ: Yoʋ have some there who hold to the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to put a stumbling block before the sons of Israel and to eat food sacrificed to idols and commit fornication.
In the same way, yoʋ also have some who hold to the teaching of the Nicolaitans.
Therefore repent. Otherwise, I will come to yoʋ quickly and make war against them with the sword of my mouth.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches. To him who overcomes I will give some of the hidden manna. I will also give him a white stone, and on the stone will be written a new name that no one knows except the one who receives it.’
“To the angel of the church in Thyatira write: ‘These are the words of the Son of God, whose eyes are like a flame of fire and whose feet are like burnished bronze:
I know yoʋr works, yoʋr love and faith, yoʋr service and endurance, and that yoʋr latter works are greater than the ones yoʋ did at first.
But I have this against yoʋ: Yoʋ tolerate yoʋr wife Jezebel, who calls herself a prophetess while teaching and seducing my servants to commit fornication and eat food sacrificed to idols.
I gave her time to repent, but she refuses to repent of her fornication.
Behold, I will throw her onto a sickbed, and those who commit adultery with her I will throw into great tribulation, unless they repent from her works.
I will strike her children dead. Then all the churches will know that I am he who searches minds and hearts, and I will give to each of you according to your works.
But to the rest of you who are in Thyatira, who do not hold to this teaching and have not learned what some call the deep things of Satan—to you I say: I place no further burden upon you.
Only hold fast to what you have until I come.
To him who overcomes and keeps my works to the end, I will give authority over the nations,
and he will rule them with a rod of iron; like earthen vessels they will be shattered, just as I have received authority from my Father.
I will also give him the morning star.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches.’
“To the angel of the church in Sardis write: ‘These are the words of him who has the seven spirits of God and the seven stars: I know yoʋr works; yoʋ have made a name for yoʋrself and yoʋ are alive, but actually yoʋ are dead.
Be watchful and strengthen what remains, which yoʋ were about to throw away, for I have not found yoʋr works to be complete in the sight of my God.
So remember what yoʋ have received and heard; obey it and repent. If yoʋ do not wake up, I will come upon yoʋ like a thief, and yoʋ will certainly not know at what hour I will come upon yoʋ.
But yoʋ have a few individuals in Sardis who have not defiled their garments. They will walk with me in white, for they are worthy.
He who overcomes will be clothed in white garments. I will certainly not blot out his name from the book of life, but will confess his name before my Father and before his angels.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches.’
“To the angel of the church in Philadelphia write: ‘These are the words of him who is holy and true, who has the key of David and opens doors that no one else can open or shut:
I know yoʋr works. Behold, I have set before yoʋ an open door that no one can shut. I know that yoʋ have little strength, but yoʋ have kept my word and have not denied my name.
Those of the synagogue of Satan are liars. They declare themselves to be Jews but are not. Behold, I will make them come and bow down at yoʋr feet, and they will know that I love yoʋ.
Because yoʋ have kept my command to persevere, I will keep yoʋ from the hour of trial that is about to come upon the whole world to test those who dwell on the earth.
I am coming quickly. Hold fast to what yoʋ have so that no one will take yoʋr crown.
The one who overcomes I will make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he will no longer go out at all. I will write on him the name of my God, the name of the city of my God (the new Jerusalem that comes down out of heaven from my God), and the new name he is to receive.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches.’
“To the angel of the church in Laodicea write: ‘These are the words of the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the origin of God's creation:
I know yoʋr works; yoʋ are neither cold nor hot. If only yoʋ were cold or hot!
So, because yoʋ are lukewarm, and not hot or cold, I am about to spit yoʋ out of my mouth.
For yoʋ say, “I am rich; I have become wealthy and need nothing,” but yoʋ do not realize that yoʋ are wretched, pitiful, poor, blind, and naked.
I counsel yoʋ to buy from me gold refined by fire so that yoʋ may be rich, and white garments so that yoʋ may clothe yoʋrself and the shame of yoʋr nakedness may not be revealed, and eye salve to anoint yoʋr eyes so that yoʋ may see.
Those whom I love, I reprove and discipline. Therefore be zealous and repent.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If anyone hears my voice and opens the door, I will come in to him and dine with him, and he with me.
To him who overcomes I will give the right to sit with me on my throne, just as I overcame and sat down with my Father on his throne.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit is saying to the churches.’ ”
After this I looked, and behold, a door was standing open in heaven! And the voice I had previously heard speaking to me like a trumpet said, “Come up here, and I will show yoʋ what must take place after this.”
Immediately I was in the Spirit, and behold, there was a throne in heaven, with one sitting on the throne,
like jasper and carnelian in appearance. And around the throne was a rainbow that looked like an emerald.
Surrounding the throne were twenty-four other thrones, and sitting on the thrones were the twenty-four elders. They were clothed in white garments and had golden crowns on their heads.
From the throne came flashes of lightning, rumblings, and peals of thunder, and there were seven flaming torches burning before the throne, which are the seven spirits of God.
Also before the throne was something like a sea of glass that looked like crystal. Around the throne on each side were four living creatures, full of eyes in front and in back.
The first living creature was like a lion, the second living creature was like a calf, the third living creature had the face of a man, and the fourth living creature was like an eagle in flight.
Each of the four living creatures had six wings and was covered with eyes all around and within. Day and night they never stop saying, “Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God Almighty, who was and who is and who is to come.”
And whenever the living creatures give glory, honor, and thanks to him who sits on the throne, who lives forever and ever,
the twenty-four elders fall down before him who sits on the throne and worship him who lives forever and ever. They cast their crowns before the throne and say,
“Yoʋ are worthy, our Lord and God, the Holy One, to receive glory, honor, and power; for yoʋ created all things, and by yoʋr will they came into existence and were created.”
Then I saw in the right hand of him who sits on the throne a scroll written on the inside and outside, sealed with seven seals.
And I saw a mighty angel proclaiming with a loud voice, “Who is worthy to open the scroll and break its seals?”
But no one in heaven above or on earth or under the earth could open the scroll or look into it.
So I began to weep loudly because no one was found who was worthy to open the scroll or look into it.
Then one of the elders said to me, “Do not weep; behold, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has conquered; he is the one who can open the scroll and its seven seals.”
Then I saw a Lamb that looked like it had been slain; he was standing among the elders in the midst of the throne and the four living creatures. He had seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God sent out into all the earth.
He went and took the scroll out of the right hand of him who was sitting on the throne.
When he took the scroll, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb. Each of them had a harp and golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints.
And they sang a new song: “Worthy are yoʋ to take the scroll and open its seals, for yoʋ were slain, and by yoʋr blood yoʋ redeemed us for God out of every tribe, tongue, people, and nation.
Yoʋ have made them kings and priests to our God, and they will reign on the earth.”
Then I looked, and I heard something like the voice of many angels coming from around the throne, the living creatures, and the elders. Their number was myriads of myriads and thousands of thousands,
and they were saying with a loud voice, “Worthy is the Lamb who was slain to receive power and riches, wisdom and strength, honor, glory, and blessing!”
Then I heard every creature in heaven, on earth, under the earth, in the sea, and all that is in them, saying, “To him who sits on the throne and to the Lamb, be blessing and honor, glory and power, forever and ever! Amen.”
And I heard the four living creatures saying, “Amen.” And the elders fell down and worshiped.
Then I saw the Lamb open one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures say with a voice like thunder, “Come and see.”
And behold, there was a white horse! Its rider had a bow, and he was given a crown and went out conquering and to conquer.
When the Lamb opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature say, “Come.”
Then another horse came out, a fiery red one. Its rider was permitted to take peace from the earth, so that people would slay one another, and he was given a great sword.
When the Lamb opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature say, “Come and see.” And behold, there was a black horse! Its rider had a balance scale in his hand.
Then I heard a voice from among the four living creatures saying, “A measure of wheat for a denarius, and three measures of barley for a denarius, and do not damage the oil and wine.”
When the Lamb opened the fourth seal, I heard the fourth living creature say, “Come and see.”
And behold, there was a pale green horse! The name of its rider was Death, and Hades followed him. He was given authority over a fourth of the earth to kill by the sword, by famine and pestilence, and by the wild beasts of the earth.
When the Lamb opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of those who had been slain because of the word of God and because of the testimony of the Lamb which they had upheld.
They cried out with a loud voice, “How long, O Master, Holy and True, will yoʋ not judge and avenge our blood on those who dwell on the earth?”
They were each given a white robe and told to rest a while longer, until their fellow servants and their brothers, who were about to be killed just as they had been, should complete their course.
Then I watched as the Lamb opened the sixth seal, and there was a great earthquake. The sun became as black as sackcloth made of goat hair, the entire moon became like blood,
and the stars of the sky fell to the earth like a fig tree dropping its unripe figs when it is shaken by a strong wind.
The sky was split apart, being rolled up like a scroll, and every mountain and island was removed from its place.
Then the kings of the earth, the magnates, the commanders, the rich, the mighty, and every slave and free man hid themselves in the caves and among the rocks of the mountains.
And they said to the mountains and rocks, “Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him who sits on the throne and from the wrath of the Lamb,
for the great day of his wrath has come, and who can withstand it?”
After this I saw four angels standing at the four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth so that no wind could blow on the earth, on the sea, or on any tree.
Then I saw another angel ascending from the rising of the sun, with the seal of the living God. He cried out with a loud voice to the four angels who had been given power to harm the earth and the sea:
“Do not harm the earth, the sea, or the trees until we have put a seal on the foreheads of the servants of our God.”
Then I heard the number of those who were sealed: one hundred and forty-four thousand, sealed from every tribe of the sons of Israel.
From the tribe of Judah twelve thousand were sealed, from the tribe of Reuben twelve thousand, from the tribe of Gad twelve thousand,
from the tribe of Asher twelve thousand, from the tribe of Naphtali twelve thousand, from the tribe of Manasseh twelve thousand,
from the tribe of Simeon twelve thousand, from the tribe of Levi twelve thousand, from the tribe of Issachar twelve thousand,
from the tribe of Zebulun twelve thousand, from the tribe of Joseph twelve thousand, and from the tribe of Benjamin twelve thousand were sealed.
After this I looked, and behold, there was a great multitude, which no one could number, from every nation, tribe, people, and tongue, standing before the throne and before the Lamb. They were clothed in white robes, with palm branches in their hands.
They were crying out with a loud voice, “Salvation belongs to our God, who sits on the throne, and to the Lamb.”
And all the angels stood around the throne and around the elders and the four living creatures, and they fell on their faces before the throne and worshiped God,
saying, “Amen! Blessing, glory, and wisdom, thanksgiving and honor, power and strength, be to our God forever and ever! Amen.”
In response one of the elders said to me, “Who are these people clothed in white robes, and where did they come from?”
I said to him, “Sir, yoʋ know.” And he said to me, “These are the ones coming out of the great tribulation. They have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
Therefore they are before the throne of God, and they serve him day and night in his temple, and he who sits on the throne will spread his tabernacle over them.
They will hunger and thirst no more; the sun will certainly not beat down upon them, nor will any scorching heat,
for the Lamb in the midst of the throne shepherds them; he leads them to springs of living water, and God will wipe away every tear from their eyes.”
When the Lamb opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for about half an hour.
And I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them.
Then another angel with a golden censer came and stood at the altar. He was given a large amount of incense to offer with the prayers of all the saints on the golden altar before the throne.
And the smoke of the incense, with the prayers of the saints, ascended up to God from the hand of the angel.
Then the angel took the censer, filled it with fire from the altar, and threw it to the earth, and there were peals of thunder, rumblings, flashes of lightning, and an earthquake.
Then the seven angels who had the seven trumpets prepared to sound them.
The first angel sounded his trumpet, and hail and fire, mixed with blood, were hurled down to the earth. A third of the earth was burned up, a third of the trees were burned up, and all the green grass was burned up.
The second angel sounded his trumpet, and something like a great burning mountain was thrown into the sea. A third of the sea became blood,
a third of the living creatures in the sea died, and a third of the ships were destroyed.
The third angel sounded his trumpet, and a great star fell from heaven, burning like a torch. It fell upon a third of the rivers and upon the springs of water.
The name of the star is Wormwood, and a third of the waters became bitter like wormwood, and many people died from the water, because it had been made bitter.
The fourth angel sounded his trumpet, and a third of the sun was struck, and a third of the moon and a third of the stars, so that a third of them were darkened. A third of the day was without light, and also a third of the night.
Then I looked, and I heard an eagle saying with a loud voice as it flew directly overhead, “Woe, woe, woe to those who dwell on the earth, because of the remaining blasts of the trumpet from the three angels who are about to sound!”
The fifth angel sounded his trumpet, and I saw a star that had fallen from heaven to earth, and the star was given the key to the pit of the abyss.
He opened the pit of the abyss, and from the pit rose smoke like the smoke of a burning furnace. The sun and the air were darkened by the smoke from the pit.
Then out of the smoke locusts descended upon the earth, and they were given power like that of the scorpions of the earth.
They were told not to harm the grass of the earth or any green thing or any tree, but only those who do not have the seal of God on their foreheads.
They were permitted to torment them for five months, but not to kill them, and their torment was like the torment of a scorpion when it stings someone.
In those days people will seek death but will certainly not find it. They will long to die, but death will flee from them.
The locusts looked like horses prepared for battle, and on their heads they wore something like golden crowns; their faces were like human faces.
They had hair like the hair of women, and their teeth were like the teeth of lions.
They had breastplates like breastplates of iron, and the sound of their wings was like the sound of many horses and chariots rushing into battle.
They have tails and stingers like scorpions, and in their tails they have the power to harm people for five months.
They have as king over them the angel of the abyss. His name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek his name is Apollyon.
The first woe has passed. Behold, two woes are still to come after this.
Then the sixth angel sounded his trumpet, and I heard a single voice from the four horns of the golden altar before God
saying to the sixth angel who had the trumpet, “Release the four angels who are bound at the great river Euphrates.”
So the four angels who were prepared for this hour, day, month, and year were released to kill a third of mankind.
The number of the troops on horse was ten thousand times ten thousand; I heard their number.
Now this is what the horses and their riders looked like in my vision: The riders had breastplates that were fiery red, hyacinth blue, and sulfur yellow. The heads of the horses were like the heads of lions, and out of their mouths came fire, smoke, and sulfur.
By these three plagues a third of mankind was killed—by the fire, the smoke, and the sulfur that came out of the horses' mouths.
For the power of the horses is in their mouths and in their tails, because their tails have heads like serpents, and with them they inflict harm.
The rest of mankind, who were not killed by these plagues, did not repent from the works of their hands; they did not stop worshiping demons and idols of gold, silver, bronze, stone, and wood, which cannot see, hear, or walk.
Nor did they repent of their murders, sorceries, fornication, or thefts.
Then I saw a mighty angel coming down from heaven, wrapped in a cloud, with a rainbow over his head; his face was like the sun, and his legs were like pillars of fire.
In his hand he held an open scroll. He placed his right foot on the sea and his left foot on the land,
and cried out with a loud voice, like a lion roaring. When he cried out, the seven thunders sounded their voices.
And when the seven thunders spoke, I was about to write. But I heard a voice from heaven saying, “Seal up what the seven thunders have said, and do not write it down.”
Then the angel I had seen standing on the sea and on the land raised his right hand to heaven
and swore by him who lives forever and ever, who created heaven and everything in it, the earth and everything in it, and the sea and everything in it, and said that there would no longer be delay,
but that in the days when the seventh angel is about to sound his trumpet, the mystery of God would be completed, according to the good news he announced to his servants the prophets.
Then the voice I had heard from heaven spoke to me again, saying, “Go take the little scroll that is open in the hand of the angel who is standing on the sea and on the land.”
So I went over to the angel and asked him to give me the little scroll. And he said to me, “Take the scroll and eat it. It will make yoʋr stomach bitter, but in yoʋr mouth it will be as sweet as honey.”
So I took the scroll from the angel's hand and ate it. In my mouth it was as sweet as honey, but when I had eaten it, my stomach turned bitter.
Then I was told, “Yoʋ must prophesy again about many peoples, nations, tongues, and kings.”
Then I was given a measuring rod like a staff, and I was told, “Rise and measure the temple of God and the altar, and count those who worship there.
But exclude the courtyard outside the temple; do not measure it, because it has been given to the Gentiles, and they will trample the holy city for forty-two months.
And I will give authority to my two witnesses, and they will prophesy for one thousand two hundred sixty days, clothed in sackcloth.”
These are the two olive trees and the two lampstands that stand before the Lord of the earth.
If anyone wants to harm them, fire comes out of their mouth and devours their enemies. If anyone wants to harm them, he must be killed in this way.
These two men have the power to shut the sky, so that no rain will fall during the days of their prophesying. They also have power over the waters to turn them into blood and to strike the earth with every plague as often as they want.
When they have finished their testimony, the beast that comes up out of the abyss will wage war against them, and overpower and kill them.
Their dead bodies will lie in the street of the great city, which in a spiritual sense is called Sodom and Egypt, where their Lord was crucified.
For three and a half days some from among the peoples, tribes, tongues, and nations will look at their dead bodies and refuse to let them be placed in a tomb.
And those who dwell on the earth will rejoice over them and celebrate and give each other gifts, because these two prophets had tormented those who dwell on the earth.
But after the three and a half days, the breath of life from God entered them, and they stood on their feet, and great fear fell upon those who were watching them.
Then I heard a loud voice from heaven saying to them, “Come up here.” And they went up to heaven in a cloud while their enemies watched them.
On that day there was a great earthquake, and a tenth of the city fell. Seven thousand people were killed in the earthquake, and the rest were terrified and gave glory to the God of heaven.
The second woe has passed. Behold, the third woe is coming quickly.
Then the seventh angel sounded his trumpet, and there were loud voices in heaven, saying, “The kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and he will reign forever and ever.”
And the twenty-four elders, who sit on their thrones before the throne of God, fell on their faces and worshiped God,
saying, “We give thanks to yoʋ, O Lord God, the Almighty, who is and who was, because yoʋ have taken yoʋr great power and begun to reign.
The nations were angry, but yoʋr wrath has come, and the time has come for judging the dead, and for rewarding yoʋr servants the prophets, along with the saints and those who fear yoʋr name, both small and great, and for destroying those who destroy the earth.”
Then the temple of God in heaven was opened, and the ark of the covenant of the Lord was seen in his temple. And there were flashes of lightning, rumblings, peals of thunder, and great hail.
Then a great sign appeared in heaven: a woman clothed with the sun, with the moon under her feet and a crown of twelve stars on her head.
She was with child and cried out in the pain and agony of giving birth.
Then another sign appeared in heaven: behold, a great fiery red dragon with seven heads and ten horns, and seven diadems on his heads.
His tail swept down a third of the stars of heaven and hurled them to the earth. Then the dragon stood in front of the woman who was about to give birth, so that when she gave birth he might devour her child.
She gave birth to a son, a male child, who is to rule all the nations with a rod of iron, but her child was caught up to God and to his throne.
And the woman fled into the wilderness, where God had a place prepared for her to be nourished for one thousand two hundred sixty days.
Then war broke out in heaven; Michael and his angels fought against the dragon. And the dragon fought back, along with his angels.
But he did not prevail, and there was no longer any place found for him in heaven.
The great dragon was thrown down, the old serpent, who is called the devil and Satan, the deceiver of the whole world. He was thrown down to the earth, and his angels were thrown down with him.
Then I heard a loud voice in heaven saying, “The salvation, power, and kingdom of our God, and the authority of his Christ, have now come. For the accuser of our brothers has been thrown down, he who accuses them day and night before our God.
They overcame him by the blood of the Lamb and by the word of their testimony; they did not love their lives so as to shy away from death.
Therefore rejoice, O heavens and you who dwell in them! But woe to the earth and the sea! For the devil has come down to you with great wrath, because he knows that his time is short.”
When the dragon saw that he had been thrown down to the earth, he pursued the woman who had given birth to the male child.
But the woman was given two wings like those of a great eagle so that she could fly away from the presence of the serpent to her place in the wilderness, to be nourished there for a time, times, and half a time.
Then out of his mouth the serpent spewed water like a river after the woman, to sweep her away with a flood.
But the earth helped the woman by opening its mouth and swallowing the river that the dragon had spewed out of his mouth.
So the dragon was angry with the woman and went off to wage war against the rest of her offspring, those who keep the commandments of God and hold to the testimony of Jesus.

Then I stood on the sand of the sea. And I saw a beast coming up out of the sea that had ten horns and seven heads, with ten diadems on his horns and blasphemous names on his heads.
The beast I saw was like a leopard; his feet were like those of a bear, and his mouth was like the mouth of a lion. The dragon gave the beast his power, his throne, and great authority.
One of the beast's heads appeared to be mortally wounded. But his mortal wound had been healed, and the whole world was amazed and followed the beast.
They worshiped the dragon that had given his authority to the beast, and they also worshiped the beast, saying, “Who is like the beast, and who can wage war against him?”
The beast was given a mouth to utter great boasts and blasphemy, and he was given authority to wage war for forty-two months.
And he opened his mouth to utter blasphemy against God and to slander his name and his tabernacle, that is, those who dwell in heaven.
He was permitted to wage war against the saints and conquer them, and he was given authority over every tribe, people, tongue, and nation.
All who dwell on the earth will worship him, everyone whose name has not been written from the foundation of the world in the book of life of the Lamb who was slain.
If anyone has an ear, let him hear:
“If anyone has captivity as his lot, away he goes; if anyone kills with the sword, with the sword he must be killed.” This calls for the endurance and the faith of the saints.
Then I saw another beast coming up out of the earth. He had two horns like a lamb, but he spoke like a dragon.
He exercised all the authority of the first beast in his presence, and made the earth and those who dwell in it worship the first beast, whose mortal wound had been healed.
He performed great signs, even making fire come down from heaven to earth in the presence of the people.
By the signs he was permitted to do in the presence of the first beast, he deceived my own people who dwell on the earth, telling those who dwell on the earth to make an image of the first beast, who had a wound from the sword but still lived.
The second beast was permitted to give breath to the image of the first beast, so that the image could speak and cause whoever refused to worship the image to be killed.
The second beast required everyone, both small and great, both rich and poor, both free and slave, to receive a mark on their right hand or on their forehead,
so that no one could buy or sell unless he had the mark, that is, the name of the beast or the number of his name.
This calls for wisdom: Let anyone who has understanding calculate the number of the beast, for it is the number of a man; his number is six hundred sixty-six.
Then I looked, and behold, the Lamb was standing on Mount Zion, and with him was a multitude numbering one hundred forty-four thousand, who had his name and the name of his Father written on their foreheads.
And I heard a voice from heaven like the roar of many waters and like the sound of great thunder. The voice I heard was like the sound of harpists playing their harps.
They were singing a new song before the throne and before the four living creatures and the elders. No one could learn the song except the one hundred forty-four thousand who had been redeemed from the earth.
These are the ones who have not defiled themselves with women, for they are virgins. These are the ones who follow the Lamb wherever he goes. They have been redeemed by Jesus from among men as firstfruits to God and the Lamb.
No lie was found in their mouths, for they are blameless.
Then I saw an angel flying directly overhead, with an eternal gospel to preach to those who dwell on the earth, to every nation, tribe, tongue, and people.
He said with a loud voice, “Fear the Lord and give him glory, because the hour of his judgment has come. Worship him who made heaven and earth, the sea and the springs of water.”
A second angel followed, saying, “Fallen is Babylon the great! She has made all the nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication.”
A third angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, “If anyone worships the beast and his image, and receives a mark on his forehead or his hand,
he too will drink of the wine of the wrath of God that has been mixed undiluted in the cup of his anger. He will be tormented with fire and sulfur in the presence of the holy angels and in the presence of the Lamb.
And the smoke of their torment goes up forever and ever. There is no rest day or night for those who worship the beast and his image or for anyone who receives the mark of his name.”
This calls for the endurance of the saints, those who keep the commandments of God and hold fast to their faith in Jesus.
Then I heard a voice from heaven saying, “Write: ‘Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from now on.’ ” “Yes,” says the Spirit, “that they may rest from their labors, and their works will follow them.”
Then I looked, and behold, there was a white cloud, and sitting on the cloud was one like a son of man, with a golden crown on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand.
And another angel came out of the temple, crying out with a loud voice to him who was sitting on the cloud, “Take yoʋr sickle and reap, because the hour to reap has come, for the harvest of the earth is ripe.”
So he who was sitting on the cloud swung his sickle over the earth, and the earth was reaped.
Then another angel came out of the temple in heaven; he too had a sharp sickle.
And another angel, who had authority over the fire, came out from the altar and called out with a loud cry to the angel who had the sharp sickle, “Take yoʋr sharp sickle and gather the clusters from the vintage of the earth, for the grapes of the earth are ripe.”
So the angel swung his sickle across the earth, gathered the vintage of the earth, and threw it into the great winepress of the wrath of God.
Then the winepress was trodden outside the city, and blood came out of the winepress, as high as a horse's bridle, for one thousand six hundred stadia.
Then I saw another great and marvelous sign in heaven: seven angels with the seven final plagues, because with them the wrath of God is completed.
I also saw something like a sea of glass mixed with fire, and those who had overcome the beast, his image, and the number of his name were standing by the sea of glass, holding the harps of God.
They sang the song of Moses, the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb: “Great and marvelous are yoʋr works, O Lord God, the Almighty! Righteous and true are yoʋr ways, O King of the nations!
Who could not fear yoʋ, O Lord, and glorify yoʋr name? For yoʋ alone are holy. All will come and worship before yoʋ, for yoʋr righteous acts have been revealed.”
After this I looked, and the sanctuary of the tent of witness in heaven was opened,
and out came the seven angels with the seven plagues. They were clothed in pure bright linen, with golden sashes wrapped around their chests.
Then one of the four living creatures gave the seven angels seven golden bowls full of the wrath of God, who lives forever and ever.
And the temple was filled with the smoke from the glory of God and from his power, and no one could enter the temple until the seven plagues of the seven angels were completed.
Then I heard a loud voice saying to the seven angels, “Go pour out on the earth the seven bowls of the wrath of God.”
So the first went and poured out his bowl on the earth. Then harmful and painful sores came upon the people who had the mark of the beast and who worshiped his image.
The second angel poured out his bowl into the sea, and it turned into blood, like that of a dead person, and every creature in the sea died.
The third poured out his bowl into the rivers and the springs of water, and they became blood.
And I heard the angel of the waters say, “Just are yoʋ, who are and have always been holy, because yoʋ have brought these judgments.
For they have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and yoʋ have given them blood to drink; it is what they deserve.”
And I heard the altar say, “Yes, Lord God, the Almighty, true and just are yoʋr judgments.”
The fourth poured out his bowl on the sun, and the sun was permitted to scorch people with fire.
People were scorched with intense heat, and they blasphemed the name of God, who had authority over these plagues, but they did not repent and give him glory.
The fifth poured out his bowl on the throne of the beast, and the beast's kingdom was plunged into darkness. People gnawed their tongues in agony
and blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and sores, but they did not repent of their works.
The sixth poured out his bowl on the great river Euphrates, and its water was dried up to prepare the way for the kings of the east.
Then I saw three unclean spirits that looked like frogs coming out of the mouth of the dragon, out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet.
They are demonic spirits performing signs, who go out to the kings of the whole world to assemble them for battle on that great day of God, the Almighty.
(“Behold, I am coming like a thief! Blessed is he who stays awake and keeps his garments on, so that he will not walk around naked and have people see his shame.”)
Then they assembled the kings at the place called in Hebrew, Megiddo.
The seventh poured out his bowl into the air, and a loud voice came from the throne of the temple of heaven, saying, “It is done!”
Then there were flashes of lightning, peals of thunder, rumblings, and a great earthquake such as had not occurred since men have been on the earth, so great was the quake.
The great city was split into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell. God remembered Babylon the great and gave her the cup of the wine of the fury of his wrath.
Every island fled, and no mountain could be found.
And great hailstones, about the weight of a talent, fell on people from heaven, and they blasphemed God for the plague of the hail, because the plague was so severe.
Then one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came and said to me, “Come, I will show yoʋ the judgment of the great prostitute who sits on many waters.
With her the kings of the earth have committed fornication, and those who dwell on the earth have become drunk with the wine of her fornication.”
So he carried me away in the Spirit to a wilderness, and I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet beast, the one that was full of blasphemous names and had seven heads and ten horns.
The woman was clothed in purple and scarlet, and adorned with gold, precious stones, and pearls. She held in her hand a golden cup full of abominations and the filth of the fornication of the earth.
A mysterious name was written on her forehead: “Babylon the great, the mother of prostitutes and of the abominations of the earth.”
And I saw the woman drunk with the blood of the saints, the blood of the martyrs of Jesus. When I saw her, I was greatly amazed.
But the angel said to me, “Why are yoʋ so amazed? I will tell yoʋ the mystery of the woman and of the beast with seven heads and ten horns that carries her.
The beast that yoʋ saw was, and is not, and is about to come up out of the abyss and go to destruction. Those who dwell on the earth, everyone whose name has not been written in the book of life from the foundation of the world, will be amazed when they see that the beast was and is not and will be back.
This calls for a mind that has wisdom: The seven heads are seven mountains on which the woman sits.
They are also seven kings. Five have fallen, one is, and another has not yet come; but when he does come, he must remain for only a little while.
The beast that was and is not, is an eighth king. Yet he is one of the seven and is on his way to destruction.
The ten horns that yoʋ saw are ten kings who have not yet received a kingdom, but they will receive authority as kings for one hour with the beast.
These kings have one mind and will give their power and authority to the beast.
They will make war with the Lamb, but the Lamb will conquer them because he is the Lord of lords and King of kings, and those with him are called, chosen, and faithful.”
Then the angel said to me, “The waters yoʋ saw, where the prostitute sits, are peoples, multitudes, nations, and tongues.
The beast and the ten horns yoʋ saw will hate the prostitute. They will make her desolate and naked; they will eat her flesh and burn her with fire.
For God has put it into their hearts to carry out his purpose by being of one mind and handing their kingdom over to the beast until the words of God are fulfilled.
As for the woman yoʋ saw, she is the great city that has dominion over the kings over the earth.”
After this I saw another angel coming down from heaven. He had great authority, and the earth was illuminated with his glory.
He cried out with a mighty voice, “Fallen is Babylon the great! She has become a dwelling place for demons, a haunt for every unclean spirit, and a haunt for every unclean and hated bird.
For all the nations have fallen because of the wine of the wrath of her fornication. The kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth have become rich from the power of her luxury.”
Then I heard another voice from heaven say, “Come out of her, my people, so that you do not participate in her sins, and so that you do not receive any of her plagues;
for her sins are heaped as high as heaven, and God has remembered her unrighteous acts.
Render to her as she herself has rendered; make it double, as she has done, even according to her works. Mix a double portion for her in the cup she has mixed.
As much as she has glorified herself and lived in luxury, give her the same amount of torment and mourning, for in her heart she says, ‘I sit enthroned as a queen; I am not a widow and will never see mourning.’
Therefore her plagues will come in a single day— death, mourning, and famine. She will be burned up with fire, for mighty is the Lord God who has judged her.”
The kings of the earth who have committed fornication with her and lived in luxury with her will weep and wail over her when they see the smoke of her burning.
In fear of her torment they will stand at a distance and say, “Alas, alas, for the great city, Babylon, the mighty city! For in a single hour yoʋr judgment has come.”
The merchants of the earth will weep and mourn over her, because no one buys their cargo anymore,
cargo of gold, silver, precious stones, pearls, fine linen, purple cloth, silk, scarlet cloth, all kinds of citron wood, all kinds of articles made of ivory, all kinds of articles made of costly wood, bronze, iron, and marble;
cargo of cinnamon, incense, myrrh, frankincense, wine, oil, fine flour, wheat, sheep, cattle, horses and chariots, and bodies and souls of men.
“The ripe fruit that was the desire of yoʋr soul has gone from yoʋ, and all yoʋr delicacies and splendors are lost to yoʋ; yoʋ will never find them again!”
The merchants of these wares, who became rich from her, will stand at a distance in fear of her torment, weeping and mourning aloud,
“Alas, alas, for the great city that was clothed in fine linen, in purple and scarlet, adorned with gold, with precious stone and pearls!
For in a single hour such great wealth has been laid waste!” And every shipmaster and seafaring man, sailors and all whose trade is on the sea, stood at a distance
and cried out as they saw the smoke of her burning, “What city is like the great city?”
They threw dust on their heads and cried out, weeping and mourning aloud, “Alas, alas, for the great city, where all who had ships at sea grew rich from her valuable merchandise! For in a single hour she has been laid waste.
Rejoice over her, O heaven, and you saints, apostles, and prophets, for God has given judgment for you against her.”
Then a mighty angel picked up a stone like a great millstone and threw it into the sea, and said, “With such violence Babylon the great city will be thrown down, never to be found again.
The sound of harpists, musicians, flutists, and trumpeters will never be heard in yoʋ again. No craftsman of any trade will ever be found in yoʋ again. The sound of a mill will never be heard in yoʋ again.
The light of a lamp will never shine in yoʋ again. The voice of bridegroom and bride will never be heard in yoʋ again, for yoʋr merchants were the magnates of the earth, and all the nations were deceived by yoʋr sorcery.”
And in her was found the blood of prophets and of saints, and of all who have been slain on the earth.
After this I heard what sounded like a loud voice of a great multitude in heaven, saying, “Hallelujah! Salvation, power, and glory belong to our God,
for true and just are his judgments; he has judged the great prostitute, who corrupted the earth with her fornication. He has avenged the blood of his servants shed by her hand.”
A second time the voice said, “Hallelujah! Her smoke goes up forever and ever.”
Then the twenty-four elders and the four living creatures fell down and worshiped God, who sits on the throne, saying, “Amen. Hallelujah!”
And a voice came out from the throne, saying, “Praise our God, all you his servants, you who fear him, both small and great.”
Then I heard what sounded like the voice of a great multitude, like the roar of many waters and like the sound of mighty peals of thunder, saying, “Hallelujah! For the Lord our God the Almighty reigns.
Let us rejoice and be glad and give him the glory, for the marriage of the Lamb has come, and his bride has made herself ready.
It has been granted to her to be clothed with fine linen, bright and pure.” For the fine linen represents the righteous acts of the saints.
Then the angel said to me, “Write: ‘Blessed are those who are invited to the marriage supper of the Lamb.’ ” He also said to me, “These are the true words of God.”
Then I fell at his feet to worship him, but he said to me, “Do not do that! I am a fellow servant of yoʋrs and of yoʋr brothers who hold to the testimony of Jesus. Worship God.” For the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.
Then I saw heaven opened, and behold, a white horse! Its rider is called Faithful and True, and in righteousness he judges and wages war.
His eyes are a flame of fire, and on his head are many diadems. Names were written on him, including a name that no one knows but he himself.
He is clothed with a garment dipped in blood, and his name is the Word of God.
The armies of heaven, clothed in fine linen, white and pure, were following him on white horses.
Out of his mouth comes a sharp two-edged sword with which he can strike down the nations, and he will rule them with a rod of iron. He will tread the winepress of the fury of the wrath of God, the Almighty.
On his garment and on his thigh a name is written: King of kings and Lord of lords.
Then I saw an angel standing in the sun, and he cried out with a loud voice, saying to all the birds that were flying directly overhead, “Come, gather together for the great supper of God,
so that you may eat the flesh of kings, the flesh of commanders, the flesh of mighty men, the flesh of horses and their riders, and the flesh of all men, both free and slave, both small and great.”
Then I saw the beast, the kings of the earth, and their armies gathered together to wage war against the rider on the horse and against his army.
But the beast was captured, and so was the false prophet who was with him, who in his sight performed the signs by which he deceived those who had received the mark of the beast and who worshiped his image. The two of them were thrown alive into the lake of fire that burns with sulfur.
The rest were killed by the sword that came out of the mouth of the rider on the horse, and all the birds gorged themselves on their flesh.
Then I saw an angel coming down from heaven, holding in his hand the key to the abyss and a great chain.
He seized the dragon, the ancient serpent, who is the devil and Satan, the deceiver of the whole world, and he bound him for a thousand years.
He threw him into the abyss and locked and sealed it over him, so that he would no longer deceive the nations until the thousand years were completed. After that he must be released for a short time.
Then I saw thrones, and those who sat on them were given authority to judge. I also saw the souls of those who had been beheaded for the testimony of Jesus and for the word of God. They had not worshiped the beast or his image and had not received the mark on their foreheads or their hands. They came to life and reigned with Christ for the thousand years.
(The rest of the dead did not come to life until the thousand years were completed.) This is the first resurrection.
Blessed and holy are those who take part in the first resurrection. The second death has no power over them, but they will be priests of God and of Christ, and they will reign with him for a thousand years.
When the thousand years are completed, Satan will be released from his prison
and will go out to deceive the nations that are at the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them for battle; their number is like the sand of the sea.
They marched up over the breadth of the earth and surrounded the camp of the saints and the beloved city, but fire came down out of heaven from God and devoured them.
And the devil, who had deceived them, was thrown into the lake of fire and sulfur, where the beast and the false prophet had been thrown, and they will be tormented day and night forever and ever.
Then I saw a great white throne and one who sat upon it. The earth and the sky fled from his face, and no place was found for them.
And I saw the dead, great and small, standing before the throne, and books were opened. Then another book was opened, which is the book of life. And the dead were judged by what was written in the books, according to their works.
Then the sea gave up the dead who were in it, and Death and Hades gave up the dead who were in them, and each person was judged according to his works.
Then Death and Hades were thrown into the lake of fire. This is the second death, the lake of fire.
If anyone's name was not found written in the book of life, he was thrown into the lake of fire.
Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and the sea was no more.
I also saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared like a bride adorned for her husband.
And I heard a loud voice from heaven saying, “Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men. He will dwell with them, and they will be his people, and God himself will be with them.
He will wipe away every tear from their eyes. Death will be no more, and there will no longer be mourning, crying, or pain, for the former things have passed away.”
Then he who sits on the throne said, “Behold, I am making all things new.” And he said, “Write this down, for these are the trustworthy and true words of God.”
He also said to me, “I am the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end. To him who thirsts I will freely give from the spring of the water of life.
I will give these things to him who overcomes; I will be his God, and he will be my son.
But as for the cowardly, the faithless, the sinful, the detestable, the murderers, the fornicators, the sorcerers, the idolaters, and all liars, their portion is in the lake that burns with fire and sulfur, which is the second death.”
Then one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls full of the seven final plagues came and said to me, “Come, I will show yoʋ the wife, the bride of the Lamb.”
And he carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high mountain and showed me the holy city Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God.
The city shone with the glory of God, and its radiance was like a very precious stone, like a jasper stone, clear as crystal.
It had a great, high wall with twelve gates. Twelve angels were at the gates, and on the gates were written the names of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel.
There were three gates on the east, three gates on the north, three gates on the south, and three gates on the west.
The wall of the city had twelve foundations, and on them were the twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.
The angel who spoke to me had a golden measuring rod to measure the city, its gates, and its wall.
The city is laid out as a square; its length is the same as its width. The angel measured the city with the rod and found it to be twelve thousand and twelve stadia. (The length, width, and height were all equal.)
Its wall was one hundred forty-four cubits according to human measurement, which the angel was using.
The wall was made of jasper, while the city was pure gold, like clear glass.
The foundations of the city wall were adorned with every kind of precious stone. The first foundation stone was jasper; the second, sapphire; the third, agate; the fourth, emerald;
the fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, carnelian; the seventh, chrysolite; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, topaz; the tenth, chrysoprase; the eleventh, jacinth; and the twelfth, amethyst.
The twelve gates were twelve pearls, each one of the gates was made of a single pearl, and the street of the city was pure gold, like transparent glass.
I did not see a temple in the city, for the Lord God Almighty is its temple, and so is the Lamb.
The city has no need of sun or moon to shine upon it, for the glory of God gives it light, and its lamp is the Lamb.
The nations will walk by its light, and the kings of the earth will bring the glory and honor of the nations to the city to present to God.
Its gates will never be shut at the end of the day, for there will be no night there.
They will bring the glory and honor of the nations to the city, so that they may enter in.
But no unclean thing and no one who causes an abomination or a lie will ever enter it, but only those whose names are written in the Lamb's book of life.
Then the angel showed me a pure river of the water of life, as bright as crystal, flowing from the throne of God and of the Lamb.
In the middle of the city street, and on each side of the river, is the tree of life, bearing twelve kinds of fruit, with each month yielding its own fruit. And the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations.
No longer will there be anything accursed, but the throne of God and of the Lamb will be in the city, and his servants will serve him.
They will see his face, and his name will be on their foreheads.
There will be no night there, and there will be no need for any lamp or light, for the Lord God will give them light, and they will reign forever and ever.
Then the angel said to me, “These words are trustworthy and true. The Lord, the God of the spirits of the prophets, has sent his angel to show his servants what must soon take place.
“Behold, I am coming quickly. Blessed is he who keeps the words of the prophecy of this book.”
I, John, am the one who heard and saw these things. And when I heard and saw them, I fell down to worship at the feet of the angel who showed them to me.
But he said to me, “Do not do that! I am a fellow servant of yoʋrs, and of yoʋr brothers the prophets, and of those who keep the words of this book. Worship God.”
Then he said to me, “Do not seal up the words of the prophecy of this book, for the time is near.
Let the evildoer still do evil, and the filthy still be filthy, and the righteous still do right, and the holy still be holy.”
“Behold, I am coming quickly, and my reward is with me, to repay each person according to their works.
I am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end.”
Blessed are those who keep his commandments, so that they may have the right to the tree of life and may enter the city by its gates.
Outside are the dogs, the sorcerers, the fornicators, the murderers, the idolaters, and everyone who loves and practices falsehood.
“I, Jesus, have sent my angel to testify to you about these things for the churches. I am the root and offspring of David, the bright morning star.”
The Spirit and the bride say, “Come.” Let anyone who hears say, “Come.” Let anyone who is thirsty come. And let anyone who wishes to do so take the water of life freely.
I testify to everyone who hears the words of the prophecy of this book: If anyone adds to them, may God add to him the plagues that are written in this book.
If anyone takes away from the words of the book of this prophecy, may God take away his share in the tree of life and in the holy city, which are written about in this book.
He who testifies to these things says, “Surely I am coming quickly.” Amen. So shall it be. Come, Lord Jesus!
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with all the saints. Amen.









































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































